Project on Cybercrime
www.coe.int/cybercrime

Octopus Interface conference
Cooperation against cybercrime
23 – 25 March 2010
Council of Europe, Strasbourg, France
25 March 10/provisional

Messages from the Octopus conference
More than 300 cybercrime experts representing countries from all continents, international
organisations and the private sector met at the Council of Europe in Strasbourg from 23 to
25 March 2010 to enhance their cooperation against cybercrime. At the close of the
conference participants adopted key messages aimed a guiding further action.
Participants share a common interest in pursuing the most effective approaches against the
growing threat of cybercrime that societies worldwide are faced with.
Effective approaches against cybercrime comprise a wide range of innovative initiatives and
actions that need to be pursued in a dynamic and pragmatic manner by public and private
sector stakeholders.
At the same time, measures against cybercrime are a shared responsibility and should be
based on a set of common principles to allow for clear guidance to governments and
organisations, to facilitate partnerships and to ensure the political commitment to cooperate.
In this connection, participants in the conference underline that:
-

For security and the protection of rights to reinforce each other, measures against
cybercrime must follow principles of human rights and the rule of law.
Security and the protection of rights is the responsibility of both public authorities and
private sector organisations.
Broadest possible implementation of existing tools and instruments will have the most
effective impact on cybercrime in the most efficient manner.

Following detailed discussions, participants recommend:
-

-

-

Making decision makers aware of the risks of cybercrime and encouraging them to
exercise their responsibility. Indicators of political commitment include steps towards the
adoption of legislation and institution building, effective international cooperation and
allocation of the necessary resources.
Implementation of the Budapest Convention on Cybercrime worldwide to sustain
legislative reforms already underway in a large number of countries. Countries should
consider becoming parties to make use of the international cooperation provisions of this
treaty. Consensus on this treaty as a common framework of reference helps mobilise
resources and create partnerships among public and private sector organisations. In this
connection, the ratification of the Budapest Convention by Azerbaijan, Montenegro and
Portugal prior and during the conference, and the expression of interest to accede by
Argentina and other countries serve as examples to other countries.
Establishing the Budapest Convention as the global standard goes hand in hand with
strengthening the Cybercrime Convention Committee (T-CY) as a forum for informationsharing network, policy-making and standard-setting. It is encouraged to address issues

-

-

-

-

not (exhaustively) regulated by the provisions of the Cybercrime Convention such as
electronic evidence, jurisdiction and liability of ISP’s.
Coherent and systematic training of law enforcement, prosecutors and judges based on
good practices, concepts and materials already available.
The establishment and strengthening of high-tech crime and cybercrime units, and
incidents response and reporting teams and systems.
The development of cooperation procedures between law enforcement agencies,
CERTs/CSIRTs as well as internet service providers and the IT industry.
Due diligence by ICANN, registrars and registries and accurate WHOIS information.
Endorsement of the “Law Enforcement Recommended Amendments to ICANN’s Registrar
Accreditation Agreement (RAA) and Due Diligence Recommendations” in line with data
protection standards. ICANN is encouraged to implement these recommendations
without delay.
The many networks and initiatives against cybercrime that exist already create a
dynamic and innovative environment involving a wide range of actors. Stronger
networking among networks is encouraged to allow for synergies and reduce duplication.
The mapping of networks exercise initiated by the Council of Europe should be continued.
A contact list for enhanced cooperation between industry and law enforcement should be
established. A proposal for a secure portal for interest parties is in preparation.
Initiatives aimed at preventing, protecting and prosecuting the sexual exploitation and
abuse of children are most valuable but require stronger support and consistency. The
“Lanzarote” Convention of the Council of Europe (CETS 201) offers guidance in this
respect and provides benchmarks to determine progress.
Making use of the guidelines for law enforcement – ISP cooperation adopted at the
Octopus Conference in 2008.
Completion and broad dissemination of the results by the Council of Europe of the
typology study on criminal money flows on the Internet that is currently underway.
In order to meet the law enforcement and privacy challenges related to cloud computing
existing instruments on international cooperation – such as the Data Protection
Convention (CETS 108) and the Budapest Convention – need to be applied more widely
and efficiently. Additional international standards on law enforcement access to data
stored in the “clouds” may need to be considered. Globally trusted privacy and data
protection standards and policies addressing those issues need to be put in place and the
Council of Europe is encouraged to continue addressing these issues in its standardsetting activities as well as by the Global Project on Cybercrime.

Public authorities, international organisations, civil society (including non-governmental
organisations) and the private sector should apply existing tools and instrument without
delay and cooperate with each other to identify additional measures and responses to
emerging threats and challenges.
In order to add impetus and resources to efforts against cybercrime and allow societies
worldwide to make best possible use of tools, instruments, good practices and initiatives
already available, a global action plan aimed at obtaining a clear picture of criminal justice
capacities and pressing needs, mobilising resources and providing support, and assessing
progress made should be launched, preferably by the United Nations and the Council of
Europe in partnership with the European Union, Parties to the Budapest Convention, and
other interested parties.
The results of the Octopus conference should be submitted to the United Nations Crime
Congress in Salvador, Brazil (12-19 April 2010) for consideration.
____________

2

