Strasbourg, 3 September 2003

MIN-LANG/PR (2003) 7

EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR R EGIONAL OR M INORITY LANGUAGES

Initial Periodical Report
presented to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe
in accordance with Article 15 of the Charter

ARMENIA

The First Report of the Republic of Armenia
According to Paragraph 1 of Article 15 of
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

June 2003, Yerevan

2

INTRODUCTION
The Republic of Armenia signed the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
on May 11, 2001.
In respect of Armenia the Charter has come into force since May 1, 2002. The RA introduces
the following report according to Paragraph 1 of Article 15 of the European Charter for
Regional or Minority Languages.
This report has been elaborated and developed by the State Language Board at the Ministry of
Education and Science based on the information submitted by the relevant ministries NGOs
and administrative offices, taking into consideration the remarks and suggestions made by
them and all parties interested, while discussing the following report.

PART I
Historical Outline
Being one of the oldest countries in the world, for the first time in its new history Armenia
regained its independence on May 28, 1918. The first Republic existed till November 29,
1920, when Armenia after forced sovetalization joined the Soviet Union, becoming on of the
15 republics.
As a result of referendum the Republic of Armenia revived its independence on September
21, 1991.
Armenia covers an area of 29,8 thousand km2 , the population is nearly 3200000 1 . Armenia
borders on Iran, Georgia, Azerbaijan and Turkey.
The Republic of Armenia is located on the Armenian plateau. Since ancient times this area
has been inhabited by Armenians, whose language is Armenian, one of the branches of IndoEuropean language family. Armenian written documents are known since the 9th century BC
(the so-called “urartian” temple-writing). But Armenian mass writing culture ha s developed
since the 5th century with the alphabet created by Mashtots. At present Armenian is the state
language of RA. Not only the population of Armenia speaks the language, but part of 7-8
million Armenians in Diaspora (more than 3,5 million people).
During different time-periods (not always) various language communities have lived in
Armenian highlands - as invaders (Arabs, Turks, Persians, Mongoloids, etc.), peaceful
immigrants (Georgians, Assyrians, Greeks, Russians, Germans, Gypsies, Yezidis, Kurds) or
the deported and exiled (Russian speaking molokans, Jews, Utines, etc). Armenian population
periodically has undergone repatriation, genocide, massacres and apostasy and forced change
of language, it has also emigrated and immigrated. At present nearly 97% of RA population
are Armenians, who speak eastern Armenian literal language 2 or one of Armenian dialects.

1

On the date July 1, 2000 the urban population in RA was 66.5%. As a result of emigration the population has
decreased. There is no due figure of the population as a result of non-exact calculation of emigration.
2
The Western Armenian literal language is spoken by that part of Armenians in Diaspora, who has been
banished from Western Armenia (eastern regions of present-day Turkey) during the first two decades of the 20th
century, as a result of genocide carried out by Ottoman Turkey.

3

The Republic of Armenia according to RA Constitution
The RA Constitution was adopted on July 5, 1995, as a result of referendum 3 .
According to the Constitution RA is declared as a sovereign, democratic state, based on social
justice and the rule of law. The Constitution is the source, which serves as a basis to form
legislation.
Regional Division of the Republic of Armenia
According to the Constitution of Armenia (may be referred as to RA) is a unitary state. The
RA regional units are marzes and communities. State government is carried out in marzes,
and local government – in the communities, according to RA Constitution, Law on Regional
division and local government. The Republic of Armenia consists of 10 marzes and Yerevan
City, which has a status of marz.
The RA Main Economic Data
The RA GDP data of 2002 are as follows:
•
•
•

GDP according to market prices forms 1243810,2 million drams ($2126171282)
GDP per capita makes ($662)
The income of the population makes 853448,4 million drams.

After gaining independence the political, economic, social and radical changes, the closing
down of large pla nts and enterprises to prevent natural disasters, the fuel and energetic crisis,
the Nagorno Karabakh conflict, the economic blockade on Armenian-Azerbaijani and
Armenian-Turkish border, the devastating earthquake of 1988 affect the general situation of
RA, which caused mass emigration.

The Demographic Situation
The last official census in Armenia was held in October 2001.
It is known that there are no monoethnic countries in the world and Armenia is not an
exception. Throughout centuries Armenia has been inhabited by different national minorities,
who, at present, make 2,2% of population.
According to the initial data of the 2001 national census, the proportion of ethnicities in
Armenia is the following:

Armenians
Yezidi
Russians
Assyrians
Kurds
Greeks

Absolute figure
3142,7 thousand
40,5 thousand
14,8 thousand
3,5 thousand
1,6 thousand
1,3 thousand

%
97,81
1,26
0,46
0,11
0,05
0,04

3

On May 25 2003 a referendum on constitutional reforms was held but failed due to insufficient votes in favour
of it.

4

Other peoples
Total
Among them
non-Armenians

8,7 thousand
3213,1 thousand
70,4 thousand

0,27
100
2,19

Among the 20 peoples who live in Armenia together with Armenians the Assyrians, Greeks,
Yezidis, Kurds, Russians, as well as Byelorussians, Ukrainians, Georgians, Germans, Poles
and Jews form comparatively large number. Here they found their second motherland and
they contribute to the economic and cultural development of Armenia as much as they can. If
we put parallels from the chronological viewpoint, it could be seen that the first date these
communities settled in Armenia goes back to the second quarter of the XIX century.
The first group of Assyrians (descendants of old Assyrians) settled in Armenia in 1830s.
Some groups immigrated during World War I. They are Christians. At present the 3500
Assyrians in Armenia live mainly in the villages Verin Dvin, Nor Artagers, Arzni, Dimitrov
and in Yerevan, Artashat, Abovyan cities. They speak Assyrian, Russian and Armenian.
The number of Yezidis in Armenia in 1830 was 324 registered. At present there are 40500,
whose ancestors immigrated from Iran and Mesopotamia. They live mainly in villages
Shamiram, Tlik, Sorik, Hakko, Giatlo, Barozh, Baisez, Avtona, Dian, Ghabaghtapa, Ria-Taza,
Amre- Taza, Mirak, Sangiar, Shenkani, Alagiaz, Jamshlu, Ortachia, Derek, Avshen, Sipan,
and Zovuni. They are Zoroastrians. They speak Yezidi, Armenian.
The present Greek community emigrated from Turkey in 1763. Some groups immigrated
during World War I. They are Christians. At present there are 1300 Greeks who live mainly in
the villages Yaghdan, Koghes, Madan, Hankavan, as well as in Stepanavan, Alaverdi,
Akhtala, Shamlough and other towns. They speak Greek, Russian and Armenian.
The first groups of Russians that settled in Armenia in 1830-1850 were groups of exiled
sectarians from Russia (Molokans, Priguns, etc.). They still live in the villages Lermontovo,
Fioletovo, Privolnoye, Medovka, Kruglaya, Shishka, Novoseltsovo, Saratovka, Mikhailovka,
Petrovka, Blagodarnoye, Pushkino, Semyonovka, Chkalovka, Bovadzor, Urasar, as well as in
Dilijan, Tchambarak, Stepanavan towns. Some groups were moved from Russia to Armenia
(Gyumri, Yerevan, etc.) during Soviet times. They speak Russian.
Kurds settled in Armenia during the Turkish and Persian power, emigrating from
Mesopotamia and partly from Iran. They are Moslems or Zoroastrians. At present the existing
in Armenia 1600 Kurds live mainly in the villages Ria-Taza, Amre-Taza, Mirak, Sangiar,
Shenkan, Alagiaz, Jamshlu, Ortachia, Derek, Avshen, etc. they speak Kurdish, Armenian.
Lately no serious regional changes have occurred in Armenia to move the structure of
population. The law on regional division takes into consideration political, economic, as well
as ethnic, language and other peculiarities when carrying out regional division. Though it
should be mentioned that in Armenia, except for several villages, there are no areas peculiar
with national minority or any different from Armenian language.

5

1. Main legal acts and provisions to implement the European Charter for regional or
minority languages
The preservation of national minority languages is the problem of national minority rights
protection, and the latter is the inseparable part of international human rights protection.
The Republic of Armenia is a party to the following international instruments4 (the most
important are given):
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights of 16 December and Protocol Thereto
Convention on the Rights of Child
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid
International Covenant on the Elimination of all Forms of Racial Discrimination
Convention against Discrimination in Education
Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and Protocol thereto
Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Racial Discrimination against Women
Convention on civil procedure
Convention on protection of cultural and natural world heritage (1972)
Convention on technical and professional education (1989)
European Cultural Convention
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
Agreement on the rehabilitation rights of deported persons, national minorities, signed
within CIS
Convention on guaranteeing the rights of persons belonging to national minorities, signed
within CIS on January 21, 1994
Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities
Agreement on establishing and functioning of branches of higher educational institutions
in CIS countries (2001)
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and the
Protocols 1,4,7 thereto

According to Article 37 of the Constitution the citizens belonging to national minorities are
entitled to the preservation of their traditions and the development of their language and
culture. And according to Article 15 of the Constitution citizens, regardless of national origin,
race, sex, language, creed, political or other persuasion, social origin, wealth or other status,
are entitled to all the rights and freedoms, and subject to the duties determined by the
Constitution and the laws.
The law on language indicate the main provisions of language policy, regulates the language
condition in Armenia, the relationship between the state authorities, governing bodies,
enterprises, administrative offices and organizations in the field of language usage. According
to the mentioned law Armenian is declared as the state and official language, which must
attend to all the spheres of RA life. Then it specifies, “the Republic of Armenia guarantees the
4

International treaties that have been ratified are a constituent part of the legal system of the Republic. If norms are provided
in these treaties other than those provided by laws of the Republic, then the norms provided in the treaty shall prevail.
International treaties that contradict the Constitution may be ratified after making a corresponding amendment to the
Constitution.

6

free usage of minority languages on its territory” (Article 1). There are also provision
concerning the national minority languages in Articles 2 and 4 of the Law.
By the law on language it is envisaged that general education of national minorities in the
communities may be organized in their native language, state program and state patronage,
with obligatory studying of Armenian (Article 2). On the territory of Armenia only the RA
government may found a foreign language non-general educational institution. According to
Article 4 of law on language, the national minority organizations residing in Armenia form
their documents, blanks, seals in Armenian together with the translation into their native
languages.
In Article 24 of RA Constitution freedom of speech is stated as one of the human’s important
rights. According to that article, every person has the right to insist on his opinion. It is
forbidden to make a person waive his opinion or change it. It is also stated that every person
has freedom of speech, including the freedom of looking for, getting and disseminating ideas
or information through any information means, irrespective of state borders.
The law on the press and the mass media states tha t in RA the press and the mass media are
free and they are not subject to censorship. The citizens are entitled to express their opinions
about any problem of public life through the press and the mass media as well as to get
reliable information. The national minorities, alongside with the other rights, may prepare,
get and disseminate information in their native language.
Article 5 of RA law on TV and radio specifies, that on the territory of Armenia the TV and
radio programs must be broadcast in Armenian, with the exception of cases stated in the law
(programs broadcast to foreign countries and for national minorities). In Article 28 of the law
on Public TV and radio companies, it is mentioned that when broadcasting programs the
interests of the nationa l minorities in Armenia should be taken into consideration. And Article
28 envisages that the Public TV and Radio Company “can spare air time for programs in the
language of national minorities in RA”. National minorities are guaranteed an hour of airtime
per week on public TV, and an hour per day on public radio.
According to paragraph 2 of Article 7 of Civil procedure code, the person involved in a civil
case, who does not know Armenian, has the right to learn the case materials, to participate in
the procedure and to speak in court through an interpreter.
According to Article 15 of Criminal Code, criminal procedure is held in Armenian. According
to the same article, during criminal procedure every person (except for the body processing
the criminal case) has the right to speak in his/her language, which he/she possesses. Upon the
decision of the body processing the criminal case, the person involved in the criminal case,
who does not know the procedure language, is entitled to have free interpreter, through whom
he can carry out his rights specified in the mentioned code. The person involved in a criminal
case, who does not know the procedure language, is given certified translations of all subject
to delivery documents in the language they know. Documents in other languages are attached
to the case with their Armenian translation.
The legislation does not prohibit executive bodies to turn to national minorities (also written)
in their languages and to speak to these bodies in their native languages. In such cases, when
giving written response to the applications, state language is used, which though is not an
obstacle to form the response in the relevant language upon the applicant’s request. This has
had its legal reflection in the RA draft law on administrative procedure which was submitted
for consideration.

7

State officials are not prohibited, by the post they hold, to communicate with minority people
in their language, if they know it.
However, if one has applied to executive bodies not in Armenian, the relevant authority must
respond to the application duly, with the exception of cases, when special requirements to
meet the application are specified by law. In that case, however, the application cannot be
refused, but the established special order of its introduction must be guaranteed.
The statutes or other documents of registered in Armenia organizations have no provisions on
not accepting the minority language usage or on limiting them. There is no legislative ban as
to economic and public activities to obstacle the minority language usage. In practice no such
obstacles arise.
In the field of spiritual culture Articles 36 and 37 of RA Constitution fully guarantee the
national minorities’ the rights according that everyone is entitled to freedom of literary,
artistic, scientific and technical creation, to benefit from the achievements of scientific
progress and to participate in the cultural life of society. Intellectual property shall be
protected by law. Citizens belonging to national minorities are entitled to the preservation of
their traditions and the development of their language and culture.
According to Article 8 of RA law on “the Principles of cultural legislation”, which came into
force on December 26, 2002, “the Republic of Armenia supports the preservation and
development of the cultural identity of national minorities on its territory”. Through
implementation of state programs it contributes to the creation of conditions for preservation,
dissemination and development of their religion, customs, language, cultural inheritance and
culture.” Article 9 of the same law guarantees carrying into life cultural activities irrespective
of nation, race, sex, language, religion, belief, social origin, property or other status. Article 6
of the law considers the languages, national customs and traditions, geographical names,
cultural values as well.
Citizens, who speak the languages of national minorities, have the right to found cultural
organizations according to law. There are more than 40 active NGOs, which deal with the
problems of people that speak the language of national minorities. The regulations of these
NGOs envisage goals to deal with preservation, dissemination and development of national
cultural values. To bring this to life they cooperate with each other, as well as with
governmental, regional and local government bodies.
According to Article 58 of RA marriage and family code, the child is given a name upon the
parents’ agreement, patronymic name is given according to the father’s name, but in cases
mentioned in Article 57 of the same code, patronymic name is the person’s name registered as
the father. According to provisions of Article 59, the children’s surname is given upon the
parents’ surname. In case parents have different surnames, the child is given the father’s or
mother’s surname, upon their agreement, and in case they don’t come to an agreement, it is
decided by the guardianship bodies. The RA legislation envisages the possibility for an
individual to preserve or change his name, surname and patronymic name or to restore his
previous name, surname or patronymic name.
Article 22 of RA Civil Code specifies that a citizen obtains rights and duties and implements
them under his name, which includes his name and surname, and he wishes, his patronymic
name. In cases and order envisaged by law a citizen may use a nickname. A citizen may
change his name in established by law order. The citizen, who has changed his name, has the

8

right to demand that relevant changes be done in all the documents formed under his previous
name.
The law on geographical names specifies, that when giving names to settlements, the
viewpoints of the natives should also be considered (Article 3), and when giving or changing
a name proposals may be made by both the local government bodies and legal entities and
natural persons (Article 6).
Article 5 of law on regional division specifies that a community including one settlement is
given the name of that settlement, and a community including two and more settlements is
given the name of the settlement having the most population. Article 6 specifies the order of
changing the RA regional division according to which changes in RA marz division, marz
borders, administrative centres, communities, district communities, settlement and district
area borders, foundation of new communities or settlements, changes in settlement
classification, as well as the naming and renaming or marzes, settlements, districts,
communities and district communities are done by the RA Government presentation through
making relevant changes and amendments in this law. It further states that settlement
renaming is done only to restore historical names to eliminate strange, non-euphonic and
repeated names, taking into consideration the viewpoint of the population in that settlement.
As to the traditional local names and street names, paragraph 9 of Article 12 of RA law on
local government, it is only in the competence of Council of Elders of the community, which
gives agreement to name or rename community streets, avenues, squares, parks, educational,
cultural, other institutions and organizations, to number private houses, blocks of flats and
buildings. And the head of the community names and renames the community streets,
avenues, squares, parks, community subjection educational, cultural, other institutions and
organizations.
The law on advertisement has been in force in Armenia since April 30, 1996. In RA the
language for advertisement is Armenian. If necessary, as an addition, the adve rtiser’s message
may be given in other languages, but with comparatively small letters. This provision does not
concern the published newspapers, special announcements, labels and brands. The size of an
Armenian advertisement text must not be less than the foreign language version. It is specified
in Article 8, that advertisements lacking propriety are forbidden, i.e. advertisements that
a) discredit the general morality and national norms,
b) have intuitive expressions, comparisons and pictures concerning the race,
nationality or social origin, age group or sex, language, religion or other beliefs.
Article 35 of Constitution specifies that every citizen is entitled to education. Education shall
be free of charge in state secondary educational institutions. Every citizen is entitled to
receive higher and other specialized education free of charge and on a competitive basis, in
state educational institutions. Law shall prescribe the establishment and operation of private
educational institutions
The RA law on education refers to the RA law on language when the language matter is
touched upon. Proceeding from principles of state policy in the field of education (the humane
nature of education, formation of relevant worldview in certain aspects, creation of bases for
the principles of democracy in the field of education, integration in the international
educational system, secular education in educational institutions, reasonable self- government
of educational institutions, and, at last, availability and continuousness of education) the RA
guarantees the right to education irrespective of nationality, race, language, religion, political
9

or other beliefs, social origin, property state or other circumstances. If it is taken into
consideration the main problems of pre-school education, it could be obvious that
preconditions must be created to communicate in the native language and on those bases to
study foreign languages. The founder of a state educational institution is the Republic of
Armenia in the person of government or relevant state licensed body. The founder of
community educational institutions is the community in the person of local self- governing
body. Non-state educational institutions may have any organizational or legal form envisaged
by the law. Natural or legal persons may be their founders.
In Article 1 of RA law on “Religious organizations and freedom of conscience” it is
mentioned “every citizen freely decides his relations about religion, has the right to profess
any religion, to carry out religious rituals alone or with other people.” 14 different religious
trends were officially registered in Armenia in 2000, including Russian Orthodox Church,
Yezidi religious community, Jewish community, which use relevant minority languages for
ritual without any limitation.
The CIS Convention on protection of national minority rights specifies that, “Any contracting
Party is bound to provide national minorities with right to make contacts between each other
without any obstacle, as well as to make contacts with organizations of those citizens and
countries, with whom they have common ethnical, cultural, language or religious beliefs.”
Article 7 of the mentioned convention specifies that national minorities may be involved in
peaceful mass meetings and unions.
The Republic of Armenia has signed bilateral (for friendship and cooperation) and
multilateral agreements with other countries and neighbouring countries especially, to
undertake the protection of national minorities. In these agreements such provisions are
touched upon which directly concern the protection of national minority rights. Such treaties
exist with Greece, Russian Federation, Romania, Bulgaria, Georgia, Ukraine, Kazakhstan,
Lebanon etc where certain provisions concern the implementation of certain measures and
creation of necessary conditions to develop and preserve the ethnical, cultural, language and
religious identity of national minorities living in the respective Parties. The mentioned
treaties 5 state the peculiar traditional friendly relations and various connections established
between the two peoples throughout the history, conscious of the importance of a number of
obligations, undertaken by many documents, the countries commit to cooperate in all aspects
with mutual trust and good relationship, and to sign other agreements if necessary.

5

For the texts of the treaties please visit www.armeniaforeignministry.am

10

2. Regional or Minority and Non-territorial Languages
According to the definition in Paragraph a), Article 1 of the Charter, in RA there are no
regional or non-territorial languages, instead there are minority languages (which, after all, are
the languages of the immigrants). They are Assyrian, Yezidi, Greek, Russian and Kurdish,
which are in fact the languages of the minorities: only the representatives of the relevant
national minorities have spoken the traditionally used languages and have brought them to
Armenia. None of these national minorities is autochthonous, and traditionally and
historically they are not connected with the area, though there are separate small areas
(villages), where mostly these minorities inhabited. The only language is Russian that a large
number of non-Russians speak. Though Russian, according to the above- mentioned
definition, cannot be regarded as a non-territorial language, as it is not traditionally used in the
territory of Armenia. The dissemination of Russian as a second language in Armenia is a
result of Russian Empire, the national, language, cultural and economic policy run by the
USSR, and was carried out mostly through schooling and higher education. The disseminatio n
of Russian language is a result of exile and economic immigration, deportation or return of
Armenians from countries of CIS, peoples’ integration policy in Soviet Union.
Thus, there are no languages relevant to Article 1 of the Charter in Armenia. Though,
Armenia, as an expression of good will, bears the responsibility for the above-mentioned five
languages, especially since three of them (Assyrian, Yezidi and Kurdish) are not state
languages in any country.

3. The Number of Minority-Language Speakers
On the territory of RA nearly 3,15 thousand people consider Assyrian as their native language
(nearly 90% of Assyrians living in RA), Yezidi – 32,4 thousand people (nearly 80% of Yezidi
living in RA), Greek – 0,75 thousand people (nearly 58% of Greeks living in RA), Kurdish –
1,25 thousand people (nearly 78% of Kurds living in RA). Not all of the above- mentioned
people have good command of their native language (there are no reliable data about how
many and how much). Anyway, the number of those having good command of the language
does not exceed the given figures (e.g. 80% of Assyrians has good command of the spoken
language, 2% - written language). Nearly 98% (14,5 thousand people) of the Russians living
in RA considers Russian their native language.
In Armenia some individuals know Ukrainian, Byelorussian, Polish, Georgian, Jewish, etc.
As to the Charter requirements, the Assyrians, Yezidis, Kurds and Greeks do not fully use the
opportunities given by RA legislation, especially in the field of educatio n and media. Very
often the Assyrians and Greeks prefer Russian to their language: they publish Russian
newspapers, get Russian education and become Russian-speaking.
According to the initial data of the 2001 national census, the proportion of ethnicities in
Armenia is the following:

Armenians
Yezidi
Russians
Assyrians

Absolute figure
3142,7 thousand
40,5 thousand
14,8 thousand
3,5 thousand

%
97,81
1,26
0,46
0,11
11

Kurds
Greeks
Other peoples
Total
Among them
non-Armenians

1,6 thousand
1,3 thousand
8,7 thousand
3213,1 thousand
70,4 thousand

0,05
0,04
0,27
100
2,19

Among the 20 peoples who live in Armenia together with Armenians the Assyrians, Greeks,
Yezidis, Kurds, Russians, as well as Byelorussians, Ukrainians, Georgians, Germans, Poles
and Jews form comparatively large number. Here they found their second motherland and
they contribute to the economic and cultural development of Armenia as much as they can. If
we put parallels from the chronological viewpoint, it could be seen that the first date these
communities settled in Armenia goes back to the second quarter of the XIX century.
The first group of Assyrians (descendants of old Assyrians) settled in Armenia in 1830s.
Some groups immigrated during World War I. They are Christians. At present the 3500
Assyrians in Armenia live mainly in the villages Verin Dvin, Nor Artagers, Arzni, Dimitrov
and in Yerevan, Artashat, Abovyan cities. They speak Assyrian, Russian and Armenian.
The number of Yezidis in Armenia in 1830 was 324 registered. At present there are 40500,
whose ancestors immigrated from Iran and Mesopotamia. They live mainly in villages
Shamiram, Tlik, Sorik, Hakko, Giatlo, Barozh, Baisez, Avtona, Dian, Ghabaghtapa, Ria-Taza,
Amre- Taza, Mirak, Sangiar, Shenkani, Alagiaz, Jamshlu, Ortachia, Derek, Avshen, Sipan,
and Zovuni. They are Zoroastrians. They speak Yezidi, Armenian.
The present Greek community emigrated from Turkey in 1763. Some groups immigrated
during World War I. They are Christians. At present there are 1300 Greeks who live mainly in
the villages Yaghdan, Koghes, Madan, Hankavan, as well as in Stepanavan, Alaverdi,
Akhtala, Shamlough and other towns. They speak Greek, Russian and Armenian.
The first groups of Russians that settled in Armenia in 1830-1850 were groups of exiled
sectarians from Russia (Molokans, Priguns, etc.). They still live in the villages Lermontovo,
Fioletovo, Privolnoye, Medovka, Kruglaya, Shishka, Novoseltsovo, Saratovka, Mikhailovka,
Petrovka, Blagodarnoye, Pushkino, Semyonovka, Chkalovka, Bovadzor, Urasar, as well as in
Dilijan, Tchambarak, and Stepanavan towns. Some groups were moved from Russia to
Armenia (Gyumri, Yerevan, etc.) during Soviet times. They speak Russian.
Kurds settled in Armenia during the Turkish and Persian power, emigrating from
Mesopotamia and partly from Iran. They are Moslems or Zoroastrians. At present the existing
in Armenia 1600 Kurds live mainly in the villages Ria-Taza, Amre-Taza, Mirak, Sangiar,
Shenkan, Alagiaz, Jamshlu, Ortachia, Derek, Avshen, etc. they speak Kurdish, Armenian.

The RA Policy in the Field of Preserving Minority Languages
The RA Constitution is the main source in running the state policy on preserving minority
languages.

12

On December 8, 1991, in Minsk, Russia, Ukraine and Byelorussia signed an agreement on
“Creating cooperation between CIS”. The agreement formally stated the end of the USSR6 , as
well as that the parties will preserve the national minorities living in their areas, wishing to
contribute to the development and preservation of their national, cultural, language and
religious peculiarity.
Armenia has signed a number of international agreements and contracts in the field of
protecting human and minority rights, preserving language and other cultural values.
In Armenia a number of laws directly specify and guarantee the preservation of national
minority languages and cultures – within the scope of law.
The main provisions of the Armenian language policy are defined by the Constitution, the
Law on Language, as well as by “State program of language policy”. It is stated in the
Constitution and in the law that the Republic of Armenia guarantees the free usage of
minority languages in its territory, including in the field of education. In current legislation
there is no obstacle in minority language usage, as well as it does not envisage or implement
any legislative or practical means against language preservation or development, damage,
threat or restriction.
In the state program of language policy it is mentioned that respect towards the
multiculturalism and polylingualism, promotion of national minority languages and culture
development is one of the conditions that guarantee Armenia’s reputation in the international
arena. The supremacy of Armenia’s state language harmonically goes with the national
minority language preservation and principles of mutual respect of all cultures – relevant to
norms and principles of international law and Council of Europe language policy. One of the
program goals is to guarantee the rights of all Armenian citizens to get education in their
native language. The 7th section of the language policy is titled “Preservation of RA national
minority rights in the field of language”.
As the major objectives of the aspect are mentioned the following:
1. The national minority languages are the inseparable part of Armenia’s language
and culture, they are its value. The state support of these languages is of great
importance for the process of democratisation of our country and civil society
development.
2. The rights of citizens of Armenia in the field of language have double nature –
national and public. On the national level it provides the right to know the native
language, to get education and to use it, on the public level it provides the right
and duty of all citizens of Armenia to know the state language and use it.
3. State support of some national minority identity preservation may positively affect
the linking of our country with the native state of those peoples.
As program activities the following are mentioned:
1. Comprehens ive support to the preservation and development of national minority
languages.
2. Support to the effective language communication and mutual understanding
between the national minorities – relevant to the norms of Council of Europe
language policy.
3. Enrolment of scientific-pedagogical potential of the given people’s intelligentsia to
preserve national minority right to get educated in their native language.
6

Eight former USSR republics joined the agreement (including Armenia) and on December 21, 1991 signed the
protocol, which is the integral part of the agreement.

13

4. Support in preparing and training national minority language teachers.
5. Analyses of national minority language textbooks’ creation possibility and
development of a publishing program.
The program also envisages a number of events that have been carried out or are under way.
It should be mentioned that the terms “national minority” and “minority languages” are fully
apprehensible for Armenian people, that have spread all around the world as a result of
genocide at the beginning of the XX century and in different countries it forms minority. As
to Article 11 of the Constitution, it stipulates “Historical and cultural monuments and other
cultural values are under the care and protection of the state. Within the framework of
principles and norms of international law, the Republic of Armenia shall promote the
protection of Armenian historical and cultural values ol cated in other countries, and shall
support the development of Armenian educational and cultural life”.
The Law on language specifies: “The Republic of Armenia supports the preservation and
dissemination of Armenian language among Armenians living abroad.”
Facing similar problems, our Republic focuses on national minorities and on running similar
policy towards their language. Though it should be mentioned, that Armenian, as a minority
language, has not yet been honoured with the preservation within the Charter even in those
countries (Greece, France, Romania, Hungary, Bulgaria, Serbia, Russian Federation, etc)7 ,
where Armenians lived in large communities in middle ages and even in early Middle Ages,
or where Armenian is a territorial language of a native people, and where Armenian
community participated in the formation of those statehoods. Whereas Eastern Armenian,
spoken in European countries is included in the “Red Book of European Languages” and
longs for urgent support.
5. Bodies and Organizations dealing with Minority Language Preservation
1. Creation of the Coordinating Council for national minorities under the Presidency is an
important step in the act of national minority languages and culture preservation. This body
was officially established on June 15, 2000 upon the decree of the President to guarantee the
national minority protection, to activate their intercommunity relations, as well as eliminating
from the necessity to care more effectively for special educational, cultural, legal other
problems. The president’s decree followed the First Congress (12 March 2000) of the
representatives of non- governmental, cultural and national minority organizations. The
Coordinating Council is an interim circle in the way of creating a separate state structure to
deal national minorities.
2. The State Language Inspectorate of Ministry of Education and Science, established in
1993, is a body dealing with national minority language preservation, according to Article 5
of the law on language and the resolution of RA Supreme Council on the order of application
of this law. At first it worked attached to the RA Government, and then in 2002 it became a
separate department of the Ministry of Education and Science. According to the statutes of the
State Language Inspectorate the objectives and goals of the Inspectorate are:
a) Implementation of a unified policy in the field of language in RA
b) Providing ground to implement the requirements of RA law on language
and RA state program of language policy
7

Cyprus is an exception, where Armenian has a status of non-territoria l language

14

c) Providing RA national minority language rights.
To implement its objectives and goals the Inspectorate, according to the established by the RA
legislation order, controls the implementation of state language policy by state and local
governing bodies.
Within the Inspectorate the Board of foreign and national minority languages functioned,
where RA national minority language speakers and representatives from relevant
communities were involved.
3. The permanent committee for education, science, culture and youth matters of RA National
Assembly deals with the matters of national minorities, their culture and language
preservation.
4. The following NGOs, registered in RA according to the established order, deal with the
matters of preserving national minorities, their culture and language.
1. “Atur Assyrian Association” NGO, Yerevan, Pushkin 11, 565151, Pavel Tamrazov
2. Council of RA Kurd Intelligentsia, Yerevan, Arshakuniats 2, 12 floor, 529612, Amarik
Sardaryan
3. “Kurdistan Committee” NGO, Yerevan, Teryan 62/19, 582207, K. Chala nyan
4. “Yezidi National Union” NGO, Kotayk marz, v. Zovuni, A. Hajoyan
5. “ “Menora” Jewish Culture Centre” NGO, Yerevan, Vardanants 5a, apt. 113, 525882, V.
Vainer
6. “Patrida” Greeks of Armenia NGO, Yerevan, Vardanants 2, 774500, 495774, E. Polatov
7. “Union of Nations of Republic of Armenia” NGO, Yerevan, Tigran Mets 8, apt. 525594,
V. Chatoev
8. “Aghbiur” Community of Germans of Armenia, Yerevan, Pushkin 14, 580300, A.
Yaskorski
9. “Ukraina” Federation of Ukrainians of Armenia NGO, Yerevan, Kyulpenkyan 2/1, apt.
52, Yavir Romanya
10. “Polonia” Benevolent NGO of Polish cooperation, Yerevan, Isahakyan 14, apt. 9, 568004,
A. Kuzminskaya
11. Community of Yezidi and Kurds, Yerevan, Shiraki 19/15, 561600, S. Sadoyev
12. “ “Elpida” Greek Community” NGO, Vanadzor, 46588, Tigran Mets 48, Arkadi Khitarov
13. World Yezidi National Union NGO, Yerevan, Arshakuniats 2, 12 floor, 522550, A.
Tamoyan
14. “Assyrian “Ashur” Youth Centre” NGO, Yerevan, Teryan 105, building 4, Room 4102,
598515, I. Gasparyan
15. “Greek Community “Ponti” of Yerevan” NGO, Yerevan, Arghutyan 29/22, 233297, F.
Nikolaidis
16. “Anastasi” Greek Community NGO, Hrazdan, Pionerneri 12, apt. 27, K. Avgitov
17. “Pontos” Greek Community of Alaverdi, Alaverdi, Zoravar Andraniki 197, apt. 1a,
Angela Kilinkarova
18. “ “Belarus” Community of Byelorussians in Yerevan” NGO of Armenia, Yerevan, Gogoli
5, apt. 7, 395938, V. Varazhan-Krishtopik
19. “Olympos” Greek Community of Noyemberyan, Noyemberyan, Kamoyi 3, 22098,
Tamara Tamazyan
20. “Yezidi National Committee” NGO, Yerevan, Davit Anhaght 23, floor 3, 240068, T.
Namatyan
21. “Stepanavan Regional “Pontos” Community of Lori marz” NGO, Stepanavan,
Yeritasardakan, Cottage 43, 22904, A. Khristoforidi
15

22. “Yezidi Abroad” NGO, Yerevan, Davit Anhaght 23, R. Khudoyan
23. Association of Ukrainians NGO, Yerevan, Narekatsi District 38, apt. 61, 621273, O.
Parkhomenko
24. ““Patriotis” Greek Community of Gyumri in Shirak marz” NGO, Yerevan, Savoyan 225,
apt. 296, Vrazh Kutikov
25. Relief and Support Fund for Russian Compatriots in Armenia, Yerevan, 443341, 228993,
I. Semyonov
26. “Rossia” NGO of Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, P. Biuzand 1/3, 565491. Y. Yakovenko
27. “Slavyanski Dom” Ngo, Yerevan, 771455. N. Gustova
28. “Garmonia” international centre of Russian cluture, Yerevan, 534121, Aida Harutyunyan
29. “Rossiane” NGO, Kapan, 085-62212, G. Aghakhanyan

6. The Bodies and Organizations the authors of this report have consulted with
While preparing this report the committee consulted with the representatives of organizations
1, 2, 6, 13, 14, 26 of the above mentioned list, it cooperated with the National minority
coordinating council under the Presidency, with the permanent committee for education,
science, culture and youth affairs of the National Assembly. Representatives from the
Ministry of Education and Science, the Ministry of culture, youth and sport, the Ministry of
Justice, the department of social matters of RA Government staff, the National Committee of
TV and Radio, the RA Public Radio. The Ministry of Foreign affairs, Ministry of Interior,
National Statistics Service, Council of Public TV and Radio, Yerevan City Municipality,
Regional councils, introduced materials.
7. Information to national communities
Article 38 of RA law on international treaties specifies that the international treaties that came
into force in accordance with the law are published in the “Official gazette of International
treaties”. The “Official gazette of International treaties” is the official periodical of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which is published according to periodicity established by the
RA Ministry of Foreign affairs. RA international treaties concerning human rights, freedoms
and obligations are also published in “Official gazette” according to the law on legal acts. The
mentioned gazette must be subscribed by all RA state, regional government bodies, local selfgovernment and judicial bodies and are available to all NGOs, unions, enterprises and
individuals. They are available state libraries and are sold.
Before and after the ratification of the Charter, according to Article 37 of the law on “RA
international treaties”, the RA Ministry of Foreign Affairs the text of the charter was sent to
competent ministries, administrative and other state bodies. Upon the request of the NGOs
dealing with matters of national minorities, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs submits the
Charter to them as well. Besides that the State Language Inspectorate of the Ministry of
Education and Science submitted the copies of the Charter to RA national minority
communities, asking for necessary information for the annual report. The regional
government bodies have also provided the national communities with information about the
Charter.
The public radio program “Andradarts” (Reflection) several times has touched upon the
Charter and the fact of the ratification of it by Armenia.
On December 19-20, 2002, in Yerevan the RA Ministry of Education and Science and the
Council of Europe Secretariat held the conference “The educational policy and the
16

minorities”, where matters concerning the Charter were touched upon and minority language
users were invited as well.

PART II
Measures taken connected with the goals and principles connected with the implementation of
European Charter for Regional and Minority Languages
The Republic of Armenia implements a policy towards all minority languages existing on its
territory relevant to the definition of Article 1 of the Charter and according to the status of
every language for the following goals and principles:
-

-

-

recognition of minority languages as an expression of cultural wealth,
willingness to take necessary measures in supporting the minority languages and to
protect them,
facilitating the usage of minority languages and/or encouragement of spoken or written
language in public or private life,
preservation and development of connections between the groups using the same
language, or between the groups in different countries using the same or identical
language, as well as creation of cultural links between other groups in the same country
using different languages,
providing relevant ways and means or teaching and learning minority languages according
to all phases,
providing conditions, that will enable non-speakers of the minority language living in that
area (where that language is used) to learn the language in case they want it,
stimulation of the study and research of minority languages at universities or adequate
educational or scientific institutions,
stimulation or exchange of relevant interracial forms in the fields mentioned in the Charter
for regional or minority languages used similarly or identically in one or two countries,
abolition of any unjustified difference, exclusion, limitation or preference which refer to
the minority language usage and threaten the preservation and development of the given
language, on condition that adoption of special me asures concerning minority languages,
directed to support the equality of rights among the users of these languages and the rest
of the population, will not be considered as an act of discrimination towards the users of
that language on a due level,
includ ing tolerance, mutual understanding and respect towards the minority languages
among the goals of learning and teaching,
availability of bodies to advise the authorities about all the problems concerning minority
languages.

2.Further Aims
The following events are envisaged for coming years:
-

to continue the considerations of the issue of preserving and developing Assyrian and
Assyrian culture,
to create ground to restore Assyrian cultural- information radio programs,
to find sponsors to publish school text-books in Assyrian, Kurdish, Yezidi,
to support the organization of training courses or teachers of Assyrian, Kurdish, Yezidi,
to develop a law on National minorities
17

-

to create a cultural centre for national minorities,
to resume the functioning of State Language Inspectorate of RA Ministry of Education
and Science and language board of national minorities.

PART III
In accordance with Article 3, paragraph 1 of the Charter, the Republic of Armenia declared
that within the meaning of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
minority languages in the Republic of Armenia are Assyrian, Yezidi, Greek, Russian and
Kurdish languages.
Republic of Armenia applies the following provisions of the Charter to the Assyrian, Yezidi,
Greek, Russian and Kurdish languages:
Article 8 – Education
Sub-paragraphs 1.a.iv; 1.b.iv; 1.c.iv; 1.d.iv; 1.e.iii; 1.f.iii.
Article 9 - Judicial authorities
Sub-paragraphs 1.a.ii, iii, iv ; 1.b.ii ; 1.c.ii and iii ; 1.d.
Paragraph 3.
Article 10 - Administrative authorities and public services
Sub-paragraphs 1.a.iv and v; 1.b; 2.b; 2.f; 2.g; 3.c; 4.c.
Paragraph 5.
Article 11 – Media
Sub-paragraphs 1.a.iii ; 1.b.ii ; 1.c.ii ; 1.e.
Paragraphs 2 and 3.
Article 12 - Cultural activities and facilities
Sub-paragraphs 1.a.c.f.
Paragraphs 2 and 3.

Article 13 - Economic and social life
Sub-paragraphs 1.b ; 1.c ; 1.d ; 2.b ; 2.c.
Article 14 - Transfrontier exchanges
Paragraphs a and b.

18

1. Assyrian
Article 8. Education
Subparagraph iv of a) of Paragraph 1
The Republic of Armenia supports the communities of national minorities to organize the
basic part of education in relevant languages for at least those pupils, whose families asked
for that and whose number is considered sufficient. There is no such request for Assyrian yet.
Subparagraph iv of b) of Paragraph 1
Primary school is available for RA national minority communities in relevant languages, or
within elementary education it provides the relevant minority language teaching as an integral
part of the curriculum, at least for pupils whose families requested for that and whose number
is considered sufficient. Thus Assyrian is taught as a special course in schools in Verin Dvin,
Dimitrov, Arzni, Nor Artagers villages and in Yerevan Pushkin school no. 8. Nearly 800
pupils attend the classes.
Subparagraph iv of c) of Paragraph 1
Secondary education is available for national minority communities in relevant languages, or
within secondary education it provides the relevant minority language teaching as an
inseparable part of the curriculum, at least for pupils who (or whose families) asked for that
and whose number is considered sufficient. Thus Assyrian is taught as a special course in
schools in Verin Dvin, Dimitrov, Arzni, and Nor Artagers villages and in Yerevan Pushkin
School no. 8.
In the 7th and 8th grades in these schools national history or literature study may also be
included upon request by specialists and parents.
Subparagraph iv of d) of Paragraph 1
In Armenia the technical and professional education is available in the language of national
minorities, or within technical and professional education it provides the relevant minority
language teaching as an inseparable part of the curriculum, at least for them who (or whose
families) asked for that and whose number is considered sufficient. There is no such request
for Assyrian yet.
Subparagraph iii of e) of Paragraph 1
The Republic of Armenia allows university or other forms of higher education in the language
of minorities or giving opportunities to teach these languages as disciplines at universities and
higher educational institutions. Several universities can offer special courses of Assyrian upon
demand. In particular “Davit Anhaght” Humanitarian University offers the profession
“Assyrian Studies”.
Subparagraph iii of f) of Paragraph 1
Since secondary education in Armenia is obligatory, there are no illiterate adults. If they have
problems with education, they apply to higher or post-graduate educational institutions.
19

Hence almost no problem arises connected with adults on- going education in other
institutions. However, there function a number of language-teaching courses in Armenia that
can offer courses of Assyrian upon demand to those who wish, without any age limitation.
There is a Sunday course of Assyrian in Arzni for adults. Union “Atour” periodically
organizes training of Assyrian language teachers.

Article 9. Judicial authorities
Subparagraph ii of a) of Paragraph 1
Article 15 of Criminal code stipulates that every person during court procedure (with the
exception of the body processing the proceedings) has the right to speak the language he/she
knows. Upon the decision of the mentioned body, the person(s) involved in the procedure,
who does not possess the language of procedure, are given free of charge opportunity to
realize all their rights provided by the code through an interpreter. This line of action is used
in Armenia not only in the regional judicial authorities, where the number of minority
language speakers is in accord with events established by Article 9 of the Charter, but in any
other area too.
Subparagraph iii of a) of Paragraph 1
The same Code provides that inquiries and evidences (written or oral) must not be considered
exclusively unacceptable, as they have been formulated in the languages of minorities.
Subparagraph iv of a) of Paragraph 1
According to the Code persons who do not know the procedure language, based on inquiry
about the legal matters, are given the certified copies of documents in the language they know
subject to submission.
Subparagraph ii of b) of Paragraph 1
According to Paragraph 2 of Article 7 of Civil Procedure Code, the person involved in civil
proceeding, who does not know the procedure language (Armenian) is provided with the right
to learn the case materials, to take part in the procedure and to speak in the court in other
language through an interpreter free of charge.
Subparagraph ii of c) of Paragraph 1
It is envisaged by the RA draft law on “Principles of Administration and Administrative
procedure” (submitted for consideration) to allow the party to speak the language of
minorities before the court, without any extra expenses for it.
Subparagraph iii of c) of Paragraph 1
The same draft law envisages allowing the documents and evidences to be given in minority
languages, if necessary through interpreters and translations, without any extra expenses for it.

20

Subparagraph d) of Paragraph 1
The legislation guarantees that implementation of Paragraphs b) and c) and turning to help for
translations and interpreters will not include extra expenses from the persons concerned.
Paragraph 3
Texts of much more important laws of national legislation are available in Armenia to
Assyrian population in the state language, Russian and sometimes Assyrian: especially texts,
which concern speakers of Assyrian (if not otherwise defined). The reason is that in Armenia
Assyrians have good command of Russian and Armenian.
Article 10. Administrative authorities and public services
Subparagraph iv of a) of Paragraph 1
The law does not forbid to turn to bodies in power in minority languages (written as well) and
to express oneself in his/her language. In such cases when answering the applications in
written form, the state language is used, which, though is not a ban to formulate the answer in
the relevant language, in case the applicant requests for that. Hence within the administrative
areas, where the number of minority language speakers is sufficient, the minority languages
speakers may introduce their claims written or oral in their language. We have this situation
particularly in villages Verin Dvin, Nor Artagers, Arzni and Dimitrov, populated with
Assyrians.
Subparagraph v of a) of Paragraph 1
On the same bases it is guaranteed, that minority language speaker has the right to introduce
documents in those languages.
Subparagraph b) of Paragraph 1
Administrative texts and forms widely used in Assyrian communities are available to the
population, as they are often written in Russian, and usually Assyrians have good knowledge
of Russian or official language.
Subparagraph b) of Paragraph 2
With regard to local or regional bodies, in the territory of which the number of minority
languages speakers is sufficient, the minority language speakers have the opportunity to place
an order in those languages written or oral.
Subparagraph f) of Paragraph 2
With regard to RA local or marz bodies, in the territory of which the number of minority
languages speakers is sufficient, the minority language usage during their meetings
(discussions) is allowed by the local authorities, though without excluding the usage of the
language (languages) officially adopted by the state.

21

Subparagraph g) of Paragraph 2
The RA law on “Geographical names” specifies, that when giving settlement names the
natives’ viewpoints must also be considered (Article 3), and when naming or renaming, offers
may be made by both local self- governing bodies and by legal and natural persons (Article 6).
In particular a number of squares, streets, fields, water springs, etc, of several villages
inhabited by Assyrians have Assyrian names.
Subparagraph c) of Paragraph 3
With regard to the state services of the administrative bodies or persons acting in their name
on the area where minority languages are used, the minority language speakers are allowed to
make inquiries and get answers in those languages.
Subparagraph c) of Paragraph 4
The officials are not restricted by the post they hold, to communicate with minority language
users in their language, if they possess it. However, if a person has applied in written to
executive bodies in a language different from Armenian, then on the area the mentioned
language is used, that authority must answer the application in essence, with the exception of
cases, when the law specified special requirements concerning the introduction of an
application. In that case, though, the application can not be refused, but the special order of its
introduction must be preserved.
Paragraph 5
The legislation envisages the opportunity for a person to preserve or change his name,
surname or patronymic name, to restore his previous name surname or patronymic name.
Assyrian citizens are free to choose Assyrian surnames and to use them in Assyrian.
Article 11. Media
Subparagraph iii of a) of Paragraph 1
Article 28 of RA law on TV and Radio envisages that public TV and Radio Company can
spare air time for special programs in minority languages. Article 28 of the same law
specifying that among other duties of the public TV and Radio Company, mentions that
interests of national minorities must also be considered when broadcasting programs or series
of programs.
Subparagraph ii of b) of Paragraph 1
The same law provides the national minorities with an hour a day of air time on Armenian
public radio. Assyrian radio has functioned for many years at Armenian radio committee and
the programs were heard in the whole east. But it is two years since the programs were
stopped, as there are no qualified specialists. These programs can be restored if the
community takes the initiative and provides the language and subject part.

22

Subparagraph ii of c) of Paragraph 1
According to the above- mentioned law the national minorities are provided with an hour per
week of air time on public TV. They can prepare also Assyrian programs if the community
takes the initiative and provides the language and subject part.
Subparagraph i of e) of Paragraph 1
Recently the publishing house agency of the Ministry of cultural, youth affairs and sport has
been allocating more than 1 (one) million AM drams to publish newspapers for national
minorities. With those allocations Assyrian newspapers or magazines can also be published if
the community takes the initiative and provides the language and subject part.
Paragraph 2
According to Article 10 of the above- mentioned law programs of foreign TV and Radio
Companies may be completely rebroadcast in Armenia based on the license given by the
National TV and Radio Committee or based on the international treaty. And licensed in TV
and Radio Companies can rebroadcast programs of foreign TV and Radio Companies on
contract bases.
Paragraph 3
It is guaranteed in Armenia that interests of national minority language users are introduced or
are taken into consideration by bodies established by law, which are responsible for freedom
of media and for providing pluralism of viewpoints. This is confirmed by the statutes and
activities of the publishing house agency of the Ministry of cultural, youth affairs and sport,
Public TV and Radio Company board and TV and Radio National Committee.

Article 12. Cultural activities and facilities
Subparagraph a) of Paragraph 1
In Armenia, where such languages are used and to the extent the state bodies are competent,
have rights or play some role in that field, they encourage those forms of expression and
initiations, which are peculiar to minority languages.
The Assyrian Union “Atour” (Motherland) carries out cultural and sport events. Assyrian
national ensembles function, though not regularly. There are cultural centres in villages
inhabited by Assyrians. In the libraries of those villages there are Assyrian books, though not
many. Children’s ensembles function in schools.
In 2001-2002 the Union “Atour” participated in international Assyrian games organized in
Iran and in four kinds of sport (football, basketball, tennis, chess) won 1st and 2nd prizes, cups
and gold medals. In 2003 they are going to participate in the championship, expecting
sponsorship from Armenian authorities.
The Institute of History of National Academy of Sciences and the “Arbela” Scientific-cultural
centre, which is involved in “Atour” Union, have organized a cultural conference titled
“Armenian-Assyrian Christian links”.

23

There are Assyrian post- graduate students in the National Academy of Sciences, who study
the history of Assyrian genocide and culture.
There is an Armenian-Assyrian scientific-cultural centre in Verin Dvin.
The Assyrian youth centre “Ashour” functions in Yerevan, which deals with educational
programs and with protection of Assyrians rights. It participated in youth conferences in Iran
and Russia.
In Assyrian villages national, religious and cultural celebrities are regularly organized
(Assyrian New Year on April 1, Shara, Saint Mariah, etc), as well as the Genocide day in
Ottoman Turkey is celebrated. Performances and concerts are organized on these days. They
intend to perform the national drama “Assyrian girl” Razmik Khosroyev, who was an actor at
Yerevan Soundoukyan Theatre.
In churches Assyrian divine service is given.
The RA preserves and restores not only Armenian, but other monuments as well, which have
been built by other nations in different times. The Agency of Monument Preservation at the
Ministry of cultural, youth matters and sport has registered and introduces the following
Assyrian monuments:
-

Assyrian Saint Kiril church, 1840, Ararat marz, village Dimitrov,
Assyrian Urma church, end of XIX century, Ararat marz, village Verin Dvin.

The community made an effort to create Assyrian alphabet (author – T. A. Mouoradova),
which is still in handwritten condition.
A Committee for Assyrian teaching methodology and Assyrian language teachers training and
qualification functions at RA National Academy of Sciences.
Subparagraph c) of Paragraph 1

It is guaranteed that all bodies responsible for organization and support to different cultural
activities will give relevant permission, so that knowledge and usage of minority languages
and culture joint the initiatives undertaken by them or for which they support.
In 2002 in Yerevan two great events were organized with the participation of all communities
of RA national minorities.
a) Two years subsequently, 2001 and 2002, on September 21, financed by the
Government and the Ministry of cultural, youth affairs and sport (500.000 and
300.000 drams respectively) great song and dance festivals were held at the Small
Philharmonic Hall, dedicated to the RA Independence Day. Representatives from
all the national minorities, individually and in-groups, participated in these
festivals, introducing their national and folk art.
b) On April 5, 2002, “Armenia – our home” event took place at Khnko Aper
Children’s Library, with participation of RA Government members, Embassies’
representatives and political figures. Women from different nationalities showed
their hand- made goods, representing their national ornaments.

24

Subparagraph f) of Paragraph 1
Armenia supports the direct participation of representatives from minority language users in
the implementation and planning of cultural activities. Thus, according to the Resolution of
Coordinating Council (consisting of representatives from national minorities) of functioning
under the Presidency staff, the allocated sum 20 million drams for 2001-2002 (i.e. 10 million
annually) was equally divided between the 11 Coordinating Board member community
representative organizations in order to support the national minority educational and cultural
activities.
Paragraph 2
With regard to the areas different from areas traditionally using the minority languages, the
Armenian authorities allow and support relevant cultural activities and possibilities, according
to the previous paragraph, even if the number of minority language users is not sufficient.
Paragraph 3
To lead its cultural policy abroad the Armenia recommends introducing its national minority
languages and cultures as well.

Article 13. Economic and social life
Subparagraph b) of Paragraph 1
According to RA legislation, in the field of economic and social activity, in the entire territory
of the country it is forbidden to include any provision in the documents, regulations, in other
acts or private documents of companies, that does not accept or limits the usage (at least with
those using the same language) of national minority languages.
Subparagraph c) of Paragraph 1
Armenia counteracts the practice of preventing from minority language usage connected with
economic and social activity.
Subparagraph d) of Paragraph 1
Companies and enterprises in Armenia decide on their own which language to use.
Subparagraph b) of Paragraph 2
With regard to the economic and public activity to the extent the RA State bodies are
competent, if possible they organize activities stimulating minority language usage in the
economic and public parts directly under their control (state sector) on the territories using
national minority language. This, in particular, happens in the villages Verin Dvin, Nor
Artagers, Arzni, Dimitrov, inhabited by Assyrians.
Subparagraph c) of Paragraph 2
The legislation guarantees that institutions of state maintenance (like hospitals, nursing homes
and hostels) receive and care for people from national minorities, who need care because of
25

poor health, age or other reasons. In this respect no case of discrimination or limitation has
been registered or observed.
Article 14. Transfrontier exchanges
Paragraph a)
The RA has concluded both bilateral and multilateral treaties to support the creation of links
between the same language speakers (Assyrian in particular). Thus the CIS Convention on
Protecting the rights of National minority people specifies, that, “Every contracting party is
obliged to provide the national minority people with the right for free contact between
themselves, citizens and organizations with whom they have common ethnic, cultural,
language or religious descent.” Article 7 of the mentioned Convention specifies that national
minorities may be involved in peaceful mass meetings and unions. The Assyrian “Atour”
Union and “Ashour” youth centre have close relations with Assyrian world union in northern
Iraq, Iran, Sweden and with Assyrian unions and centres functioning in CIS countries, and
receive from them newspapers, literature and text-books.
Paragraph b)
For the benefit of national minority languages there is no obstacle for transfrontier
cooperation, in particular between marzes and local authorities, in the territory of which the
same language is used similarly or identically.

2.Yezidi
Article 8. Education
Subparagraph iv of a) of Paragraph 1
The Republic of Armenia supports the communities of national minorities to organize the
basic part of education in relevant languages for at least those pupils, whose families asked
for that and whose number is considered sufficient. There is no such request for Yezidi yet.
Subparagraph iv of b) of Paragraph 1
Primary school is available for national minority communities in relevant languages, or within
primary education it provides the relevant minority language teaching as an integral part of
the curriculum, at least for pupils whose families requested for that and whose number is
considered sufficient. Thus Yezidi is taught (2-4 hours a week) at the school in the village
Zovuni, Kotayk marz. There are similar courses in 16 villages of Aragatsotn marz inhabited
by Yezidi people. They were in four more villages, but because of absence of teachers they do
not function regularly.
Subparagraph iv of c) of Paragraph 1
Secondary education is available for RA national minority communities in relevant languages,
or within secondary education it provides the relevant minority language teaching as an
inseparable part of the curriculum, at least for pupils who (or whose families) asked for that
and whose number is considered sufficient. Thus Yezidi is taught (2-4 hours a week) at the
school in the village Zovuni, Kotayk marz. There are similar courses in 16 villages of
26

Aragatsotn marz inhabited by Yezidi. They were in four more villages, but because of
absence of teachers they do not function regularly. In 7th and 8th grades in these schools
national history or literature study may also be included upon request by specialists and
parents.
Subparagraph iv of d) of Paragraph 1
In Armenia the technical and professional education is available in the language of national
minorities, or within technical and professional education it is provided the relevant minority
language teaching as an integral part of the curriculum, at least for pupils who (or whose
families) asked for that and whose number is considered sufficient. Several years ago the
department of Yezidi language was opened at Yerevan Pedagogical vocational school after
Bakunts, but it was closed due to the absence of applicants. The department can recommence
its functioning if applicants are available.
Subparagraph iii of e) of Paragraph 1
The Republic of Armenia allows university or other forms of higher education in the language
of minorities or giving opportunities to teach these languages as disciplines at universities and
higher educational institutions. Several universities can offer special courses of Yezidi upon
demand. In particular Yerevan University of Management offers the profession “Yezidi
Studies”.
Subparagraph iii of f) of Paragraph 1
Since secondary education in Armenia is obligatory, there are no illiterate adults. If they have
problems with education, they apply to higher or post-graduate educational institutions.
Hence almost no problem arises connected with adults’ on-going education in other
institutions. However, there function a number of language-teaching courses in Armenia that
can offer courses of Yezidi upon demand to those who wish, without any age limitation.

Article 9. Judicial authorities
Subparagraph ii of a) of Paragraph 1
Article 15 of RA criminal code specifies that every person during a court procedure (with the
exception of the person carrying on the procedure) has the right to speak the language he
knows. Upon the decision of the body proceeding the case, the involved person, who does not
know the procedure language, are given free of charge opportunity to realize all their rights
established by the mentioned law through an interpreter. This line of action is used in
Armenia not only in the regional judicial bodies, where the number of minority language
speakers is in accord with events established by Article 9 of the Charter, but in any other area
too.
Subparagraph iii of a) of Paragraph 1
The same Code provides that inquiries and evidences (written or oral) must not be considered
exclusively unacceptable, as they have been formulated in the languages of minorities.

27

Subparagraph iv of a) of Paragraph 1
According to the Code people who do not know the procedure language, based on inquiry
about the legal matters, are given, envisaged by the Code, the certified copies of documents in
the language they know subject to submission.
Subparagraph ii of b) of Paragraph 1
According to Paragraph 2 of Article 7 of Civil Procedure Code, the person involved in civil
proceedings, who does not know the procedure language (Armenian) is entitled to learn the
case materials, to take part in the procedure and to speak in the court in other language
through an interpreter – without any expenses.
Subparagraph ii of c) of Paragraph 1
It is envisaged by the draft law on “Principles of Administration and Administrative
procedure” (submitted for consideration) to allow the party to speak the language of
minorities before the court, without any extra expenses for it.
Subparagraph iii of c) of Paragraph 1
The same draft envisages allowing the documents and evidences to be given in minority
languages, if necessary through interpreters and translations, without any extra expenses for it.
Subparagraph d) of Paragraph 1
The legislation guarantees that implementation of paragraphs b) and c) and turning to help for
translations and interpreters will not include extra expenses from the persons concerned.
Paragraph 3
Texts of much more important laws of national legislation are available to Yezidi population
in the state language, Russian and sometimes Yezidi: especially texts, which concern speakers
of Yezidi (if not otherwise defined). The reason is that in Armenia Yezidi have good
command of Russian and Armenian.
Article 10. Administrative authorities and public services
Subparagraph iv of a) of Paragraph 1
The law does not prohibit to turn to bodies in power in minority languages (written as well)
and to express oneself in own language. In such cases when answering the applications in
written form, the state language is used, which, though is not a ban to formulate the answer in
the relevant language, if the applicant requests for that. Hence within the administrative areas,
where the number of minority language speakers is sufficient, the minority languages
speakers may introduce their claims written or oral in their language. We have this situation
particularly in villages Shamiram, Tlik, Sorik, Hakko, Giatlo, Barozh, Baisz, Avtona, Dian,
Ghabaghtapa, Ria-Taza, Amre-Taza, Mirak, Sangiar, Shenkani, Alagiaz, Jamshlu, Ortachai,
Derek, Avshen and Zovuni populated with Yezidi.

28

Subparagraph v of a) of Paragraph 1
On the same bases it is guaranteed, that minority language speakers have the right to
introduce documents in those languages.
Subparagraph b) of Paragraph 1
Administrative texts and forms widely used in Yezidi communities are available to the Yezidi
speaking population, as they are sometimes written in Yezidi, and usually Yezidi have good
knowledge of RA State language.
Subparagraph b) of Paragraph 2
With regard to RA local or regional authorities and bodies, in the territory of which the
number of minority languages speakers is sufficient, the minority language speakers have the
opportunity to submit applications in those languages written or oral.
Subparagraph f) of Paragraph 2
With regard to local or regional bodies, in the territory of which the number of minority
languages speakers is sufficient, the minority language usage during their meetings
(discussions) is allowed by the local authorities, though without excluding the usage of the
language (languages) officially adopted by the state.
Subparagraph g) of Paragraph 2
The law on “Geographical names” specifies, that when giving settlement names the natives’
viewpoints must also be considered (Article 3), and when naming or renaming, offers and
proposals may be made by both local self- government bodies and by legal and natural persons
(Article 6). In particular a number of villages have Yezidi names - Shamiram, Tlik, Sorik,
Hakko, Giatlo, Barozh, Baisz, Avtona, Dian, Ghabaghtapa, Ria-Taza, Amre-Taza, Mirak,
Sangiar, Shenkani, Alagiaz, Jamshlu, Ortachai, Derek, Avshen, etc, as well as a several water
springs, fields, streets, squares, etc.
Subparagraph c) of Paragraph 3
With regard to the state services of the administrative bodies or persons acting in their name
on the area where minority languages are used, the minority language speakers are allowed to
make inquiries and get answers in those languages.
Subparagraph c) of Paragraph 4
The officials are not banned by the post they hold, to communicate with minority language
users in their language, if they possess it. However, if a person has applied in written to RA
executive bodies in a language different from Armenian, then on the area the ment ioned
language is used, the mentioned state body must answer the application in essence, with the
exception of cases, when the requirements concerning the introduction of an application are
provided specially by law. In that case, though, the application cannot be refused, but the
special procedure of its introduction must be preserved.

29

Paragraph 5
The legislation envisages the opportunity for a person to preserve or change his name,
surname or patronymic name, to restore his previous name surname or patronymic name. In
Armenia it is up to Yezidi citizens to choose Yezidi surnames and to use them in Yezidi. Part
of Yezidis prefers to act like that.
Article 11. Media
Subparagraph iii of a) of Paragraph 1
Article 28 of RA law on TV and Radio envisages that public TV and Radio Company “can
spare air time for special programs in RA minority languages”. Article 28 of the same law
specifies that among other duties of the public TV and Radio Company the interests of RA
national minorities must also be considered when broadcasting programs or series of
programs.
Subparagraph ii of b) of Paragraph 1
The same law provides the national minorities with an hour per day of air time on Armenian
public radio. For many years half an hour Yezidi programs are being broadcast every day
(information, community life, culture, folk music).
Subparagraph ii of c) of Paragraph 1
According to the above- mentioned law the RA national minorities are provided with an hour a
week of air time on public TV. They can prepare also Yezidi programs if the community takes
the initiative and provides the language and subject part.
Subparagraph of e) of Paragraph 1
Recently the publishing house agency of RA Ministry of cultural, youth matters and sport has
been allocating more than 1 (one) million AM drams to publish newspapers for national
minorities. With those allocations Yezidi “Lalesh”, “Ezdikhana” (The Voice of Yezidi, in
Armenian8 ), newspapers are published.
Paragraph 2
According to Article 10 of the above- mentioned law programs of foreign TV and Radio
Companies may be completely rebroadcast in territory based on the license given by the
National TV and Radio Committee or based on the intergovernmental treaty. And licensed in
TV and Radio Companies can rebroadcast programs of foreign TV and Radio Companies on
contract bases.
Paragraph 3
Armenia guarantees that interests of national minority language users are introduced or are
taken into consideration by bodies established by law, which are responsible for freedom of
media and for providing pluralism of viewpoints. This is confirmed by the statutes and

8

The choice of the language is made by the Yezidis.

30

activities of the publishing house agency of the Ministry of cultural, youth affairs and sport,
Public TV and Radio Company board and TV and Radio National Committee.
Article 12. Cultural activities and facilities
Subparagraph a) of Paragraph 1
In territories, where such languages are used and to the extent the state bodies are competent,
have rights or play some role in that field, they encourage those forms of expression and
initiations, which are peculiar to minority languages.
Today the World and Armenia Yezidi national Union operates in Armenia, the “Ezdikhana”
NGO is registered. They have their national flag and coat of arms. There are cultural centres
in villages inhabited by Yezidis.
Since middle ages, according to national-religious tradition, writing and literature have been
forbidden among Yezidis, and only in Soviet times the ban was removed. In 1921 for the first
time Armenian- lettered ABC book “Shams” was published for Yezidi children, which is still
used at schools. Now, despite the present situation (in 21 villages inhabited by Yezidis
national schools functioned or are functioning), 50% of school-aged pupils do not attend
school.
There are nearly 2000 Yezidi books preserved in National Library. They have such books also
in their village libraries.
In 2001-2002 with the authorship of Yezidi national hero Aziz Tamoyan and with the
editorship of professors from Faculty of Oriental Studies of Yerevan State University the
books “We are Yezidi: genealogical, religious, historical essay”, “The Heroism of Yezidi
people: Yezidis in Artsakh War” are published. The latter was published with the sponsorship
of Ministry of Defense and Minister of Defence Serzh Sargsyan himself. The book introduces
36 Yezidi warriors who died in Artsakh War; three of them are buried in Yerablur (cemetery
where warrior are buried).
“National Heroes of Yezidi People”, “National Saints of Yezidi People”, “Aziz Tamoyan –
National Hero of Yezidi People” postures have also been published.
National- folk holidays are celebrated with the following sequence:
-

Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday of the first week after February 13 of every year is
fasting,
The first Wednesday after April 13 is Malake Taus – Yezidi New Year. the same
Wednesday in Lalesh – Yezidi sanctuary, is called Red Wednesday,
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday after December 13 is fasting. Friday is the Red Sultan
Yezidi holiday.
The people sacredly preserve the above- mentioned rituals and traditions.

Formerly 3 folk ensembles functioned, which come together only occasionally.

31

Subparagraph c) of Paragraph 1
The RA guarantees that all bodies responsible for organization and support to different
cultural activities will give relevant permission, so that knowledge and usage of minority
languages and culture joint the initiatives undertaken by them or for which they support.
In 2002 in Yerevan two great events were organized with the participation of all communities
of RA national minorities.
c) Two years successively, 2001 and 2002, on September 21, financed by RA
Government and the Ministry of cultural, youth matters and sport (500.000 and
300.000 drams respectively) great song and dance festivals were held at the Small
Philharmonic Hall, dedicated to the RA Independence Day. Representatives from
all the national minorities, individually and in groups, participated in these
festivals, introducing their national and folk art.
d) On April 5, 2002, “Armenia – our home” event took place at Khnko Aper
Children’s Library, with participation of RA Government members, Embassies’
representatives and political figures. Women from different nationalities showed
their hand- made goods, representing their national ornaments.
Subparagraph f) of Paragraph 1
Armenian authorities support the direct participation of representatives from minority
language users in the implementation and planning of cultural activities. Thus, according to
the Resolution of Coordinating Council national minority national-cultural NGO’s
functioning under the Presidency staff, the allocated sum of 20 million drams for 2001-2002
(i.e. 10 million annually) was equally divided between the 11 Coordinating Board member
community representative organizations, with the purpose of supporting the national minority
educational and cultural activities.
Paragraph 2
As to the areas different from areas classically using the minority languages, the RA allows
and supports relevant cultural activities and possibilities, according to the previous paragraph,
even if the number of minority language users is not sufficient.
Paragraph 3
To lead its cultural policy abroad the RA recommends introducing its national minority
languages and cultures as well.

Article 13. Economic and public life
Subparagraph b) of Paragraph 1
According to the legislation, in the field of economic and public activity, in the whole
territory of the country it is forbidden to include any provision in the regulations or private
documents of companies, that do not accept or limit the usage (at least with those using the
same language) of national minority languages.

32

Subparagraph c) of Paragraph 1
Armenia counteracts the practice of preventing from minority language usage connected with
economic and public activity.
Subparagraph d) of Paragraph 1
In Armenia the companies and enterprises decide on their own which language to use.
Subparagraph b) of Paragraph 2
With regard to the economic and public activity to the extent the state bodies are competent; if
possible they organize activities stimulating minority language usage in the economic and
public parts directly under their control (state sector) on the territories using national minority
language. This, in particular, happens in the villages Shamiram, Tlik, Sorik, Hakko, Giatlo,
Barozh, Baisz, Avtona, Dian, Ghabaghtapa, Ria-Taza, Amre-Taza, Mirak, Sangiar, Shenkani,
Alagiaz, Jamshlu, Ortachai, Derek, Avshen, Zovuni and other settlements inhabited by
Yezidi.
Subparagraph c) of Paragraph 2
The RA legislation guarantees that institutio ns of state maintenance (like hospitals, nursing
homes, and hostels) receive and care for people from national minorities, who need care
because of poor health, age or other reasons. In this respect not a single case of discrimination
or limitation has been registered or observed.
Article 14. Transfrontier exchanges
Paragraph a)
Armenia has concluded bilateral and multilateral treaties to support the creation of links
between the same language speakers (Yezidi in particular). Thus the CIS Convention on
Protecting the rights of National minority people specifies, that, “every contracting party is
obliged to provide the national minority people with the right for free contact between
themselves, citizens and organizations with whom they have common ethnic, cultural,
language or religious descent.” Article 7 of the mentioned Convention specifies that national
minorities may be involved in peaceful mass meetings and unions. Yezidis in Armenia keep
in touch with Yezidi communities in Iran and Iraq. Their religious sanctuary is in Iraq where
they sometimes visit.
Paragraph b)
For the benefit of national minority languages there is no obstacle for transfrontier
cooperation, in particular between marzes and local authorities, in the territory of which the
same language is used similarly or identically.

33

3. Greek
Article 8. Education
Subparagraph iv of a) of Paragraph 1
The Republic of Armenia supports the communities of national minorities to organize the
basic part of education in relevant languages for at least those pupils, whose families asked
for that and whose number is considered sufficient. Children are taught Greek in Yerevan
Kindergarten 52.
Subparagraph iv of b) of Paragraph 1
Primary school is available for national minority communities in relevant languages, or within
elementary education it provides the relevant minority language teaching as an inseparable
part of the curriculum, at least for pupils whose families asked for that and whose number is
considered sufficient. Thus teaching of Greek is organized in Yerevan Schools no. 12 and 74.
Subparagraph iv of c) of Paragraph 1
Secondary education is available for national minority communities in relevant languages, or
within secondary education it is provided the relevant minority language teaching as an
inseparable part of the curriculum, at least for pupils who (or whose families) asked for that
and whose number is considered sufficient. Thus teaching of Greek is organized in Yerevan
Schools no. 12 and 74. In 7th and 8th grades in these schools national history or literature
study may also be included upon request by specialists and parents.
Subparagraph iv of d) of Paragraph 1
In Armenia the technical and professional education is available in the language of national
minorities, or within technical and professional education it provides the relevant minority
language teaching as an inseparable part of the curriculum, at least for pupils who (or whose
families) asked for that and whose number is considered sufficient. There is no such request
for Greek yet.
Subparagraph iii of e) of Paragraph 1
The Republic of Armenia allows university or other forms of higher education in the language
of minorities or giving opportunities to teach these languages as disciplines at universities and
higher educational institutions. Several universities (Yerevan State University, Yerevan
Linguistic University, “Atcharyan” University) have or offer special courses of Greek. There
is a Department of Greek language at Yerevan University of Culture. 22 students study there.
Yerevan “Monte Melkonyan” University and University of Management offer the profession
“Hellenic studies”. According to international agreement it is also possible to organize higher
education in Greek for the Greek community and others who wish so. Greece finances the
visit of school graduates’ of Greek descent to Greece, to continue higher education there.
Subparagraph iii of f) of Paragraph 1
Since secondary education in Armenia is obligatory, there are no illiterate adults. If they have
problems with education, they apply to higher or post-graduate educational institutions.
34

Hence almost no problem arises connected with adult’s on-going education in other
institutions. However, there function a number of language-teaching courses in RA that offer
courses of Greek, alongside with other languages to those who wish, without any age
limitation (e.g. “Haiknet” educational centre). In 10 settlements inhabited by Greeks there
function Sunday schools, supported by Greek Embassy to Armenia. Teachers of Greek have
training courses in Greek.
Article 9. Judicial authorities
Subparagraph ii of a) of Paragraph 1
Article 15 of the Criminal code specifies that every person during court procedure (with the
exception of the body proceeding the case) is entitled to speak the language he knows. Upon
the decision of the person carrying on the procedure, the involved person who does not know
the procedure language, are given free of charge opportunity to realize all their rights
established by the mentioned la w through an interpreter. This line of action is used not only in
the regional judicial bodies, where the number of minority language speakers is in accord with
events established by Article 9 of the Charter, but in any other areas too.
Subparagraph iii of a) of Paragraph 1
The same law provides that inquiries and evidences (written or oral) must not be considered
exclusively unacceptable, as they have been formulated in the languages of minorities.
Subparagraph iv of a) of Paragraph 1
According to the same law person who does not know the procedure language, based on
inquiry about the legal matters, are given, envisaged by the Code, the certified copies of the
documents in the language they know subject to submission.
Subparagraph ii of b) of Paragraph 1
According to Paragraph 2 of Article 7 of Civil Procedure Code, the person involved in civil
proceedings, who does not know the procedure language (Armenian) has the right to learn the
case materials, to take part in the procedure and to speak in the court in other language
through an interpreter – without extra expenses.
Subparagraph ii of c) of Paragraph 1
It is envisaged by the draft law on “Principles of Administration and Administrative
procedure” (submitted for consideration) to allow one of the sides to speak the language of
minorities before the court, without any extra expenses for it.
Subparagraph iii of c) of Paragraph 1
The same draft envisages allowing the documents and evidences to be given in minority
languages, if necessary through interpreters and translations, without any extra expenses for it.

35

Subparagraph d) of Paragraph 1
The Armenian legislation guarantees that implementation of Paragraphs b) and c) and turning
to help for translations and interpreters will not include extra expenses from the persons
concerned.
Paragraph 3
Texts of much more important laws of national legislation are available to Greek population
in the official language, Russian and sometimes in Greek: especially texts, which concern
speakers of Greek (if not otherwise defined). The reason is that in Armenia Greeks have good
command of Russian and Armenian.
Article 10. Administrative authorities and public services
Subparagraph iv of a) of Paragraph 1
The law does not prohibit to turn to bodies in power in minority languages (written as well)
and to express oneself in own language. In such cases when answering the applications in
written form, the state language is used, which, though is not a ban to formulate the answer in
the relevant language. In case the applicant asks for that. Hence within the administrative
areas, where the number of minority language speakers is sufficient, the minority languages
speakers may introduce their claims written or oral in their language. Such a situation
particularly exists in villages Yaghdan, Koghes, Madan, Akhtala, Shamlugh and other
settlements, populated with Greeks.
Subparagraph v of a) of Paragraph 1
On the same bases it is guaranteed, that minority language speakers have the right to
introduce documents in those languages.
Subparagraph b) of Paragraph 1
Administrative texts and forms widely used in Greek communities are available to the
population, as they are often written in Russian, and usually Greeks have good knowledge of
Russian or official language.
Subparagraph b) of Paragraph 2
With regard to local or marz bodies, in the territory of which the number of minority
languages speakers is sufficient, the minority language speakers have the opportunity to place
an order in those languages written or oral.
Subparagraph f) of Paragraph 2
With regard to local or marz bodies, in the territory of which the number of minority
languages speakers is sufficient, the minority language usage during their meetings
(discussions) is allowed by the local authorities, though without excluding the usage of the
language (languages) officially adopted.

36

Subparagraph g) of Paragraph 2
The law on “Geographical names” specifies, that when giving settlement names the natives’
viewpoints must also be considered (Article 3), and when naming or renaming, offers may be
made by both local self- governing bodies and by legal and natural persons (Article 6). In
particular a number of squares, streets, fields, water springs have Greek names.
Subparagraph c) of Paragraph 3
With regard to the state services of administrative bodies or persons acting in their name on
the area where minority languages are used, the minority language speakers are allowed to
make inquiries and get answers in those languages.
Subparagraph c) of Paragraph 4
The officials are not banned by the post they hold, to communicate with minority language
users in their language, if they know it. However, if a person has applied in written to
executive bodies in a language different from Armenian, then on the area the mentioned
language is used, the mentioned state body must answer the application in essence, with the
exception of cases, when the law has specified special requirements concerning the
introduction of an application. In that case, though, the application cannot be refused, but the
special order of its introduction must be preserved.
Paragraph 5
The legislation envisages the opportunity for a person to preserve or change his name,
surname or patronymic name, to restore his previous name surname or patronymic name.
Greek citizens are free to choose Greek surnames and to use them in Greek. Most of Greek
citizens prefer to do so.
Article 11. Media
Subparagraph iii of a) of Paragraph 1
Article 28 of law on TV and Radio envisages that public TV and Radio Company “can spare
air time for special programs in minority languages”. Article 28 of the same law specifies that
among other duties of the public TV and Radio Company the interests of national minorities
must also be considered when broadcasting programs or series of programs.
Subparagraph ii of b) of Paragraph 1
The same law provides the national minorities with an hour a day of air time on Armenian
public radio. Greek programs may be organized within this time if the community takes the
initiative and provides the language and subject part.
Subparagraph ii of c) of Paragraph 1
According to the above- mentioned law the RA national minorities are provided with an hour a
week of air time on public TV. They can prepare also Greek programs if the community takes
the initiative and provides the language and subject part.

37

Subparagraph i of e) of Paragraph 1
Recently the publishing house agency of RA Ministry of cultural, youth matters and sport has
been allocating more than 1 (one) million AM drams to publish newspapers for national
minorities. With those allocations the Greek “Patrida” NGO publishes the “Byzantine
inheritance” Russian9 monthly magazine for the Greek community.
Paragraph 2
According to Article 10 of the above- mentioned law programs of foreign TV and Radio
Companies may be completely rebroadcast in Armenia based on the license given by the
National TV and Radio Committee or based on the intergovernmental treaty. And licensed in
TV and Radio Companies can rebroadcast programs of foreign TV and Radio Companies on
contract bases.
Paragraph 3
Armenia guarantees that interests of national minority language users are introduced or are
taken into consideration by bodies established by law, which are responsible for freedom of
media and for providing pluralism of viewpoints. This is confirmed by the statutes and
activities of the publishing house agency of the Ministry of cultural, youth matters and sport,
Public TV and Radio Company board and TV and Radio National Committee.
Article 12. Cultural activities and facilities
Subparagraph a) of Paragraph 1
In Armenia, where such languages are used and to the extent the state bodies are competent,
have rights or play some role in that field, they encourage those forms of expression and
initiations, which are peculiar to minority languages.
The Greek Community has several organizations (“Partida” in Yerevan, “Patriotis” in Gjumri,
“Elpida” in Vanadzor, “Pontos” in Alaverdi).
450 books are preserved in National Library of Armenia. Some of them are in libraries in
settlements inhabited by Greeks. School textbooks, handbooks, other books and press are
received from Greece. There are cultural centres in villages inhabited by Greeks.
“Pontos” youth dance group and “Elas” ensemble function in the Greek community. “Pontos”
dance ensemble is famous with similar dance ensembles. It mainly introduces classical Greek
dances, as well as national costumes. Together with dance ensemble “Elas” “Pontos” acted in
orphanages, in Brusov State Linguistic University, in Arabkir House of Armenian-borns,
Kanaz cultural centre.
The Greek community lives with various cultural interests, it takes part in state and national
celebrations. It often organizes events in Armenian Society for Friendship and Cultural
Relations with Foreign Countries.
In 2001-2002, besides the events organized with other national minorities the community has
also celebrated:
9

The language has been chosen by the Greeks

38

-

-

-

May 12, 2001, European language teaching day, upon the invitation from the
Council of Europe, the Greek community exhibited Greek books and textbooks in
“Moscva” cinema-house.
On March 8, on the 4th anniversary of Armentel, the “Pontos” dance ensemble
went to Greece to perform on tour.
March 25 is celebrated every year as Greece Independence Day.
Easter is celebrated in April.
On April 24 Armenian Genocide Day is commemorated.
On May 19 the Greek Genocide Day is commemorated (in 1992 in eastern Turkey.
600 thousands Greeks were killed).
The Greek community was awarded a diploma by the President of Armenia for
participation in NGO Assemblage organized on 10-19 October in “Karen
Demirchyan” cultural centre.
October 28 is celebrated as “No” day against fascism.
On October 29 the “Pontos” dance ensemble gave a concert for the professors of
Armenian State Engineering University
The community took active part in the 10-day Greek film festival.

The “Pontos” union of Greek community has organized TV programs about its activities.
Interesting programs have been organized about the Greek community by “Bari luis
Hayastan” (Good morning Armenia) and “Sektor Pro” (Sector Pro) programs on
“Prometheus” TV-channel. The public radio programs “Haik” as well as other information
programs on public TV often tell about the community life.
The public radio often broadcasts concerts of Greek music. Tapes and laser CDs with Greek
songs are sold everywhere.
Armenia preserves and restores not only Armenian, but other monuments as well, which have
been built by other nations in different times. The Agency of Monument Preservation at the
Ministry of cultural, youth matters and sport has registered and introduces the following
Greek monument:
St. Sava church of Greek belief, 1909, Lori marz, Toumanyan subregion, village Shamlough.
Subparagraph c) of Paragraph 1
The RA guarantees that all bodies responsible for organization and support to different
cultural activities will give relevant permission, so that knowledge and usage of minority
languages and culture joint the initiatives undertaken by them or for which they support.
In 2002 in Yerevan two great events were organized with the participation of all communities
of RA national minorities.
e) Two years successively, 2001 and 2002, on September 21, financed by RA
Government and the Ministry of cultural, youth matters and sport (500.000 and
300.000 drams respectively) great song and dance festivals were held at the Small
Philharmonic Hall, dedicated to the Armenian Independence Day. Representatives
from all the national minorities, individually and in- groups, participated in these
festivals, introducing their national and folk art.
f) On April 5, 2002, “Armenia – our home” event took place at Khnko Aper
Children’s Library, with participation of RA Government members, Embassies’

39

representatives and political figures. Women from different nationalities showed
their hand- made goods, representing their national ornaments.

Subparagraph f) of Paragraph 1
The Republic of Armenia supports the direct participation of representatives from minority
language users in the implementation and planning of cultural activities. Thus, according to
the Resolution of Coordinating Council of national minority national-cultural NGOs
functioning in co-operation with the presidency staff, the allocated sum 20 million drams for
2001-2002 (i.e. 10 million annually) was equally divided between the 11 Coordinating
Council member community representative organizations, with the purpose of supporting the
national minority educational and cultural activities.
Paragraph 2
With regard to the areas different from areas traditionally using the minority languages, the
RA allows and supports relevant cultural activities and possibilities, according to the previous
paragraph, even if the number of minority language users is not sufficient.
Paragraph 3
To lead its cultural policy abroad the RA recommends introducing its national minority
languages and cultures as well.

Article 13. Economic and social life
Subparagraph b) of Paragraph 1
According to the legislation, in the field of economic and public activity, on the whole
territory of the country it is forbidden to include any paragraph in the regulations or private
documents of companies, that does not accept or limits the usage (at least with those using the
same language) of national minority languages.
Subparagraph c) of Paragraph 1
Armenia counteracts the practice of preventing from minority language usage connected with
economic and public activity.
Subparagraph d) of Paragraph 1
In Armenia the companies and enterprises in RA decide on their own which language to use.
Subparagraph b) of Paragraph 2
With regard to the economic and public activity to the extent the state bodies are competent, if
possible they organize activities stimulating minority language usage in the economic and
public parts directly under their control (state sector) in the territories using national minority
language. This, in particular, happens in the villages Yaghdan, Koghes, Madan, Akhtala,
Shamlough inhabited by Greeks.

40

Subparagraph c) of Paragraph 2
The legislation guarantees that institutions of state maintenance (like hospitals, nursing
homes, hostels) receive and care for people from national minorities, who need care because
of poor health, age or other reasons. In this respect not a single case of discrimination or
limitation has been registered or observed.
Article 14. Transfrontier exchanges
Paragraph a)
Armenia has signed bilateral (with Greece) and multilateral (within CIS countries) agreements
to support the creation of links between the same language speakers (Greek in particular) in
the fields of culture, education, information, profession and permanent education. Thus, the
treaty on friendship and cooperation signed between Armenia and Greece, developing
relations of cooperation in several aspects, (Article 20) straightly specifies that Armenia and
Greece guarantee the creation of necessary conditions and the implementation of relevant
measures to preserve and develop ethnic, cultural and religious identity of Armenians in
Greece and Greeks in Armenia, according to the norms and principles of international law.
The Contracting parties support on state level the public, spiritual, cultural, educational, sports
and charity activities of Armenian community in Greece and Greek community in Armenia.
Paragraph b)
For the benefit of national minority languages there is no obstacle for transfrontier
cooperation, in particular between marz and local authorities, on the territory of which the
same language is used similarly or identically.

4. Russian
Article 8. Education
Subparagraph iv of a) of Paragraph 1
The main part of pre-school education in Russian is available in Armenia to all Russian
children, who expressed a wish to get it. In Armenia in all settlements, where the number of
Russians is sufficient, there are Russian pre-school educational institutions or groups
(departments). In most of the educational institutions teaching of Russian is organized
according to parents’ wish. So it is organized in all Yerevan schools and Gyumri pre-school
educational centres 4, 6, 8,9, 1, 15, 16, 18, 23, 26, 27, 30.
Subparagraph iv of b) of Paragraph 1
In Armenia primary education in Russian is available to all Russian children who expressed a
wish to get it. In Armenia in all settlements, where the number of Russians is sufficient, there
are Russian primary schools or groups. So schools with Russian education function in
Yerevan, Tsakhkadzor, villages Fioletovo and Lermotovo. There are Russian language
departments (classes) in 47 schools (15 of them in Yerevan). More than 10.000 children study
there. In Armenia also function 3 schools of Russian Federation army garrison (Yerevan,
Gyumri, Armavir) as well as Russian Embassy school (Yerevan Secondary School no. 54),
41

where citizens’ children study together with Russian Federation citizens’ children (in these
schools Armenian language is not taught).
Besides, in primary classes of all schools, Russian is a compulsory subject as a foreign
language (4 hours a week).
Treaty between Armenia and Russia on friendship, cooperation and mutual support (1997)
specifies that Armenian party will create conditions in the RA system of education for
profound study of Russian language. This obligation was brought to life by the RA
Government Resolution 48, on September 16, 1999, on the issue “Russian language in the RA
system of education and cultural and public life”, according to which schools provided with
professional staff were given an opportunity to organize profound study of Russian with
special program (4-6 hours a week). Now there are 52 such schools. In 5 more schools the y
carry out Armenian-Russian bilingual teaching with a special program and special textbooks.
Subparagraph iv of c) of Paragraph 1
Secondary education in Russian is available to all Russian children, who expressed a wish to
get it. In Armenia in all settlements, where the number of Russians is sufficient, there are
Russian secondary schools and groups. They are the same mentioned in the previous
paragraph. These schools use books and handbooks published both in Armenia and Russia. In
the 7th and 8th grades they study “History of Russia” and “Russian Literature.”
Besides, in all forms of schools Russian is a compulsory subject, as a foreign language (3
hours a week, in schools with Russian bias 4-6 hours a week).
Subparagraph iv of d) of Paragraph 1
In Armenia the technical and professional education in Russian is available at least to pupils
who (or whose families) asked for that and whose number is considered sufficient. There is a
Department of Russian at Yerevan State Humanitarian College. In all other technical and
vocational educational institutions they teach Russian as a foreign language as an inseparable
part of the curriculum.
Subparagraph iii of e) of Paragraph 1
Higher education in Russian is available to those who expressed a wish to get it. In all major
settlements of Armenia (Yerevan, Gyumri, Vanadzor, Gavar) there are higher educational
institutions and departments with Russian education. Russians as well can study there without
any discrimination. There are 250 students at the Department of Russian Philology at Yerevan
State University, 240 students at the Department of Russian language and literature and
Russian department of primary education pedagogy and methods at Yerevan State
Pedagogical Institute named after Kh. Abovyan, 350 student s at the department of Russian
linguistics and intercultural relations and 75 students at the Department of Russian and
English languages at Yerevan Brusov State Linguistic University, 200 students at the
department of Russian language and literature of Gyumri State Pedagogical University, 100
students at Russian department of primary education pedagogy and methods of Vanadzor
State Pedagogical University, 100 students at the department of Russian language and
literature at Gavar State University. There is a department of Russian at Yerevan State
Institute of theatre and cinema. There are departments of Russian in several private
universities in Armenia (Yerevan “Haibusak”, “Hiusisayin”, “Hrachya Acharyan”, Gyumri
“Progress”, Spitak “Spitak”, etc.). According to the intergovernmental agreement signed in
42

1997 there functions Russian-Armenian (Slavonakan) State University, which has 700
students. This University allocates 3 non-competitive places to the Russian community, 5-6
representatives of the community are admitted to the Preliminary department of the
University free of charge. In Armenia there also function 15 branches, departments or
educational-consulting units of different Russian higher educational institutions where more
than 2000 students study. The Russian Federation allocates 70 state scholarships to Armenian
citizens (10 of which to the Russian community). The Moscow authorities and the Ministry of
education of Russia have spared computer, lingaphone and laboratory equipments to the
Armenian-Russian University. The rest of the higher educational institutions included twoyear course of Russian in their curricula.
Subparagraph iii of f) of Paragraph 1
Since secondary education in Armenia is obligatory, there are no illiterate adults. If they have
problems with education, they apply to higher or post-graduate educational institutions.
Hence almost no problem arises connected with adult’s on-going education in other
institutions. However, a number of language courses function, which, among other language
courses offer Russian as well to those who wish, without age limitation. Besides, 200 Russian
language teachers regularly go to Russia (Moscow and Rostov na Don) to improve their
qualification. In 2002 in Moscow 7 teachers from Armenia became laureates of international
competition – winning Pushkin prizes. It is planned to found a regional centre for Russian
language teachers to improve their qualifications, at the Armenian-Russian State Univeristy
(Slavyanski). Since 2002 “Union of Russian philologists of Armenia” has been functioning at
the Brusov State Linguistic University. Since 2000 the quarterly magazine “Russian language
in Armenia” has resumed its publication (with cooperation of “Pedagogical initiation”
Armenian Company and Centre for Educational reforms of Ministry of education and science
of Armenia). Since 2001 with the sponsorship of the Union of Armenians in Russia,
Armenian Centre for Russian language development has been functioning, which held an
international competition named “Russia and Russian language in my life” (for pupils of top
classes in CIS and Baltic countries). According to the agreement signed between two states
(2001) both countries admit all the documents concerning educational, scientific degrees and
titles.
Article 9. Judicial authorities
Subparagraph ii of a) of Paragraph 1
Article 15 of Criminal code specifies that every person during a court procedure (with the
exception of the person proceeding the case) has the right to speak the language he knows.
Upon the decision of the person carrying on the procedure, the persons involved who do not
know the procedure language, are given free of charge opportunity to realize all their rights
established by the mentioned law through an interpreter. This way of action is used in
Armenia not only in the regional judicial bodies, where the number of minority language
speakers is in accord with events established by Article 9 of the Charter, but in any other area
too.
Subparagraph iii of a) of Paragraph 1
The same law provides that inquiries and evidences (written or oral) must not be considered
exclusively unacceptable, as they have been formulated in the languages of minorities.

43

Subparagraph iv of a) of Paragraph 1
According to the same law people who do not know the procedure language, based on inquiry
about the legal matters, are given, envisaged by the Code, the verified copies of subject to
submission documents in the language they know.
Subparagraph ii of b) of Paragraph 1
According to Paragraph 2 of Article 7 of Civil Procedure Code the person involved in civil
proceedings, who does not know the procedure language (Armenian) is provided with the
right to learn the case materials, to take part in the procedure and to speak in the court in other
language through an interpreter – without any expenses.
Subparagraph ii of c) of Paragraph 1
It is envisaged by the draft law on “Principles of Administration and Administrative
procedure” (submitted for consideration to the RA Government) to allow the party to speak
the language of minorities before the court, without any extra expenses for it.
Subparagraph iii of c) of Paragraph 1
The same draft envisages allowing the documents and evidences to be given in minority
languages, if necessary through interpreters and translatio ns, without any extra expenses for it.
Subparagraph d) of Paragraph 1
The RA legislation guarantees that implementation of Paragraphs b) and c) and turning to
help for translations and interpreters will not include extra expenses from the concerned
person.
Paragraph 3
Texts of much more important laws are available in to Russian speaking population in
Russian (if not otherwise defined). In Soviet times in Armenia legal documents were often
and sometimes exceptionally available in Russian. This tradition to some extent is continued
to present day. In RA newly enacted important laws are published in translation in Russian
language press. A number of documents are signed in Russian as well. A number of
international legal instruments are more available in Russian, than in Armenian.

Article 10. Administrative authorities and social services

Subparagraph iv of a) of Paragraph 1
The law does not forbid to turn to bodies in power in minority languages (written as well) and
to express oneself in his/her language. In such cases when relying to the applications in
written form, the official language is used, which, though is not a ban to formulate the answer
in the relevant language in case the applicant asks for that. Hence within the administrative
areas, where the number of minority language speakers is sufficient, the minority languages
speakers may introduce their claims written or oral in their language. We have this situation
particularly in villages Semyonovka, Chkalovka, Lermontovo, Fioletovo, Blagodarnoye,
44

Novoseltsovo, Saratovka, Medovka, Kruglaya Shishka, Mikhailovka, Petrovka, Privolnoye,
Pushkino and other villages populated with Russians. Oral or written applications in Russian
are not usually refused in other settlements and administrative areas either.
Subparagraph v of a) of Paragraph 1
On the same bases it is guaranteed, that minority language speakers have the right to
introduce documents in those languages.
Subparagraph b) of Paragraph 1
Administrative texts and forms widely used in Russian communities are available to the
Russian speaking population, as they are sometimes written in Russian or Russian as well. For
example, the alderman and the village mayor of Fioletovo village community are given the
right to formulate their resolutions, messages or official notes only in Russian.
Subparagraph b) of Paragraph 2
With regard to RA local or marz bodies, on the territory of which the number of minority
languages speakers is sufficient, the minority language speakers have the opportunity to place
an order in those languages written or oral.
Subparagraph f) of Paragraph 2
With regard to RA local or marz bodies, on the territory of which the number of minority
languages speakers is sufficient, the minority language usage during their meetings
(discussions) is allowed by the local authorities, though without excluding the usage of the
language (languages) officially adopted by the state.
Subparagraph g) of Paragraph 2
The RA law on “Geographical names” specifies, that when giving settlement names the
natives’ viewpoints must also be considered (Article 3), and when naming or renaming, offers
may be made by both local self- governing bodies and by legal and natural persons (Article 6).
In particular a number of villages have Russian names - Semyonovka, Chkalovka,
Lermontovo, Fioletovo, Blagodarnoye, Novoseltsovo, Saratovka, Medovka, Kruglaya
Shishka, Mikhailovka, Petrovka, Privolnoye, Pushkino, etc, as well as a several rivers, water
springs, fields, mountain passes, streets, squares, etc.
Subparagraph c) of Paragraph 3
With regard to the state services of RA administrative bodies or persons acting in their name
on the area where minority languages are used, the minority language speakers are allowed to
make inquiries and get answers in those languages.
Subparagraph c) of Paragraph 4
The RA State officials are not banned by the post they hold, to communicate with minority
language carriers in their language, if they know it. However, if a person has applied in
written to RA executive bodies in a language different from Armenian, then on the area the
mentioned language is used, the mentioned state body must answer the application in essence,
with the exception of cases, when the law has specified special requirements concerning the
45

introduction of an application. In that case, though, the application can’t be refused, but the
special order of its introduction must be preserved.
Paragraph 5
The RA legislation envisages the opportunity for a person to preserve or change his name,
surname or patronymic name, to restore his previous name surname or patronymic name. RA
Russian citizens are free to choose Russian surnames and to use them in Russian. Most of RA
Russian citizens prefer to act like that. A number of citizens of Armenian origin emigrated
from Russia, Azerbaijan and other CIS countries have also preserved the Russian variant of
their surnames.
Article 11. Media
Subparagraph iii of a) of Paragraph 1
Article 28 of law on TV and Radio envisages that public TV and Radio Company “can spare
air time for special programs in minority languages”. Article 28 of the same law specifies that
among other duties of the public TV and Radio Company the interests of RA national
minorities must also be considered when broadcasting programs or series of programs.
Subparagraph ii of b) of Paragraph 1
The same law provides the national minorities with an hour a day of air time on Armenian
public radio. Half of that daily hour is given to Russian “Haik” pubic cultural information
program, and 15 minutes are given to Russian information program. Every Sunday the
spiritual program “Haitnutyun” (Discovery) is broadcast, and on Saturdays the informationanalytical program “Antsats shabatum” (During the past week) is broadcast (10 minutes), 15
minutes daily are given to interstate (for CIS countries) “Mir” (World) Russian language
information program (30 minutes on Sundays). Radio Company “Van” mostly broadcasts
Russian language programs.
On Saturdays the program “Haik” is devoted to the national minority communities in
Armenia, to their culture ands public problems.
Subparagraph ii of c) of Paragraph 1
According to the above- mentioned law the RA national minorities are provided with an hour a
week of air time on public TV. 35 minutes of that hour (5 minutes a day) is allocated to the
information program in Russian. Besides, on average 6-7 hours of Russian films (original or
translated) are shown. Several private TV companies have regular programs in Russian:
“Prometheus”, “ALM” (“Na samom dele” /In reality/ talk show on Sundays), “Kentron”
(“Armianskoye Radio” /Armenian Radio/ satirical program, etc.) Nearly all the private TV
companies show 5-8 hours of Russian films (original or translated). “Prometheus” TV
Company allocates 30 minutes every day to interstate (for CIS countries) “Mir” (World)
program in Russian.
Subparagraph i of e) of Paragraph 1
Recently the publishing house agency of the Ministry of cultural, youth matters and sport has
been allocating more than 1 (one) million AM drams to publish newspapers for national
minorities. With this allocation “Respublika Armenia”, “Urartu”, “Novoye Vremya”
46

newspapers and “Literaturnaya Armenia” magazines are published. Newspapers like “Golos
Armenii”, “Efir”, “TV kanal” in Russian language are published in rather great circulation,
more than 10 scientific and other magazines, great number of Russian newspapers and
magazines are freely disseminated. The Russian Embassy in Armenia has subscribed two
Russian newspapers (“Rosiyskaya Gazeta”, “Uchitelskaya Gazeta”) of 25 organizations of
Russian community. The Russian newspaper of Jewish community “Magen Davit” (Davit’s
Shield) is also published in Armenia. A number of bilingual (Armenian and Russian) and
multilingual magazines and newspapers are also published.
Paragraph 2
According to Article 10 of the above- mentioned law programs of foreign TV and Radio
Companies may be completely rebroadcast on RA territory based on the license given by the
RA National TV and Radio Committee or based on the intergovernmental agreement. TV and
Radio Companies licensed in Armenia can rebroadcast programs of foreign TV and Radio
Companies on contract bases. Through public TV-centre TV channels RTR, ORT, NTV,
MuzTV and “Russkoye Radio”, “Mayak”, “Dinamit FM”, “Yevropa Plus” radio channels are
broadcast round the clock, TVTs, TVC, MTV and “Mshakuyt” Russian language TV
channels and “Hit FM” radio channel are broadcast partly. The Russian version of
“Euronews” is also broadcast.
Paragraph 3
The RA guarantees that interests of national minority language users are introduced or are
taken into consideration by bodies established by law, which are responsible for freedom of
media and for providing pluralism of viewpoints. This is confirmed by the statutes and
activities of the publishing house agency of RA Ministry of cultural, youth affairs and sport,
Public TV and Radio Company board and TV and Radio National Committee.
Article 12. Cultural activities and facilities
Subparagraph a) of Paragraph 1
In Armenia, where such languages are used and to the extent the state bodies are competent,
have rights or play some role in that field, they encourage those forms of expression and
initiations, which are peculiar to minority languages.
The bookshop “Russkaya Kniga” functions in Yerevan. A great number of Russian books are
sold in bookshops all around Armenia. Every year many Russian books are published (bellesletters, scientific, children’s journalistic, informative dictionaries, etc.).
In 2002 the “Rosiya” NGO initiated the publishing of the following 3 Russian books: “G.S.
Griboyedov and Armenia”, “Russia and Armenia. XIX century”, “Together Forever: on
Russian-Armenian historical-cultural and literary links”. All in all 106 books with different
names in Russian were published in 2002, and 32 books with different names were published
in the first quarter of 2003.
In the state central, regional, university, administrative and other libraries Russian books
make a great number. For example, in the library of Yerevan Municipality there are 423515
Russian books.

47

Every year in the Yerevan central library named after A. Isahakyan it is organized Russian
literature day, jubilee celebrations devoted to the classics of Russian literature and art, and
exhibitions.
Yerevan Municipality organized a donation day to the library of “Slavyanskaya” Secondary
School, and donated 355 Russian books.
A great number of state bodies, organizations, individuals have Russian language (or bilingual
or trilingual: Russian included) Internet pages and sites.
In Yerevan Russian State Theatre of Drama after Stanislavski functions, which has a separate
building, great audience and fame. It goes on tour to Russia several times a year. In 2002 the
representative office of the Russian centre for cultural and scientific international cooperation
was established in Yerevan, which has become an important centre for Russian culture.
Different Chairs of Russian Philology from RA universities with Russian departments and
from Armenian branches of RF universities regularly organize conferences, seminars and
publish their materials.
The Russian community of Armenia has several NGOs of which the most representative is
“Rossiya”. The organization has 2500 members and 11 branches in 9 marzes of the Republic.
When carrying out cultural programs “Rossiya” cooperates with other Russian organizations,
in particular with “Harmony” NGO.
A coordinating council for Russian NGOs has been established, which deals with preservation
and preaching of Russian culture and traditions, and dissemination of Russian language. The
council struggles for increasing the Russian language status (to declare it an official or state
language). For this purpose lobbing is carried out in RA National Assembly trying to review
the RA law on language. The council is for the review of 4 projects, at least two of which
envisage equalization of the Russian language status to Armenian, which will actually mean
subordination of the Armenian language to the Russian language, as it was in Soviet times.
Within past two years more than 100 events have been organized in the communities, of
which rather important are:
-

-

On October 10-13, 2002 for the first time in Armenia Romance international competition
was held, which will be held every year. Ara Abrahamyan, President of the Union of
Armenians in Russia, sponsored the competition. The Russian Ambassador A. Dryukov,
RA Minister of Culture R. Sharoyan, Head of the Benevolent Fund for Cultural
Development A. Darbinyan participated in it.
On October 8-13 Days of Russian culture were held together with the fund of the Union of
Armenians in Russia (Gyumri, Artsakh, Malishka).
In 2002 and 2003 Festivals of Russian films were held in “Moscva” cinema-house.

Besides the above- mentioned well-known political, public and church holidays, jubilee
anniversaries are celebrated.
-

The holiday to the 1700th anniversary of adoption of Christianity as a state religion in
Armenia.
Series of parties devoted to Armenian-Russian vocal music (Khachatryan, Babajanyan,
Chaikovski, Rakhmaninov) at the museum of A. Khachatryan.
Music parties devoted to Christmas and Easter.
48

-

Popular scientific meeting about Armenian- Russian literary and cultural links.
Youth entertaining show-programs.
Children’s celebrities (Children’s International Day: June 1, “First time first grade”:
September 1, New Year’s Eve performance, “Childhood Day”, Fairy-tale festivals).
Russian folk celebrations (“Ivan Kupala”, “Maslenitsa”, “Troitsa”, “Easter”, “Svyatki”,
etc).

The Russian community often organizes events in Armenian Society for Friendship and
Cultural Relations with Foreign Countries©
Within “Rossiya” NGO “Orphey” vocal-chamber and “Solnishko” dance ensembles function.
Under “Harmony” NGO the “Garmoshka” children’s puppet-theatre functions. At present
with the help of “Harmony” NGO and the Fund for support to Russian compatriots in
Armenia “Sudaroushka” folk choir and “Rus” travelling philharmonic orchestra are being
established. Guest concerts are regularly held in orphanages, nursing homes, hospitals and
military units with professional and beginner singers and actors.
A club of interesting meetings functions based on “Slavyanskaya” Secondary school, with the
help of which the pupils get to know famous figures of Armenian and Russian culture.
Russian tapes, videotapes and CDs are sold everywhere, Russian songs, films, satirical
programs are shown on TV.
The RA preserves and restores not only Armenian, but other monuments as well, which have
been built by other nations in different times. The Agency of Monument Preservation at the
RA Ministry of cultural, youth matters and sport has registered the following Russian
monuments:
-

-

-

Russian church next to the military unit in Kanaker-Zeitun district of Yerevan. It was built
in 1913. In 1984 a plan was developed in “Yerkaghnorogumnakhagits” Institute to make
the church a cultural house.
A Russian frontier post in the village Yervandashat of Baghramyan subregion in Armavir
marz. It is built of raw brick before the Russian-Turkish war in 1877-1878.
Russian church next to the railway station square in Vanadzor. It was built in 1895. Upon
the resolution by the executive committee of the City council it has been made a museum
of Armenian-Russian friendship. In 1977 it has been reconstructed.
A complex of a Russian castle on the southwestern border of Gyumri. It was built in
1834-44 by the order of Nikolai I. Within the complex the “Severski Fort” fortification is
still standing, which has round map and serves as a military unit ammunition depot.

Subparagraph c) of Paragraph 1
The RA guarantees that all bodies responsible for organization and support to different
cultural activities will give relevant permission, so that knowledge and usage of minority
languages and culture joint the initiatives undertaken by them or for which they support.
In 2002 in Yerevan two great events were organized with the participation of all communities
of national minorities.
g) Two years successively, 2001 and 2002, on September 21, financed by RA
Government and the Ministry of cultural, youth matters and sport (500.000 and
300.000 drams respectively) great song and dance festivals were held at the Small
Philharmonic Hall, dedicated to the RA Independence Day. Representatives from
49

all the national minorities, individually and in-groups, participated in these
festivals, introducing their national and folk art.
h) On April 5, 2002, “Armenia – our home” event took place at Khnko Aper
Children’s Library, with participation of Government members, representatives of
diplomatic corps and political figures. Women from different nationalities showed
their hand- made goods, representing their national ornaments.
Subparagraph f) of Paragraph 1
The RA supports the direct participation of representatives from minority language users in
the implementation and planning of cultural activities. Thus, according to the Resolution of
Coordinating Council of national minority national-cultural NGO’s functioning with the RA
President staff, the allocated sum 20 million drams for 2001-2002 (i.e. 10 million annually)
was equally divided among the 11 Coordinating Council member community representative
organizations, with the purpose of supporting the RA national minority educational and
cultural activities.
Paragraph 2
With regard to the areas different from areas traditionally using the minority languages, the
Armenia allows and supports relevant cultural activities and possibilities, according to the
previous paragraph, even if the number of minority language users is not sufficient.
Paragraph 3
To lead its cultural policy abroad the RA recommends introducing its national minority
languages and cultures as well.
Article 13. Economic and social life
Subparagraph b) of Paragraph 1
According to RA legislation, in the field of economic and public activity, in the whole
territory of the country it is forbidden to include any provision in the regulations or private
documents of companies, that does not accept or limits the usage (at least with those using the
same language) of national minority languages. Russian language is rather widely used in
Armenia. Most of population knows Russian to some extent, and nearly 1/8th of rural
population speaks Russian better than any other language.
Subparagraph c) of Paragraph 1
The RA counteracts the practice of preventing from minority language usage connected with
economic and public activity.
Subparagraph d) of Paragraph 1
In RA the companies and enterprises in RA decide on their own which language to use. In
many RA companies and enterprises Russian is used as the language for oral communication.
In postures and advertisements Russian is rather often used as a foreign language parallel to
Armenian.

50

Subparagraph b) of Paragraph 2
With regard to the economic and public activity to the extent the RA State bodies are
competent, if possible they organize activities stimulating minority language usage in the
economic and public parts directly under their control (state sector) in the territories using
national minority language. This, in particular, happens in the villages Fioletovo and
Lemontovo inhabited by Russians.
Subparagraph c) of Paragraph 2
The RA legislation guarantees that institutions of state maintenance (like hospitals, nursing
homes, hostels) receive and care for people from national minorities, who need care because
of poor health, age or other reasons. In this respect no case of discrimination or limitation has
been registered or observed.
Article 14. Transfrontier exchanges
Paragraph a)
The RA has signed bilateral (with Russian Federation) and multilateral (within CIS countries)
multilateral agreements to support the creation of links between the same language speakers
in the field of culture, education, information, professional and permanent education.
According to the agreement signed between Armenia and Russia both countries admit all the
documents and certificates concerning educational, scientific titles and degrees. According to
another agreement (between CIS educational administrative offices, 2001) Russia (and other
CIS countries) higher educational institutions can establish branches in Armenia and admit
students without discrimination. According to several treaties a number of Russian TV and
Radio companies are broadcast in RA. The treaty between Armenia and Russia on friendship
and cooperation specifies provisions concerning the implementation of certain measures and
creation of necessary conditions to develop and preserve ethnic, cultural, religious identity of
national minorities living in both countries. The arrangements consider the special traditional
friendly relations and relations established between the two peoples throughout the history.
Realizing the importance of a number of obligations undertaken by number of international
treaties, the countries are obliged to cooperate in line of friendship and mutual trust in all
aspects, if necessary to sign further supporting agreements.
The transfrontier cooperation between Russia and Armenia is made maximum easy. No visa
is required to visit either of the countries.
Paragraph b)
For the sake of national minority languages there is no obstacle for transfrontier cooperation,
in particular between regional and local authorities, in the territory of which the same
language is used similarly or identically.

51

6. Kurdish

Article 8. Education
Subparagraph iv of a) of Paragraph 1
The Republic of Armenia supports the communities of national minorities to organize the
basic part of education in relevant languages for at least those pupils, whose families asked
for that and whose number is considered sufficient. There is no such request for Kurdish yet.
Subparagraph iv of b) of Paragraph 1
Primary school is available for national minority communities in relevant languages, or within
elementary education it is provided the relevant minority language teaching as inseparable
part of the curriculum, at least for pupils whose families asked for that and whose number is
considered sufficient. Thus Kurdish is taught (2 hours a week) at the school in the village
Zovuni, Kotayk marzes. Until recently there have been similar courses in 20 other villages
inhabited by Kurds (Ria- Taza, Amre-Taza, Mirak, Sangiar, Shenkani, Alagiaz, Hakko, etc),
but due to the absence of teachers they do not operate regularly.
Subparagraph iv of c) of Paragraph 1
Secondary education is available for RA national minority communities in relevant languages,
or within secondary education it provides the relevant minority language teaching as an
inseparable part of the curriculum, at least for pupils who (or whose families) asked for that
and whose number is considered sufficient. Thus Kurdish is taught (2 hours a week) at the
school in the village Zovuni, Kotayk marz. Until recently there have been similar courses in
20 other villages inhabited by Kurds (Ria-Taza, Amre-Taza, Mirak, Sangiar, Shenkani,
Alagiaz, Hakko, etc), but because of absence of teachers they do not function regularly. In the
7th and 8th grades in these schools national history or literature study may also be included
upon request by specialists and parents.
Subparagraph iv of d) of Paragraph 1
In RA the technical and professional education is available in the language of national
minorities, or within technical and professional education it provides the relevant minority
language teaching as an inseparable part of the curriculum, at least for pupils who (or whose
families) asked for that and whose number is considered sufficient. Several years ago the
department of Kurdish language was opened at Yerevan Pedagogical vocational school after
Bakunts, but it was closed due to the absence of applicants. The department can restore its
functioning if applicants are available.
Subparagraph iii of e) of Paragraph 1
The Republic of Armenia allows university or other forms of higher education in the language
of minorities or giving opportunities to teach these languages as disciplines at universities and
higher educational institutions. Several RA universities can offer special courses of Kurdish
upon request and demand. There is such a course in the Department of Oriental studies of
Yerevan State University. Yerevan “Davit Anhaght” Humanitarian University offers the
profession “Kurdish Studies”.
52

Subparagraph iii of f) of Paragraph 1
Since secondary education in Armenia is obligatory, there are no illiterate adults. If they have
problems with education, the y apply to higher or post-graduate educational institutions.
Hence almost no problem arises connected with adult on-going education in other institutions.
However, there function a number of language-teaching courses in Armenia that can offer
courses of Kurdish upon demand to those who wish, without any age limitation.

Article 9. Judicial authorities
Subparagraph ii of a) of Paragraph 1
Article 15 of Criminal procedure code specifies that every person within court procedure
(with the exception of the body proceeding the case) is entitled to speak the language which
he/she knows. Upon the decision of the body proceeding the case, the involved persons, who
do not know the procedure language, are given free of charge opportunity to realize all their
rights established by the mentioned Code through an interpreter. This manner is used in
Armenia not only in the regional judicial bodies, where the number of minority language
speakers is in accord with events established by Article 9 of the Charter, but in any other area
too.
Subparagraph iii of a) of Paragraph 1
The same Code provides that inquiries and evidences (written or oral) must not be considered
exclusively unacceptable, as they have been formulated in the languages of minorities.
Subparagraph iv of a) of Paragraph 1
According to the Criminal procedure Code people who do not know the procedure language,
based on inquiry about the legal matters, are given the certified copies of documents in the
language they know subject to submission.
Subparagraph ii of b) of Paragraph 1
According to Paragraph 2 of Article 7 of Civil Procedure Code, the person involved in civil
case, who does not know the procedure language (Armenian) is provided with the right to
learn the case materials, to take part in the procedure and to speak in the court in other
language through an interpreter – without any expenses.
Subparagraph ii of c) of Paragraph 1
It is envisaged by the draft law on “Principles of Administration and Administrative
procedure” (submitted for consideration) to allow the side to speak the language of minorities
before the court, without any extra expenses for it.
Subparagraph iii of c) of Paragraph 1
The same draft envisages allowing the documents and evidences to be given in minority
languages, if necessary through interpreters and translations, without any extra expenses for it.

53

Subparagraph d) of Paragraph 1
The legal system guarantees that implementation of Paragraphs b) and c) and turning to help
for translations and interpreters will not include extra expenses from interested people.
Paragraph 3
Texts of much more important laws of national legislation are available to Kurdish population
in the state language, Russian and sometimes Kurdish: especially texts, which concern
speakers of Kurdish (if not otherwise defined). The reason is that in Armenia Kurds have
good command of Russian and Armenian.
Article 10. Administrative authorities and public services
Subparagraph iv of a) of Paragraph 1
The law does not forbid to turn to bodies in power in minority languages (written as well) and
to express oneself in his/her language. In such cases when answering the applications in
written form, the state language is used, which, though is not a ban to formulate the answer in
the relevant language in case the applicant asks for that. Hence within the administrative
areas, where the number of minority language speakers is sufficient, the minority languages
speakers may introduce their claims written or oral in their language. We have this situation
particularly in villages Shamiram, Tlik, Sorik, Hakko, Giatlo, Barozh, Baisz, Avtona, Dian,
Ghabaghtapa, Ria-Taza, Amre-Taza, Mirak, Sangiar, Shenkani, Alagiaz, Jamshlu, Ortachai,
Derek, Avshen and Zovuni populated with Yezidi.
Subparagraph v of a) of Paragraph 1
On the same bases it is guaranteed, that minority language speakers have the right to
introduce documents in those languages.
Subparagraph b) of Paragraph 1
Administrative texts and forms widely used in Kurdish communities are available to the
Kurdish speaking population, as they are sometimes written in Kurdish, and usually Kurds
have good knowledge of official language of Armenia.
Subparagraph b) of Paragraph 2
With regard to local or regional bodies, in the territory of which the number of minority
languages speakers is sufficient, the minority language speakers have the opportunity to
submit applications or place an order in those languages written or oral.
Subparagraph f) of Paragraph 2
With regard to RA local or regional bodies, in the territory of which the number of minority
languages users is sufficient, the minority language usage during their meetings (discussions)
is allowed by the local authorities, though without excluding the usage of the language
(languages) officially adopted by the state.

54

Subparagraph g) of Paragraph 2
The law on “Geographical names” specifies, that when giving settlement names the natives’
viewpoints must also be considered (Article 3), and when naming or renaming, offers may be
made by both local self- governing bodies and by legal and natural persons (Article 6). In
particular a number of villages have Kurdish names - Shamiram, Tlik, Sorik, Hakko, Giatlo,
Barozh, Baisz, Avtona, Dian, Ghabaghtapa, Ria-Taza, Amre-Taza, Mirak, Sangiar, Shenkani,
Alagiaz, Jamshlu, Ortachai, Derek, Avshen, etc, as well as a several water springs, fields,
streets, etc.
Subparagraph c) of Paragraph 3
With regard to the state/public services of administrative bodies or persons acting in their
name on the area where minority language s are used, the minority language speakers are
allowed to make inquiries and get answers in those languages.
Subparagraph c) of Paragraph 4
The officials are not banned by the post they hold, to communicate with minority language
users in their language, if they know it. However, if a person has applied in written to
executive bodies or public service employees in a language different from Armenian, then on
the area the mentioned language is used. The mentioned state body or employee must answer
the application in essence, with the exception of cases, when the law has specified special
requirements concerning the introduction of an application. In that case, though, the
application cannot be refused, but the special order of its introduction must be preserved.
Paragraph 5
The legislation envisages the opportunity for a person to preserve or change his name,
surname or patronymic name, to restore his previous name surname or patronymic name. In
Armenia Kurdish citizens are free to choose Kurdish surnames and to use them in Kurdish.
Part of Kurdish citizens prefers to act like that.
Article 11. Media
Subparagraph iii of a) of Paragraph 1
Article 28 of law on TV and Radio envisages that public TV and Radio Company “can spare
ethereal time for special programs in minority languages”. Article 28 of the same law
specifies, alongside with the other duties of the public TV and Radio Company, that interests
of national minorities must also be considered when broadcasting programs or series of
programs.
Subparagraph ii of b) of Paragraph 1
The same law provides the national minorities with an hour a day of air time on Armenian
public radio. For many years half an hour Kurdish programs are being broadcast every day
(information, community life, culture, folk music, etc).

55

Subparagraph ii of c) of Paragraph 1
According to the above- mentioned law the national minorities are provided with an hour a
week of air time on public TV. They can prepare also Kurdish programs if the community
takes the initiative and provides the language and subject part.
Subparagraph i of e) of Paragraph 1
Recently the publishing house agency of RA Ministry of cultural, youth matters and sport has
been allocating more than 1 (one) million AM drams to publish newspapers for national
minorities. With this allocation Kurdish “Ria Taza” (New Way) newspaper is published.
Since 1999 “Mijagetk” (Mesopotamia) bilingual newspaper published every two weeks in 4signature size, the first 14 pages of which are in Armenian, and the last two pages in Kurdish
– to teach Kurdish and to disseminate Kurdish culture. The Newspaper “Ria Taza” is for the
same purposes, sometimes acting like a native language textbook.
Paragraph 2
According to Article 10 of the above- mentioned law programs of foreign TV and Radio
Companies may be completely rebroadcast in Armenia based on the license given by the
National TV and Radio Committee or based on the intergovernmental agreement. And being
licensed in Armenia TV and Radio Companies can rebroadcast programs of foreign TV and
Radio Companies on contract bases.
Paragraph 3
Armenia guarantees that interests of national minority language users are introduced or are
taken into consideration by bodies established by law, which are responsible for freedom of
media and for providing pluralism of viewpoints. This is confirmed by the statutes and
activities of the publishing house agency of the Ministry of cultural, youth matters and sport,
Public TV and Radio Company board and TV and Radio National Committee.
Article 12. Cultural activities and facilities
Subparagraph a) of Paragraph 1
In territories, where such languages are used and to the extent the state bodies are competent,
have rights or play some role in that field, they encourage those forms of expression and
initiations, which are peculiar to minority languages.
Nearly 2000 Kurdish books are kept in the National library of Armenia. Some of them are in
libraries of villages inhabited by Kurds.
There are cultural centres in villages inhabited by Kurds.
In 2002 the “Mijagetk” publishing house published the book “The role and essence of Yezidi
reality in Kurdistan” in Armenian.
In 2002 the Kurdish ABC book “Zmane de” was published in Yerevan under the authorship
of Karlene Chachani, Head of the Department of Kurdish at Writers’ Union.

56

In 2003 in Yerevan the book “About the Son of the Padishah” by Karlene Chachani in
Russian translation and the book of poems “Conscience” (in Kurdish) by Sh. Ashir were
published.
The “Kurdistan” Committee has been coordinating the activities of Kurdish community
recently. Besides “Kurdistan” committee there also functions the Armenian-Kurdish
Friendship Promotion, together with which different cultural events are organized. In 2002
they in particular organized:
-

The exhibition of Edward Ghazaryan’s miniature carvings in Armavir,
Meetings with famous figures of culture,
Celebrations of famous writers’ anniversaries,
Celebration of the 25th anniversary of “Kurdistan” Party.

In the Kurdish community there function the Folk Song and Dance Ensemble of Aragatsotn
marz, the youth ensemble of Baisez village of Talin, the Children’s Choir of Alagiaz and the
Ensemble of Zilan village.
There is a Department of Kurdish in Writers’ Union.
Since 2000 Kurds in Armenia use Latin alphabet (instead of Cyrillic one).
In Institute of oriental studies at National Academy of Sciences there is a group of Kurdish
Studies, where Kurd scientists work as well (M. Makhmoyan, Ph.D.).
The RA preserves and restores not only Armenian, but other monuments as well, which have
been built by other nations in different times. The Agency of Monument Preservation at the
RA Ministry of cultural, youth matters and sport has registered the following Kurdish
monument:
Kurdish cemetery, XVI-XVIII centuries, Aragatsotn marz, Aragats subregion, village Ria
Taza.
Subparagraph c) of Paragraph 1
The RA guarantees that all bodies responsible for organization and support to different
cultural activities will give relevant permission, so that knowledge and usage of minority
languages and culture joint the initiatives undertaken by them or for which they support.
In 2002 in Yerevan two great events were organized with the participation of all communities
of RA national minorities.
i) Two years successively, 2001 and 2002, on September 21, financed by RA
Government and the Ministry of cultural, youth matters and sport (500.000 and
300.000 drams respectively) great song and dance festivals were held at the Small
Philharmonic Hall, dedicated to the RA Independence Day. Representatives from
all the national minorities, individually and in groups, participated in these
festivals, introducing their national and folk art.
j) On April 5, 2002, “Armenia – our home” event took place at Khnko Aper
Children’s Library, with participation of RA Government members, Embassies’
representatives and political figures. Women from different nationalities showed
their hand- made goods, representing their national ornaments.
57

Subparagraph f) of Paragraph 1
The RA supports the direct participation of representatives from minority language users in
the implementation and planning of cultural activities. Thus, according to the Resolution of
Coordinating Council (consisting of representatives from national minorities) allocated sum
of 20 million drams for 2001-2002 (i.e. 10 million annually) was equally divided between the
11 Coordinating Council member community representative organizations, with the purpose
of supporting the national minority educational and cultural activities.
Paragraph 2
With regard to the areas different from areas traditionally using the minority languages, the
Armenia allows and supports relevant cultural activities and possibilities, according to the
previous paragraph, even if the number of minority language users is not sufficient.
Paragraph 3
To lead its cultural policy abroad the RA recommends introducing its national minority
languages and cultures as well.

Article 13. Economic and social life
Subparagraph b) of Paragraph 1
According to the legislation, in the field of economic and public activity, in the whole
territory of the country it is prohibited to include any provision in the regulations or private
documents of companies, that does not accept or limits the usage (at least with those using the
same language) of national minority languages.
Subparagraph c) of Paragraph 1
Armenia counteracts the practice of preventing from minority language usage connected with
economic and public activity.
Subparagraph d) of Paragraph 1
In Armenia the companies and enterprises decide on their own which language to use.
Subparagraph b) of Paragraph 2
As to the economic and social activity to the extent the respective authorities are competent, if
possible they organize activities stimulating minority language usage in the economic and
public parts directly under their control (state sector) in the territories using national minority
language. This, in particular, happens in the villages Shamiram, Tlik, Sorik, Hakko, Giatlo,
Barozh, Baisz, Avtona, Dian, Ghabaghtapa, Ria-Taza, Amre-Taza, Mirak, Sangiar, Shenkani,
Alagiaz, Jamshlu, Ortachai, Derek, Avshen, Zovuni and other settlements inhabited by Kurds.

58

Subparagraph c) of Paragraph 2
The legislation guarantees that institutions of state maintenance (like hospitals, nursing
homes, hostels) receive and care for people from national minorities, who need care because
of poor health, age or other reasons. As of now in this respect no case of discrimination or
limitation has been registered or observed.
Article 14. Transfrontier exchanges
Paragraph a)
Armenia is a party to treaties to support the creation of links between the same language
speakers. Thus the CIS Convention on Protecting the rights of National minority people
specifies, that, “every contracting party is obliged to provide the national minority people with
the right for free contact between themselves, citizens and organizations with whom they have
common ethnic, cultural, language or religious descent.” Article 7 of the mentioned
Convention specifies that national minorities may be involved in peaceful mass meetings and
unions.
Kurdish organizations have relations with Kurds in Iran and Iraq; they receive newspapers
and books from them. In Yerevan Kurds have organized demonstrations and marches in
defence of Abdula Ojalan.
Paragraph b)
For the benefit of national minority languages there is no obstacle for transfrontier
cooperation, in particular between marzes and local authorities, in the territory of which the
same language is used similarly or identically.
Nevertheless, transfrontier exchange and co-operation is not carried out between the
authorities and regions and national minorities group of some neighbouring states because of
border blockade.

59

