Strasbourg, 23 January 2003

MIN-LANG/PR (2003) 5

EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR R EGIONAL OR M INORITY LANGUAGES

Initial Periodical Report
presented to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe
in accordance with Article 15 of the Charter

AUSTRIA

Part I
1. Legal basis:
The basic though obvious principle underlying the Austrian legislation on "ethnic groups 1 " is that,
being Austrian nationals, the members of the minorities in Austria enjoy the same rights – in
particular the same political and fundamental rights – as all other Austrian citizens.
Moreover, the Austrian legislation contains a number of regulations exclusively addressing minority
issues. These regulations are listed below and will be discussed in greater detail under the respective
articles of the Charter.
1.1. Constitutional law:
The following legal provisions on national minorities are incorporated into the Austrian
Constitution:
Article 8 of the Federal Constitution Act (Bundesverfassungsgesetz/B-VG), Federal Law Gazette
No. 1/1920 as amended in Federal Law Gazette Vol. I, No. 99/2002
Articles 66 to 68 of the State Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye of 10 September 1919, State Law
Gazette No. 303/1920; in accordance with Article 149(1) of the B-VG, these provisions enjoy the
status of constitutional law
Article 7 of the State Treaty for the Re-establishment of an Independent and Democratic Austria
(State Treaty of Vienna), Fed. Law Gazette No. 152/1955; in accordance with Article II(3) of the
Amendment to the B-VG, Fed. Law Gazette No. 59/1964, Article 7(2) to 7(4) has the status of
constitutional law
Article 1 of the Minority Schools Act for Carinthia (Minderheiten-Schulgesetz für Kärnten), Fed.
Law Gazette No. 101/1959 as amended in Fed. Law Gazette Vol. I, No. 76/2001
Article 1 of the Minority Schools Act for Burgenland (Minderheiten-Schulgesetz für Burgenland),
Fed. Law Gazette No. 641/1994 as amended in Fed. Law Gazette Vol. 1, No. 136/1998
In this context, attention should be drawn to the fact that the European Convention on Human
Rights (ECHR) enjoys the status of constitutional law in Austria and that a complaint against an
alleged violation of one of the rights set out therein may be lodged directly with the Constitutional
Court (Verfassungs gerichtshof). Article 14 of the Convention is of decisive importance as it
guarantees that the enjoyment of the rights set forth in the Convention is secured without
discrimination on any ground, in particular language.
Furthermore, Article 19 of the Basic Law of Austria (Staatsgrundgesetz/StGG) should be
mentioned, whose validity is contested (it reads as follows:
"(1) All the national groups of the empire enjoy equal rights, and each national group has an
inviolable right to the preservation and fostering of its nationality and language.

1

The Austrian legislation uses the term “Volksgruppen“ (ethnic groups) for indigenous ethnic
communities.

2

(2) The state recognises the equal rights of all habitually spoken languages in schools,
administration and public life.")
1.2. Ordinary law:
The following ordinary laws (i.e. legislation not conferred the status of constitutional law) and
ordinances are applicable in Austria:
Ethnic Groups Act (Volksgruppengesetz), Fed. Law Gazette No. 396/1976, as amended and
promulgated in Fed. Law Gazette Vol. I, No. 35/2002
Minority Schools Act for Carinthia
Minority Schools Act for Burgenland
Ordinances based on the Ethnic Groups Act:
- Ordinance of the Federal Government on the Ethnic Groups Advisory Councils, Fed. Law Gazette
No. 38/1977, as amended in Fed. Law Gazette No. 895/1993
Ordinance of the Federal Government of 31 May 1977 defining the geographical areas where
bilingual (German and Slovene) topographical signs are to be put up, Fed. Law Gazette No.
306/1977, as amended and promulgated in Fed. Law Gazette Vol. II, No. 37/2002
- Ordinance of the Federal Government of 31 May 1977 defining the courts, administrative
authorities and other official bodies where Slovene is admitted as an official language in addition to
German, Fed. Law Gazette No. 307/1977, as amended and promulgated in Fed. Law Gazette
Vol. II, No. 428/2000
- Ordinance of the Federal Government of 31 May 1977 defining the Slovene place names, Fed.
Law Gazette No. 308/1977
- Ordinance of the Federal Government of 24 April 1990 defining the courts, administrative
authorities and other official bodies where Croat is admitted as an official language in addition to
German, Fed. Law Gazette No. 231/1990
Topographical Ordinance for Burgenland, Fed. Law Gazette Vol. II, No. 170/2000
- Ordinance governing the use of Hungarian as an official language, Fed. Law Gazette No.
229/2000
1.3. Court rulings
Rulings of the Constitutional Court in matters relating to national minorities will be cited in the
comments regarding the respective Articles of the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages.
2. Minority languages in Austria:
In Austria the following minority languages are spoken:
Burgenland-Croatian in Burgenland
Slovene in Carinthia and Styria
Hungarian in Vienna and Burgenland
Czech in Vienna
Slovak in Vienna
Romanes in Burgenland
In the following the history and social situation of the ethnic groups speaking the above languages
are outlined:

3

The Croatian minority:
More than 450 years ago, Croats settled in a region then defined as western Hungary (now
Burgenland, the border region of western Hungary, parts of Lower Austria, of Slovakia and the
Czech Republic). After 1848 the population in this region started to develop a Croatian identity.
Assimilation tendencies among Croats have been encouraged by the general exodus from this
region and are also due to the fact that in the interwar period many people from Burgenland started
to commute to Vienna daily or weekly. To counteract the threatening loss of Croatian identity in a
city as big as Vienna, in 1934 the "Croatian-Burgenland Cultural Association in Vienna"
(Kroatisch-Burgenländische Kulturverein in Wien) and subsequently the "Croatian Club of
Academics" („Kroatische Akademikerklub") were founded in Vienna. The Burgenland Croats
committed themselves to a policy of integration at a very early stage and are well integrated in
every respect, i.e. in social, economic, professional and political terms. Consequently, many
measures necessary to preserve and promote the language and culture of the Burgenland Croats
could be implemented. The awareness of the Burgenland-Croatian identity has been growing among
the members of this ethnic group, particularly students, since the 1970s. From the 1980s onwards,
this has led to a considerable improvement of their linguistic and cultural situation and has
strengthened their identity to an even greater extent.
Today, about 30,000 Burgenland Croats (based on an estimate provided by this ethnic group) live in
approximately 50 locations in Burgenland. Their settlements are linguistic islands dispersed
throughout this Land. There is no compact settlement area (see map of Burgenland, including a
graph of all minorities living in Burgenland and the distribution of Croat communities in the Annex
to this Report). Based on estimates provided by this ethnic group, about 12,000 Burgenland Croats
live in Vienna. According to the 2001 national census, a total of 19,374 Austrian nationals stated to
use Burgenland Croatian for everyday communication.
Numerous scientific studies on the situation of the Croats of Burgenland (see comments regarding
Article 12) were conducted in the past years. The key findings of these studies can be summarised
as follows:
An analysis of the age pattern shows that the Burgenland Croats are clearly older than the
remaining population (by 8 years on average), which can be explained mainly by the fact that a
major share of the younger generation does not speak Burgenland Croatian.
The Burgenland Croats consider language the most essential feature of their identity.
The younger the respondents, the greater the appreciation expressed for bilingualism and
thus the Croatian language.
A dramatic loss of bilingual proficiency in the family has been recorded within the last three
generations: only 27% of the parents who were raised bilingually talk to their children in Croatian.
The Burgenland Croats express a marked "desire to live in harmony", and an overwhelming
majority (82%) describes relations with the remaining population as being "unproblematic and
harmonious".
There are divergent opinions on the significance of bilingual signs indicating the names of places
within this ethnic group: before the introduction of bilingual place- name signs, 47% considered
them "important because otherwise the identity of the Burgenland Croats would not be recognised",
while 46% did not agree with this statement.
Burgenland Croats describe their experience with bilingualism in general as positive: 48% of the
commuters stated that bilingualism had positive effects on their careers, while only 2% experienced
it as an obstacle; 50% were of the opinion that bilingualism had "no impact" at all.
4

Almost two thirds think "it is again fashionable to speak to their children in Croatian".
About one fifth of the Burgenland Croats are of the opinion that "Croatian is a language for old
people"; this attitude is particularly common in the south of Burgenland.
It is a common view – shared by 68% of the Burgenland Croats – that bilingual children are doing
better at school.
50% of the respondents expressed the wish that their children should be provided with instruction in
Croatian at school.
The Slovene minority:
About 1,400 years ago, Slovenes (previously "Slavs of the Alps") settled also in the territories of
Carinthia and Styria. Due to the inflow and settlement of Bavarian and Fraconian peasants starting
in the 9th century and supported by the East Franconian leadership, the Slovenes were driven in a
process of mutual assimilation to south and south eastern Carinthia as well as lower Styria still in
the Middle Ages.
ln the 15th century a linguistic border started to develop along the Carinthian towns of Hermagor –
Villach – Maria Saal – Diex – Lavamünd, which remained intact until the mid-19th century.
The nationalism becoming palpable also in Carinthia in the middle of the 19th century laid the
foundation for ethnically- motivated conflicts. The development of tourism, industry and trade in the
second half of the 19th century fostered the use of the German language and nurtured assimilation.
Closer contacts between the Slovenes from Carinthia and the Slovenes in Carniola and other
crownlands supported the trend towards ethno-political boundaries. After the collapse of the
Austro-Hungarian Empire, the question to which state Carinthia should belong or where the borders
of Carinthia should be drawn became a burning issue. The State Treaty of St. Germain laid down
the that two Carinthian regions populated exclusively or predominantly by Slovenes (i.e. Seeland
and the Mieß valley, respectively) had to be ceded to Yugoslavia. At the same time it provided for a
plebiscite to decide the crucial question of whether south Carinthia should be part of Austria or
Yugoslavia. In the plebiscite held on 10 October 1920 59% voted in favour of Austria. Thus the
Carinthian territory remained practically intact. Before the plebiscite, the Provisional Regional
Assembly of Carinthia had for example adopted a resolution on 28 September 1920, in which it
made an appeal to the Slovenes of Carinthia and committed itself "to preserving the linguistic and
national identity of the Slovene compatriots now and forever and to promoting the prosperity of
their intellectual and economic life in the same way as that of the German-speaking inhabitants of
the Land". According to estimates, about 12,000 Slovenes voted in favour of Austria in the
plebiscite.
Subsequently, Austria’s minority policy focused on the Carinthian Slovenes; in that period also
complaints were lodged with the League of Nations. Negotiations conducted over several years
during the second half of the 1920s on establishing a cultural autonomy for the Carinthian Slovenes
were fruitless. This system would for example have required Slovenes to declare themselves
members of a "Slovene National Community" (a community to be established under public law) by
registering in the "Slovene People’s Book" ("slowenisches Volksbuch"). Under the National
Socialist regime, the Slovenes were persecuted and after 1942 even forcibly resettled.
In the post-war period significant ideological and political differences within the ethnic group soon
became apparent. They were due, inter alia, to the antagonism between Catholicism and
Communism and to the territorial claims to south Carinthia repeatedly asserted by Yugoslavia until
5

1949 by using the local Slovene ethnic group as an substantiating argument. The latter question was
resolved only by the State Treaty in 1955. Efforts to implement and extend the minority protection
rights enshrined in the State Treaty of 1955 (Article 7) as well as the interpretation of these rights
have been a recurrent item on the political agenda since then. Although it is clear from the wording
of this Article in the State Treaty that these rights are not limited to the Carinthian Slovenes but
extend to "the Slovene and Croatian minorities in Carinthia, Burgenland and Styria", disputes over
Article 7 have been confined in a spectacular way to Carinthia. This can be illustrated by the
following examples: the school strike in 1958 against bilingual instruction, which had been
mandatory (since 1945) until then; the so-called "Ortstafelkonflikt" (conflict over bilingual placename signs) in 1972; and protests against the secrete survey of mother tongue speakers in 1976.
This great potential for conflict is undoubtedly rooted in the historical territorial disputes described
above.
Estimates on the number of the members of the Slovene minority in Austria vary greatly. At the last
population census in 2001 a total of 17,953 Austrian nationals stated to use Slovene as a language
for everyday communication. Possible reasons for the inaccuracy of census results will be discussed
below. The fact should be highlighted that the findings of recent scientific research conducted on
the "Slovene language proficiency" in the political districts of Carinthia showed that about 59,000
persons aged 15 and over have varying degrees of proficiency in the Slovene language. However,
this does not necessarily mean that all these persons are members of the Slovene ethnic group.
According to an estimate of Slovene organisations, currently about 50,000 Slovenes live in Austria.
Members of the Slovene minority also live in Styria (cf. Declarations of Austria regarding Part II of
the Charter).
The Hungarian minority:
The present Hungarian minority descends from early settlers who were in charge of protecting the
western border for the Hungarian kings. "Frontier guard settlements" can be found along the
Hungarian border still today as reflected in village names such as Oberwart and Siget in der Wart
("Wart" is an obsolete German term for "guard"). When Burgenland became part of Austria in
1921, the Hungarians living in the region became a minority.
While this ethnic group maintained close contacts with Hungary in the interwar period, this changed
after World War II. The economic transformation after 1945 led to a massive rural exodus, climbing
numbers of weekly commuters and a general tendency of the rural population to engage in
subsidiary gainful activities or to become industrial workers (the same phenomena were observed
with the Burgenland Croats). This social change as well as the Iron Curtain had an adverse impact
on the status of Hungarian as the first language and resulted in a strong linguistic assimilation, a
trend to be counteracted by intensified private educational work only at a later stage. As today many
of those aged between 30 and 60 do not speak Hungarian, measures are taken particularly with a
view to promoting the bilingualism of children and young people.
The fall of the Iron Curtain has had very favourable effects on the Hungaria n minority in
Burgenland. As it became easier for them to maintain contacts with Hungary, the linguistic identity
of the Burgenland Hungarians has been strengthened.
The present settlement area comprises the regions of Oberwart (Oberwart, Unterwart, Siget in der
Wart) and Oberpullendorf (Oberpullendorf, Mittelpullendorf). Burgenland Hungarians live also in
larger villages and towns, e.g. Eisenstadt, Frauenkirchen. Moreover, Hungarian families have been
living in Graz and Vienna for centuries.
6

Today the number of Hungarians living in Vienna is considerably higher than the number of
Burgenland Hungarians: this is mainly due to three waves of emigrants and refugees from Hungary
in 1945, 1948 and 1956. In 1992 the Hungarians living in Vienna were recognised as members of
the Hungarian ethnic group.
According to the estimates provided by organisations of this ethnic group, roughly 20,000 to 30,000
Hungarians are currently living in Austria. At the census in 2001 a total of 25,884 Austrian
nationals stated to use Hungarian as a language of everyday communication.
The Czech minority:
Czechs have lived in Vienna since the days of King Premysl Otakar. In the late 18th century
immigration was so massive that official announcements had to be published also in Czech in the
suburbs of Vienna. Czech immigration into Vienna peaked between 1880 and 1890, when more
than 200,000 Czechs, above all blue-collar workers and craftsmen, came to live in this city. The
majority of the Czech associations still in existence today was founded between 1860 and 1890. The
Czech community in Vienna certainly had its heyday after the turn of the century. At that time,
Vienna was "the second largest Czech city in the world". More Czechs were living only in Prague.
Despite fierce political opposition, Vienna’s Czech community succeeded in founding the first
independent Czech schools. Thanks to a wealth of Czech enterprises, crafts associations,
cooperative societies, banks and newspapers as well as political parties but also an intense social
life in countless associations, the Czechs living in Vienna were able to communicate exclusively in
Czech in all spheres of everyday life.
After the two World Wars, two big waves of Czechs returning to their homecountry halved the
number of Czechs living in Vienna. In the 1960s a steady decline was recorded reaching its lowest
point in 1968. The situation in Czechoslovakia in 1968 and 1969 forced many Czechs to emigrate to
Vienna. The number of native Czech speakers increased after the suppression of the Prague spring
of 1968/69, when 10,000 Czech citizens applied for political asylum in Austria.
The situation of the Czechs in Vienna was characterised by the impact of political developments in
former Czechoslovakia after 1945, on the one hand; on the other hand, Vienna’s Czech community
developed independently to some extent, a process that was encouraged by the Iron Curtain. In the
1950s the minority faced the problem of being split into two groups, one maintaining official
contacts with Czechoslovakia and a larger part refusing any contacts with the Communist country.
It was only in the 1990s that the community was reconciled and agreed on a common Advisory
Council representing the entire Czech minority in the Federal Chancellery. This was the first step
towards improving the "internal" image within this ethnic group, which encouraged participation
particularly among younger Czechs and led to a number of innovations.
In the wake of the political changes in the CSSR in November 1989, contacts between the Czech
community in Vienna and the population of the Czech Republic became closer. This ethnic group
has gained in importance after the opening up of the East: today about 20,000 Czechs live in
Vienna. At the last population census in 2001, 11,035 Austrian nationals stated to use Czech as their
language of everyday communication. The estimated number of Czech native speakers ranges
between 15,000 and 20,000.
The Slovak minority:
The Austrian Slovaks are a small ethnic group who settled in what is Austria today many centuries
ago. The eastern regions of Lower Austria belonged to early state-like entities of the first Slovaks
between the 5th and 9th century. Linguistic and ethnographic analyses indicate that these regions
7

have been populated continuously by Slovaks to the present day. About one quarter of this ethnic
group lives in Lower Austria. Today the major part of the minority, i.e. about two thirds, is resident
in Vienna. Slovaks live in all districts of the city, there are no areas predominantly inhabited by
Slovaks or compact Slovak island. Slovaks live all over Austria, above all in Upper Austria and
Styria.
The highest number of Slovaks living in Austria (about 70,000 persons) was recorded around 1900,
with most of them living in Vienna and the Marchfeld region (Lower Austria). The Slovak
population then declined sharply: around 1914 20,000 Slovaks were registered on what is today
Austrian territory. After 1918 some Slovaks settled in the newly founded state of Czechoslovakia;
at the 1923 population census still 4,802 Slovaks were counted all over Austria. Since then there has
been a steady decline. At the 2001 census a total of 3,343 Austrian nationals stated to use Slovak as
their habitual language of communication. Out of this number 1,412 persons lived in Vienna. Their
actual number is however estimated to be considerably higher. According to estimates by Slovak
organisations, this ethnic group has between 5,000 and 10,000 members.
By amendment of the Ordinance promulgated in the Fed. Law Gaze tte No. 38/1977 (Fed. Law
Gazette 148/1992), an Advisory Council as contemplated in the Ethnic Groups Act
(Volksgruppengesetz) was established for this minority on 21 July 1992, which was convened for
the first time in 1993.
The Romany minority:
Today five main groups of Roma can be distinguished in Austria; in the order of the duration of
their presence in the Central European German-speaking area these are the following: Sinti,
Burgenland Roma, Lovara, Kalderash and Arlije. The below table presents an overview of the
migration history and geographical parameters of these five groups:

Country of
emigration
Period of
immigration
Settlement area

Sinti
southern
Germany
Czech region
around 1900

predominantly
urban areas

Bgld. Roma
Hungary

Lovara
Hungary
Slovakia

Kalderash
Serbia

Arlije
Macedonia
Kosovo

from 15 th 2nd half of the 19th from 1960s from 1960s
century
century
onwards
onwards
onwards.
1956
Burgenland predominantly Vienna area Vienna area
(towns in
Vienna area
eastern
Austria)

"Country of emigration" stands for the host country or country of residence before immigration into
Austria. It was impossible to include a presentation of accurate figures in this table. Based on this
ethnic group’s own estimates, currently about 25,000 Roma live in Austria. Since the data for the
groups presented above vary significantly, no reliable figures can be provided. However, mention
should be made of the fact that the number of Roma who came to Austria as migrant workers from
the 1960s onwards – and of whom most are Austrian nationals today – is considerably higher than
the number of Sinti, Burgenland Roma and Lovara living longer in Austria.
The stays of varying duration of the individual groups on what is today Austrian territory has given
rise to different socio-historical developments. While those Roma who had immigrated as migrant
workers were affected by the Nazi genocide only indirectly or almost not at all, the Burgenland
8

Roma, Sinti and also Lovara have been suffering from its impact to the present day. The
grandparents’ generation shaping the culture and handing down traditions was almost completely
annihilated in the concentration camps and thus also the Romany people’s social structures were
destroyed (e.g. extended families). To a certain degree, the groups affected have never recovered
from this rupture and, in fact, they have hardly been able to do so since after the liberation of the
small number of holocaust survivors marginalisation and discrimination by no means came to an
end. (In this context, attention has to be drawn to the fact that four Roma from Oberwart were killed
for political motives on 4 February 1995 by a convicted individual perpetrator).
The positive attitude of the Austrian public to the Roma is, inter alia, due to their self-organisation
in 1988 in the context of the memorial year in commemoration of the victims of the Anschluss.
More details on this positive development are provided in the comments regarding Article 5.
As mentioned above, the legal basis for an Advisory Council for this ethnic group was established
in 1993. This Advisory Council was convened for the first time in 1995.
3. and 4. The numerical strength of the ethnic groups:
The ethnic composition of the Austrian population can be illustrated based on the census results.
The data provided below were collected in the 2001 national census. At this census, the 7,322,000
Austrian nationals were asked to state the language(s) used by them for everyday communication.
The distribution of Austrians habitually using a minority language is as follows:
Burgenland-Croatian:
Geographical distribution:

19,374 in total
17,241 Burgenland
2,456 Vienna

Slovene:
Geographical distribution:

17,953 in total
12,554 Carinthia
1,412 Vienna
2,192 Styria

Hungarian:
Geographical distribution:

25,884 in total
10,686 Vienna
4,704 Burgenland

Czech:
Geographical distribution:

11,035 in total
5,778 Vienna

Slovak:
Geographical distribution:

3,343 in total
1,775 Vienna

Romany:

4,348

People stating that they habitually spoke two languages, including "German", were added to the
speakers of minority languages. The 2001 census differentiated for the first time between Croatian
and Burgenland Croatian; the figure for Burge nland includes both linguistic varieties, while the data
for Vienna and the total of speakers indicate only the number of persons stating to habitually speak
"Burgenland Croatian".

9

In accordance with Article 1(3) of the Ethnic Groups Act, everyone is "free to declare their
affiliation with an ethnic group..." and nobody can be forced "to provide evidence of his or her
affiliation with an ethnic group". Bearing also in mind that according to the legal definition of
"ethnic group" (Article 1(2) of the Ethnic Groups Act) the decisive linguistic element is the mother
tongue and that in the national censuses conducted at intervals of 10 years pursuant to the National
Census Act respondents are asked to state the language habitually used for everyday
communication ("Umgangs sprache"), there is currently no legal basis for gathering accurate data on
how many members an ethnic group has. Since the term "Umgangssprache" may be interpreted
differently, the results of national censuses can only be a rough approximatio n of an ethnic group’s
numerical strength.
In addition to the results of regular national censuses, the following data are of interest to determine
the number of minority members: the use of the respective language as a medium of instruction at
school, the existence and reach of local associations of the respective ethnic group, the election
results of groups (political parties) or persons addressing minority issues in electoral campaigns
(particularly at the local level), the coverage of mass media in minority languages and the use of
minority languages at church. As a matter of fact, almost all of the above indicators depend on a
variety of factors not necessarily related to minority issues and are not conclusive if considered on
an individual basis.
The numerical strength of the Romany people living in Austria is most difficult to assess. However,
it can be assumed that the census results regarding the language habitually spoken do not
adequately reflect the number of indigenous Roma. Presumably, some ten thousand persons
ethnically belonging to the Roma minority live in Austria, predominantly in Vienna and other big
cities as well as in Burgenland.
Statistical data of bilingual schools are not a completely reliable source: Frequently monolingual
children join bilingual classes, while children of families speaking a minority language may stop
attending bilingual courses or may not even enrol for them for various reasons. On the other hand,
in Burgenland, where bilingual school instruction has been introduced in all bilingual communities,
school statistics indicate the language habitually spoken by the children. In any case, it would be
inadmissible to overrate the numerical strength of ethnic groups based on school statistics.
For example, in the school year 2001/2002 1,722 pupils (i.e. 30.06% of all children attending
primary school), were registered for bilingual (German/Slovene) instruction at 63 primary schools
under the Minority Schools Act for Carinthia, covering the traditional settlement area of the
Carinthian Slovenes in the south of the Land. In addition, another 116 pupils were provided
bilingual instruction at two primary schools in Klagenfurt. "Slovene" as a subject without formal
assessment of performance was chosen by 93 pupils in Carinthia. Furthermore, 246 pupils attended
Slovene language lessons at 12 lower secondary schools (Hauptschulen) and 1 upper grade of
primary school (Volksschuloberstufe). This figure includes 104 pupils registered in accordance with
the Minority Schools Act, 39 chose Slovene as a living foreign language instead of English, 103
pupils attended Slovene lessons as an optional subject. The following information can be provided
on higher secondary schools (Allgemeinbildende Höhere Schulen) and higher vocational secondary
schools (Berufsbildende Höhere Schule): 477 pupils attended the two branches of the Slovene
federal grammar school focusing on languages and natural sciences, respectively
(Bundesgymnasium / Bundesrealgymnasium) in the school year 2001/2002; compared to the
previous year, the number of pupils increased by 24 as the innovative Julius-Kugy Class proved
very attractive. In this class four languages are used for instruction, i.e. Slovene, German, Italian
and English, from the first grade onwards. 133 pupils attended the Klagenfurt bilingual federal
commercial college (Zweisprachige Bundeshandelsakademie). The private bilingual institute for
10

economic professions (Lehranstalt für wirtschaftliche Berufe) registered 118 pupils. At the
remaining higher secondary schools as well as intermediate and higher vocational schools 305
pupils took Slovene as an optional subject or chose the language as an optional or alternative
compulsory subject.
In the school year 2001/2002 a total of 11,602 children attended primary schools in Burgenland, out
of them 1,424 children were provided bilingual (German/Croat) instruction at bilingual primary
schools. In addition, 125 children were registered for Croatian language lessons offered by Germanspeaking primary schools in addition to the usual range of subjects. In the same period 105 pupils of
lower secondary schools signed up for bilingual instruction and another 121 pupils of lower
secondary schools chose Croatian as an alternative compulsory subject or optional subject. As far as
higher secondary schools are concerned, a total of 329 young people were registered for learning
Croatian, including 123 pupils at the bilingual higher secondary school and 206 pupils taught
Croatian as a compulsory subject, optional subject or subject without formal assessment of
performance. At the higher vocational secondary schools 101 young people took up Croatian as an
optional subject or optional compulsory subject. 26 persons chose the optional subject "Croatian" at
the Federal Institute for Nursery Teaching ("Bundesanstalt für Kindergartenpädagogik").
In the school year 2001/2002 364 children were taught Hungarian at primary schools in
Burgenland, among them 118 were provided bilingual instruction (German/Hungarian) at bilingual
primary schools and 246 studied Hungarian as a subject without formal performance assessment, an
optional subject and the like. In the same period 82 pupils at lower secondary schools studied
Hungarian offered as a subject without formal assessment, as an optional or compulsory subject. In
higher secondary schools a total of 199 young people signed up for Hungarian. This figure includes
131 pupils attending the bilingual higher secondary school and 68 pupils who were taught
Hungarian as a compulsory subject, optional subject or subject without formal assessment. At the
higher vocational secondary schools 40 young people studied Hungarian as an optional subject or
as an optional compulsory subject.
5. Statutory organisations of the ethnic groups:
In accordance with Article 3 of the Ethnic Groups Act, Advisory Councils for the individual ethnic
groups have to be established in the Federal Chancellery to advise the federal government and
federal ministers in matters concerning the ethnic groups. Their task is to safeguard and represent
the overall cultural, social and economic interests.
For each ethnic group an Advisory Council was set up. Correspondence to the Advisory Councils
may be sent to the mailing address of the Office of the Advisory Councils:
Office of the Advisory Council for the xxx Ethnic Group at the Federal Chancellery, Division V/7,
Ballhausplatz 2, 1014 Vienna.
6. Measures in accordance with Article 6 of the Charter:
As a state treaty according to Article 50 B-VG, the Charter was published in the Federal Law
Gazette. Furthermore, the Charter and the pertinent Declarations can be downloaded from the
Homepage of the Austrian Federal Chancellery:
http://www.bka.gv.at/bka/minorities/sprachencharta.html

11

Moreover, in the ratification procedure the Charter was presented to the Advisory Councils of all
ethnic groups. The Charter was also subject to a consultation procedure. For this purpose, the bodies
and persons concerned were informed of this Charter.
Part II
Part II: Objectives and principles pursued in accordance with Article 2, paragraph 1
Recognition of regional or minority languages (Article 7, para. 1(a)):
Compliance with this provision is documented by the notification of the two Declarations of the
Republic of Austria regarding the scope of application of the Charter and the ratification of the
Charter in the light of these Declarations.
Respect of the geographical area (Article 7, para. 1(b)):
The Austrian administrative divisions do not constitute an obstacle to the protection of the minority
languages and can be considered at least "neutral" in this respect; the law provides for measures to
promote specific languages, e.g. the definition of specific school districts with entitlement to
bilingual instruction in the minority school system. In this context, attention should be drawn to the
ruling of the Constitutional Court (Constitutional Court Reports 9224/1981) that a re-definition of
constituencies to the detriment of a minority is not compatible with the principle of equality.
Resolute action to promote regional or minority languages (Article 7, para. 1(c)):
Under the Austrian legislation on the protection of minorities, rights to promote minority languages
have been granted prior to the entry into force of this Charter (cf. comments regarding Part III of the
Charter). Concrete (financial) support measures benefiting all the minority languages listed in
Austria’s Declarations are enshrined above all in the Articles 8ff. of the Ethnic Groups Act. In
accordance with the Budget Law, the federal government allocates about € 3.8 million annually to
the support of ethnic groups.
Facilitation of the use of these languages (Article 7, para 1(d)):
In conformity with Article 66(3) of the State Treaty of St. Germain incorporated into the Austrian
Constitution, "the free use by any Austrian national of any language in private intercourse, in
commerce, in religion, in the press, or in publications of any kind, or at public meetings" is
guaranteed in Austria. As described in the chapter on the legal basis of minority languages in
Austria, specific provisions govern the use of minority languages as official languages (in addition
to German) before administrative authorities and the courts (cf. comments regarding Articles 9 and
10). In Austria mechanisms to facilitate the use and promotion of minority languages are already in
place in the field of education and science, culture as well as in the economic and social life. There
a varying degrees of support for promoting the use of these languages in education and science
since they are not subject to the same conditions. Details on the use of the minority languages in the
fields mentioned are provided in the comments regarding Part III of the Charter.
Maintenance and development of links (Article 7, para. 1 (e)):
A great number of Austrian minority language speakers are organised in associations of the
respective ethnic group, which are granted financial aid under the support scheme for ethnic groups
pursuant to Articles 8ff of the Ethnic Groups Act; assistance (particularly to the cultural sector) also
12

serves to foster the relations among groups speaking minority languages (but also contacts with the
German-speaking population). This provides a basis for promoting cultural exchange, strengthening
relations among ethnic groups in general as well as contributing to the preservation and further
development of their languages.
Teaching and learning of minority languages (Article 7, para. 1(f), 1(g),1(h)):
The Austrian legislation provides for measures promoting Croatian and Hungarian in the
educational system. The Minority Schools Act for Burgenland is of great importance, which also
introduced provisions taking account of the Romanes. Regulations concerning the Slovene language
are above all included in the Minority Schools Act for Carinthia. The Czech and Slovak languages
are mainly subject to Article 68(1) of the State Treaty of St. Germain; see comments regarding
Article 8.
In Austria everybody has the opportunity to learn the Austrian minority languages as the measures
mentioned above are not limited to the members of the ethnic groups but are available to the general
public; the only difference is that basically only the members of the ethnic groups have a legal right
to these measures.
Austrian universities teach and conduct research on the languages of the ethnic groups, i.e.
Croatian, Slovene, Hungarian, Czech and Slovak; as far as the language of the Roma is concerned,
Graz University is funding a project on the codification of Romanes.
Transnational exchanges (Article 7, para.1(i)):
See comments regarding Article 14 describing transnational exchanges for all minority languages.
Elimination of discrimination (Article 7, para. 2):
First and foremost, the general principle of equal rights pursuant to Article 7, para. 1 of the Federal
Constitution Act (B-VG) has to be highlighted that is binding on the legislator and the executive
branch of government and prohibits in particular any unj ustified distinction. Distinction between the
majority and minority population is not admissible unless there is a reasonable justification. An
analogous provision is Article 14 of the ECHR stipulating that enjoyment of the rights set forth in
the convention has to be secured without discrimination any ground, e.g. association with a national
minority.
Moreover, there are provisions under constitutional law protecting members of minorities against
discrimination and requiring that they be given equal treatment with other nationals; these
provisions can be considered a specific form of expression of the principle of equality. The earliest
constitutional provisions date back to the State Treaty of St. Germain (Fed. Law Gazette No.
303/1920). Article 66 of the Treaty stipulates that all Austrian nationals are equal before the law
and enjoy the same rights without distinction as to race, language or religion; furthermore, the free
use of any language in private life, in commerce, in religion, in the press or in publications of any
kind, or at public meetings is protected. Article 67 of the Treaty lays down that Austrian nationals
who belong to ethnic, religious or linguistic minorities enjoy the same treatment and security "in
law and in fact" as the other Austrian nationals; this Article underlines that in particular they have
an equal right to establish, manage and control at their own expense charitable, religious and social
institutions, schools and other educational establishments, with the right to use their own language
freely therein. Another constitutional provision guaranteeing equal treatment is Article 7, para. 4 of
the Vienna State Treaty. It stipulates that nationals of the minorities are granted the right to
participate in the cultural, administrative and judicial systems on equal terms with other Austrian
13

nationals; besides, the Federal Constitution Act (B-VG) prohibits all forms of racial discrimination
(Fed. Law Gazette No. 390/1973). According to the Constitutional Court Reports 3822/1960 the
discrimination of a minority language may never be substantively justified.
Particularly Article 67 of the State Treaty of St. Germain calls for factual equality of the members
of minorities as it stipulates that Austrian nationals who belong to racial, religious or linguistic
minorities enjoy the same treatment and security "in law and in fact" as the other Austrian nationals;
furthermore, positive obligations binding the Austrian state are derived from the interpretation of
the provisions on minority protection incorporated into the Austrian Constitution. According to the
Constitutional Court Reports 9224/1981, the Constitutional Court emphasised with reference to the
aspect of equality that a more or less formal equal treatment of members of minorities and members
of other social groups will not always fully honour the ethical commitment to the protection of
minorities guaranteed under the Constitution and that therefore the protection of minority members
vis-à-vis members of other social groups may substant ively justify or even require preferential
treatment of minorities in specific matters; thus, it is clear that for example legal measures of
"positive discrimination", which could be problematic from the perspective of the principle of
equality, are admissible. This objective is also pursued within the constitutional mandate of Article
8, para. 2 of the B-VG.
A provision prohibiting discrimination having the status of an ordinary law is Article 7, para. 1 of
the Vienna State Treaty. It stipulates that Austrian nationals belonging to the minorities enjoy the
same rights as all other Austrian nationals, including the right to their own organisations, meetings
and press in their own language. Article 7, para. 5 of this Treaty has also the status of an ordinary
law and prohibits organisations whose aim is to deprive minorities of their minority capacity or
rights. Another relevant provision is contained in Article IX, para. 1(3) of the 1991 Act establishing
the Administrative Procedures Law (Einführungsgesetz zu den Verwaltungsverfahrensgesetzen /
EGVG), Fed. Law Gazette No. 50/1991, which declares it an act liable to persecution under
administrative criminal law to unduly discriminate persons in the public or to prevent them from
entering places or to deny them access to services conceived for use by the general public, solely on
grounds of their national or ethnic origin.
Promotion of the understanding between all the linguistic groups of the country (Article 7, para. 3):
Measures to promote the respect, understanding and tolerance of the entire population for all groups
living in Austria, their languages and cultures are key objectives of political education and school
education. Political education, school education and preventive measures aim at emphasising the
values of free democracy and creating an intellectual climate for a co-existence founded on respect,
tolerance and non- violence within our social order. In this context, the 1996-1999 research
programme of the Federal Ministry for Science and Transport "Xenophobia (research – reasons –
counterstrategies)" should be mentioned, which provided special support for research on this
subject.
Taking into consideration the needs expressed and establishment of specific bodies (Article 7, para.
4):
Austria construes the obligation arising from first sentence as meaning above all that the needs and
wishes expressed by the Advisory Councils for the ethnic groups must be taken into consideration;
therefore the government bases its action on the "Memorandum submitted by the Austrian Ethnic
Groups to the Austrian federal government and the Nationalrat (lower house of the Austrian
Parliament)" on 24 June 1997, which was prepared and adopted jointly by the Advisory Councils of
all ethnic groups. Bearing in mind the difficulties mentioned – particularly if there are opposing
wishes – this does not preclude the possibility of taking into account the demands of other
organisations of the ethnic groups (especially associations).
14

Austria considers the above- mentioned Advisory Councils for the ethnic groups to be bodies in
accordance with the second sentence of this paragraph. As described above, their task defined in
Article 3 of the Ethnic Groups Act is to advise the federal government and the federal ministers; on
request, they may also advise the governments of the Länder.
Non-territorial languages (Article 7, para. 5):
As described above, this provision has little practical relevance for the Republic of Austria.

Part III
Burgenland-Croatian in the Burgenland-Croatian language area in the Land of Burgenland:
Article 8, para. 1(a)(ii):
In accordance with the 1995 Burgenland Act on Nurseries, State Law Gazette No. 63 as amended in
Fed. Law Gazette No. 91/2002, Burgenland-Croatian is the compulsory second language in
nurseries in specific communities defined in the law. In other communities of the Burgenland the
Burgenland-Croatian language has to be used as a medium of instruction in nurseries if at least 25%
of the parents/guardians request this upon registration. In these nurseries Burgenland-Croatian has
to be used to the extent necessary but no less than six hours weekly.
Article 8, para. 1(b)(ii):
By virtue of the constitutional provision of Article 1, para. 1 of the Minority Schools Act for
Burgenland, Austrian nationals belonging to the Burgenland-Croatian minority are granted a
constitutional right to Burgenland-Croatian as a language of instruction or to learn BurgenlandCroatian as a compulsory subject (inter alia in the primary schools to be defined in accordance with
Article 6 of this Act). Article 3 of the Act provides for primary schools or classes at primary schools
where instruction is provided in Burgenland-Croatian and German (i.e. bilingual primary schools or
primary school classes). The Minority Schools Act for Burgenland also guarantees the continuation
of existing bilingual primary schools (Article 6, para. 2) and permits the establishment of additional
bilingual primary schools in the event of long-term demand (Article 6, para.3).
Article 6, para. 1 of this Act stipulates that bilingual primary schools have to be available in these
communities and, to the extent possible, all members of the Burgendland-Croatian ethnic group
registering for attendance of a bilingual school should be able to attend such a school. In accordance
with Article 7, para. 1, this principle should be applied to the entire territory of Burgenland by
establishing school districts with entitlement to bilingual instruction; this ensures that persons living
in this Land outside the Burgenland-Croatian language area can also benefit from bilingual
instruction.
Article 8, para.1(c)(iii):
In conformity with the Minority Schools Act for Burgenland, the Burgenland-Croatian language is
taught in lower secondary schools, a special higher secondary school and in "special language
programmes" also at other schools in Burgenland, i.e. generally in all state-run schools of
Burgenland.
15

As far as the criteria for mandatory establishment of a bilingual lower secondary school are
concerned, the provisions described under Article 8, para. 1(b)(ii) are applicable.
Article 12 of the Minority Schools Act for Burgenland provides for a bilingual higher secondary
school. This school is located in Oberwart.
Article 8, para.1(d)(iv):
The legislation on lower secondary schools in Burgenland applies analogously to instruction at
polytechnic schools (i.e. 9th grade of compulsory schooling), that have the task of preparing young
people for choosing an occupation by offering vocational orientation and of providing basic
vocational training. In general, the Minority Schools Act for Burgenland provides for bilingual
teaching at all schools in Burgenland, including vocational schools.
Article 8, para.1(e)(iii):
Due to the university autonomy guaranteed under the law, the powers of the government to
intervene in university study courses are limited. Croatian is however offered at Austrian
universities as a study course.
Article 8, para.1(f)(iii):
Croatian is taught at several adult education centres and in courses offered by organisations of the
ethnic group; these programmes are promoted under the federal government’s support scheme for
ethnic groups.
Article 8, para.1(g):
In Austria this requirement is met in particular by curricula taking into account the history and
culture reflected by the minority language (cf. in particular the Ordinance issued by the Federal
Ministry for Education that serves as a basis for designing the curricula for minority primary
schools and teaching in minority languages in primary and lower secondary schools in Burgenland
and Carinthia, Fed. Law Gazette No. 1966/118, as amended in Fed. Law Gazette Vol. II, No.
1998/309). Moreover, the subject "mother tongue education" (offered as an optional subject or
subject without formal assessment or in the framework of school autonomy) includes facts and
figures on the country of origin of the pupils concerned. This subject aims at fostering biculturality
as well as developing and consolidating bilingualism. A key objective is to support the respective
pupils in developing their personality and identity.
Article 8, para.1(h):
Article 13 of the Minority Schools Act for Burgenland provides for bilingual training programmes
for pre-school teachers and school teachers at the respective training facilities, which are designed
to ensure that the requirements of bilingual instruction at schools and nurseries are met.
Article 8, para.1(i):
In accordance with Article 15 of the Minority Schools Act for Burgenland, specific divisions
responsible for bilingual schooling have to be installed at the regional School Board for Burgenland
(Landesschulrat für Burgenland). Specialised inspectors qualified to inspect bilingual instruction
have to be appointed.
16

Article 8, para.2:
Article 6, para. 3 as well as Article 10, para. 3 of the Minority Schools Act for Burgenland stipulate
that bilingual instruction has to be offered in Burgenland also outside the indigenous settlement area
of the ethnic group if required.
Article 9, para.1(a)(ii):
In accordance with the Articles 13ff of the Ethnic Groups Act in conjunction with the Ordinance
regarding the Use of Croatian as an Official Language, Croatian is admissible as an official
language in addition to German before the district courts of Eisenstadt, Güssing, Mattersburg,
Neusiedl am See, Oberpullendorf and Oberwart as well as before the Eisenstadt Regional Court.
Everybody may request to use Croatian as the official language in criminal proceedings conducted
against him/her before these courts.
Article 9, para.1(a)(iii):
There is no provision under the Austrian law stipulating that documents or evidence in criminal
proceedings may be submitted only in a specific language.
Article 9, para.1(b)(ii):
Based on the legislation referred to in the comments regarding Article 9, para.1(a), a party to a civil
lawsuit may use Croatian as an official language before the courts listed.
Article 9, para.1(b)(iii):
There is no provision under the Austrian law stipulating that documents or evidence in civil
proceedings may be submitted only in a specific language.
Article 9, para.1(c)(ii):
In accordance with the Articles 13ff of the Ethnic Groups Act in conjunction with Article 4 of the
Ordinance regarding the Use of Croatian as an Official Language, Croatian is admitted as an
additional official language before the Burgenland Independent Administrative Senate
(Unabhängiger Verwaltungssenat), i.e. an administrative agency under Austrian law but a tribunal
as contemplated by Article 6 of the ECHR. The provisions basically correspond to those described
above.
Article 9, para.1(c)(iii):
There is no provision under the Austrian law on administrative proceedings applicable to
proceedings before the Independent Administrative Senates stipulating that evidence may be
submitted only in a specific language.
Article 9, para.1(d):
In accordance with Article 22 of the Ethnic Groups Act, the costs and fees arising from translations
due to use of a language admitted as an additional official language have to be borne ex officio.

17

Article 9, para.2(a):
As mentioned above, the validity of legal documents is not contingent on the language in which
there were drawn up.
Article 10, para.1(a)(ii) and para.1(c):
In accordance with the Articles 13ff. of the Ethnic Groups Act in conjunction with the Ordinance
regarding the Use of Croatian as an Official Language, Croatian is admitted as an additional official
language before administrative authorities within whose district one of the communities listed in the
Ordinance is located, provided that the seat of this authority is in Burgenland. This means that a
person may apply to such an authority to use Croatian. A person is entitled to submit written and
oral applications in this language and to receive decisions and orders of the autho rities in German
and Croatian. (Article 16 of the Ethnic Groups Act).
Article 10, para.2(b) and para.2(d):
The explanations provided in the above paragraph apply analogously. Furthermore, Article 13, para.
4 of the Ethnic Groups Act authorises the communities listed in the Ordinance regarding the Use of
Croatian as an Official Language to publish general official documents in the minority language.
Article 10, para.4(a):
In proceedings before the above- mentioned administrative authorities conducted by using Croatian
as the official language, written and oral applications in Croatian have to be translated into German
ex officio (Article 14, para. 1 Ethnic Groups Act). Pursuant to Article 15 of this Act, the services of
interpreters have to be used if necessary. If records of these proceedings are drawn up in German,
they have to be translated immediately into Croatian. In accordance with Article 22 of this Act,
costs arising from such translations or from interpretation have to be borne ex officio.
Article 10, para.5:
Based on Article 21 of the Personal Status Act (Personenstandsgesetz) in conjunction with Article
154 of the Austrian Civil Code (ABGB), a child is in general given his/her first name by the
parents. There is no requirement under the Austrian law that a German first name or German
surname must be given to the child. This is also implied in Article 5, para. 3 of the Personal Status
Ordinance (Personenstandsverordnung) stating that the transcription of names of persons to be
registered based on a document in Latin characters has to be true to the characters and marks of the
original. This means that diacritical marks not used in the German language have to be reproduced.
However, the personal status register has to be kept in German (Article 18 of the Ethnic Groups
Act). If documents drawn up in the language of an ethnic group are submitted upon registration, the
authority has to procure translation into German. On the other hand, extracts from the register have
to be translated into the respective minority language if requested (Article 20 Ethnic Groups Act).
Based on a ruling of the Constitutional Court (Constitutional Court Reports 14452/1996),
translation is mandatory even if the procedure to be recorded (e.g. wedding ceremony) was not
conducted in a minority language because the member of the ethnic group did not submit a request.
The Act Amending the Law on Name Changes (Namensrechtsänderungsgesetz) grants people a farreaching right to change their names. Members of linguistic minorities who adopted a Germanised
name have therefore become able to change back to the original name in the minority language.
Names may now be changed for any reason.
18

Name changes are subject to fees unless they are made for an important reason. Members of a
minority may invoke the reason pursuant to Article 2 para.1(10) of the Act Amending the Law on
Name Changes, stating that the intended change of name is necessary to avoid undue social
disadvantages and that these disadvantages cannot be prevented in any other form. In accordance
with Article 2, para. 2, this is also a valid reason for changing a first name.
Article 11, para.1(b)(ii) and para.1(c)(ii):
The regional broadcasting station for Burgenland broadcasts daily radio programmes of a duration
of approximately 45 minutes in the Burgenland-Croatian language. In addition, TV programmes of
30 minutes’ duration are broadcast once a week in the Burgenland-Croatian language by the ORF
regional broadcasting station for Burgenland; this TV programme is re-broadcast for reception all
over Austria on Monday evenings.
Article 11, para.1(d):
The federal government’s support scheme for ethnic groups subsidises CDs with language courses
in minority languages, video productions, theatre productions and the like.
Article 11, para.1(e)(i):
The weeklies "Hrvatske Novine" and "Glasnik" published in Burgenland-Croatian receive financial
aid under the government’s support scheme for ethnic groups and from the general press subsidy
granted pursuant to the 1985 Press Promotion Act. The periodical publication "Put" was granted
financial assistance in the framework of the support scheme for journalism.
Article 11, para.1(f)(ii):
In addition to the funds granted under the support scheme for ethnic groups mentioned under
Article 11, para.1(d), general support measures, e.g. in the framework of programmes promoting the
arts, are available for audiovisual productions in Burgenland-Croatian.
Article 11, para.2:
The freedom of communication is fully guaranteed under the Austrian Constitution. In this context,
the following legal provisions are of relevance: Article 10 ECHR incorporated into the Austrian
Constitution; Article 13, para. 1 of the Basic Law on the General Rights of Citizens
(Staatsgrundgesetz über die allgemeinen Rechte der Staatsbürger), Law Gazette of the Reich No.
142/1867, the resolution of the Provisional National Assembly of 1918 on the abolition of
censorship, National Law Gazette No. 3/1918, as well as the Federal Constitution Act Guaranteeing
the Independence of Broadcasting, Fed. Law Gazette No. 396/1974. Cable TV and satellite
programmes from Croatia can be received in Burgenland without restrictions.
Article 12, para.1(a) and para.1(d):
Under the government’s support scheme for ethnic groups, numerous cultural facilities and
activities committed to the furtherance of the Burgenland-Croatian language are promoted (all
cultural facilities and activities listed and referred to in Article 12, para. 1 receive substantial aid
under the support scheme for ethnic groups). The fact should be highlighted that the support scheme
for ethnic groups has facilitated scientific research and state-of-the-art documentation concerning
19

the minority language and culture. Moreover, it subsidises a wealth of original productions in the
fields of literature and the performing arts by members of the minority.
The decisive criterion of eligibility to aid under the support scheme for ethnic groups is the
promotion of the minority language. Hence, promotion of the language of an ethnic group is a sine
qua non for the provision of funds from the support scheme for ethnic groups.
Article 12, para.2:
Activities or facilities to be promoted do not have to be located in the indigenous settlement area of
the ethnic group in order to be eligible to funds from the support scheme for ethnic groups. For
example, the Vienna-based Burgenland-Croatian Centre is granted financial assistance from the
support scheme for ethnic groups.
Article 12, para.3:
In pursuing its cultural policy abroad, Austria strives to highlight linguistic diversity as it its also
reflected in the languages of Austria’s ethnic groups (e.g. see comments regarding Article 14 on the
activities of ARGE Alpen-Adria).
Article 13, para.1(d):
Compliance with this provision is ensured by the prohibition of discrimination of the speakers of
minority languages (cf. comments regarding Article 7 para. 2) and the constitutional right to the free
use of any language in private life and in commerce pursuant to Article 66, para. 3 of the State
Treaty of St. Germain.
Article 14(b):
In the context of transfrontier exchanges, ARGE Alpen-Adria is of crucial importance. The
activities of and the stimulus provided by ARGE Alpen-Adria made a valuable contribution to a
heightened awareness of and a more in-depth approach to minority issues in the Central European
region. The exchange of best-practice solutions could help to mitigate conflicts in the member
regions. The activities organised by ARGE Alpen-Adria in the past have in general received a
positive feedback and enabled members of different minorities to establish direct contacts and get to
know one another at these cultural events. Direct co-operation of the regional authorities is ensured
by the fact that the Land of Burgenland is a member of ARGE Alpen-Adria and that it is
represented in this capacity by its Governor.
Cross-border co-operation between Austria and its neighbouring countries was intensified also in
the framework of activities of the external offices of the Austrian Institute of East and Southeast
European Studies (Österreichisches Ost- und Südosteuropa Institut). Members of the minorities
played a decisive role in these activities. Austria did not "interfere" with contacts pursuant to Article
17 of the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities but promoted them
actively.

20

Slovene in the Slovene language area in the Land of Carinthia:
Article 8, para.1 (a)(iv):
On 1 October 2001 the Carinthian Nursery Funds Act (Kärntner Kindergartenfondsgesetz / KKGFG), State Law Gazette No. 74/2001, entered into force. The aim of this Act is to promote
private bilingual or multilingual nurseries in the settlement area of the Slovene minority in
Carinthia.
To achieve this aim, a fund was set up that has the following tasks: to grant financial assistance to
organisations supporting bilingual or multilingual nurseries in order to cover operational losses, to
advise these organisations in all linguistic-pedagogical matters concerning the education and care of
children as well as to evaluate the linguistic-pedagogical concepts of these organisations.
This Act grants private bilingual or multilingual nurseries a legal right to financial aid to cover
operational losses.
In addition, bilingual nurseries receive financial assistance in the framework of the federal
government’s support scheme for ethnic groups.
Article 8, para.1 (b)(ii):
The constitutional provision of Article 7 of the Minority Schools Act for Carinthia, Fed. Law
Gazette No. 101/1959 entitles pupils of the area defined in this Federal Act to Slovene as a language
of instruction. This right guaranteed under the Austrian Constitution is derived from Article 7(2) of
the State Treaty of Vienna, Fed. Law Gazette No. 152/1955 granting Austrian nationals of the
Slovene minority a right to elementary education in Slovene and to a proportional number of special
higher secondary schools.
Based on the ruling of the Constitutional Court (Constitutional Court Reports 12245/1989) all
members of the Slovene ethnic group in Carinthia enjoy this right irrespective of the fact whether
they reside in the indigenous settlement area or not.
In accordance with Article 10, para. 1 of the Minority Schools Act for Carinthia, primary schools
catering mainly for the Slovene minority ha ve to be located in communities where bilingual
elementary instruction was provided at the beginning of the school year 1958/59. Pursuant to para.
2, legislation at the level of the Land has be adopted to ensure that all pupils of primary schools in
the above- mentioned regions may receive instruction in Slovene or bilingual instruction.
Furthermore, additional primary schools outside this area have to cater for this ethnic group where a
sustained demand to satisfy the right granted under Article 7(2) of the Vienna State Treaty is
identified. The school districts have to be defined so as to guarantee that the entire area of Carinthia
outside the region described in the above paragraph is covered. This measures aims at implementing
the above-cited ruling of the Constitutional Court.
The parents/guardians of the pupils have to register the children for Slovene or bilingual instruction.
In the grades 1 to 4 of bilingual primary schools instruction has to be provided by using both
German and Slovene to the same extent. From grade 5 onwards the language of instruction is
German but the syllabus has to provide for four lessons a week of Slovene (having the status of a
compulsory subject). Religious instruction has to be offered in Slovene and German in all bilingual
grades.
21

To support bilingual teaching, a second teacher has to be appointed for mixed classes of pupils
registered for bilingual education and those not registered. If children enrol for bilingual instruction
who do not have an adequate command of the Slovene language, remedial teaching in Slovene has
to be offered. Slovene can be learned as a subject without formal assessment at German-only
primary schools in Carinthia.
Article 8, para.1 (c)(iii):
In conformity with the Minority Schools Act for Carinthia, the Slovene language is taught in lower
secondary schools, a special higher secondary school and in "special language programmes" also at
other schools in Carinthia, i.e. generally in all state-run schools of Carinthia.
As far as the criteria for mandatory establishment of a bilingual lower secondary school are
concerned, the provisions described under Article 8, para. 1(b)(ii) are applicable.
Article 24 of the Minority Schools Act for Carinthia provides for a bilingual higher secondary
school. This school is located in Klagenfurt. At this school Slovene is a used as a medium of
instruction, use of the German language in all subjects is compulsory. It is also a mandatory subject
of examination in the final school leaving exam. Pupils have to have adequate command of the
Slovene language to be admitted to this school.
Article 8, para.1(d)(iv):
The legislation for lower secondary schools in Carinthia applies analogously to instruction at
polytechnic schools (i.e. 9th grade of compulsory schooling), that have the task of preparing young
people for choosing an occupation by offering vocational orientation and of providing basic
vocational training. Furthermore, the Minority Schools Act for Carinthia in general provides for
bilingual teaching at all schools in Carinthia, including vocational schools.
In addition, there is a bilingual commercial college (Handelakademie) in Klagenfurt and a bilingual
institute for economic professions in St. Peter near St. Jakob/Rosental.
Article 8, para.1(e)(iii):
Due to the university autonomy guaranteed under the law, the powers of the government to
intervene in university study courses are limited. Slovene is however offered at Austrian
universities as a study course.
Article 8, para.1(f)(iii):
Slovene is taught at several adult education centres and in courses offered by organisations of the
ethnic group; these programmes are promoted under the federal government’s support scheme for
ethnic groups.
Article 8, para.1(g):
In Austria this requirement is met in particular by curricula taking into account the history and
culture reflected by the minority language (cf. in particular the Ordinance issued by the Federal
Ministry for Education that serves as a basis for designing the curricula for minority primary
schools and teaching in minority languages in primary and lower secondary schools in Burgenland
and Carinthia, Fed. Law Gazette No. 1966/118, as amended in Fed. Law Gazette Vol. II, No.
22

1998/309). Moreover, the subject "mother tongue education" (offered as an optional subject or
subject without formal assessment or in the framework of school autonomy) includes facts and
figures on the country of origin of the pupils concerned. This subject aims at fostering biculturality
as well as developing and consolidating bilingualism. A key objective is to support the respective
pupils in developing their personality and identity.
Article 8, para.1(h):
Article 21 of the Minority Schools Act for Carinthia provides for bilingual training programmes for
school teachers at the respective training facilities, which are designed to ensure that the
requirements of bilingual instruction at schools are met.
Article 8, para.1(i):
In accordance with Article 31 of the Minority Schools Act for Carinthia, specific divisions
responsible for bilingual schooling have to be installed at the regional School Board for Carinthia
(Landesschulrat für Kärnten). Specialised inspectors qualified to inspect bilingual instruction have
to be appointed.
Article 8, para.2:
Article 11, para. 1 of the Minority Schools Act for Carinthia stipulates that bilingual instruction has
to be offered in Carinthia also outside the indigenous settlement area of the ethnic group if required
(see also comments regarding Article 8, para. 1(b)(ii).
Article 9, para.1(a)(ii):
In accordance with the Articles 13ff of the Ethnic Groups Act in conjunction with the Ordinance
regarding the Use of Slovene as an Official Language, Slovene is admissible as an official language
in addition to German before the district courts of Ferlach, Eisenkappel and Bleiburg as well as
before the Klagenfurt Regional Court. Any resident of the indigenous settlement area may request
to use Slovene as the official language in criminal proceedings conducted against him/her before
these courts.
Article 9, para.1(a)(iii):
There is no provision under the Austrian law stipulating that documents or evidence in criminal
proceedings may be submitted only in a specific language.
Article 9, para.1(b)(ii):
Based on the legislation referred to in the comments regarding Article 9, para.1(a), a party to a civil
lawsuit may use Slovene as an official language before the courts listed.
Article 9, para.1(b)(iii):
There is no provision under the Austrian law stipulating that documents or evidence in civil
proceedings may be submitted only in a specific language.

23

Article 9, para.1(c)(ii):
In accordance with the Articles 13ff of the Ethnic Groups Act in conjunction with Article 4 of the
Ordinance regarding the Use of Slovene as an Official Language, Slovene is admitted as an
additional official language before the Carinthia Independent Administrative Senate (Unabhängiger
Verwaltungssenat), i.e. an administrative agency under Austrian law but a tribunal as contemplated
by Article 6 of the ECHR. The provisions basically correspond to those described above.
Article 9, para.1(c)(iii):
There is no provision under the Austrian law on administrative proceedings applicable to
proceedings before the Independent Administrative Senates stipulating that evidence may be
submitted only in a specific language.
Article 9, para.1(d):
In accordance with Article 22 of the Ethnic Groups Act, the costs and fees arising from translations
due to use of a language admitted as an additional official language have to be borne ex officio.
Article 9, para.2(a):
As mentioned above, the validity of legal documents is not contingent on the language in which
there were drawn up.
Article 10, para.1(a)(ii) and para.1(c):
In accordance with the Articles 13ff. of the Ethnic Groups Act in conjunction with the Ordinance
regarding the Use of Slovene as an Official Language, Slovene is admitted as an additional official
language before administrative authorities within whose district one of the communities listed in the
Ordinance is located provided that the seat of this authority is in Carinthia. This means that a person
may apply to such an authority to use Slovene. A person is entitled to submit written and oral
applications in this language and to receive decisions and orders of the authority in German and
Slovene (Article 16 of the Ethnic Groups Act).
Based on the decision of the Constitutional Court of 4 October 2000, V 91/99-11, specific
provisions are applicable in the political district of Völkermarkt, where – due to the direct
applicability of the State Treaty of Vienna – every public authority has to examine on its own
initiative whether it has to use Slovene as an official language.
Article 10, para.2(b) and para.2(d):
The explanations provided in the above paragraph apply analogously. Furthermore, Article 13, para.
4 of the Ethnic Groups Act authorises the communities listed in the Ordinance regarding the Use of
Slovene as an Official Language to publish general official documents in the minority language.
Article 10, para.4(a):
In proceedings before the above- mentioned administrative authorities conducted by using Slovene
as the official language, written and oral applications in Slovene have to be translated into German
ex officio (Article 14, para. 1 Ethnic Groups Act). Pursuant to Article 15 of this Act, the services of
interpreters have to be used if necessary. If records of these proceedings are prepared in German,
24

they have to be translated immediately into Slovene. In accordance with Article 22 of this Act, costs
arising from such translations or from interpretation have to be borne ex officio.
Article 10, para.5:

Based on Article 21 of the Personal Status Act (Personenstandsgesetz) in conjunction with Article
154 of the Austrian Civil Code (ABGB), a child is in general given his/her first name by the
parents. There is no requirement under the Austrian law that a German first name or German
surname must be given to the child. This is also implied in Article 5, para. 3 of the Personal Status
Ordinance (Personenstandsverordnung) stating that the transcription of names of persons to be
registered based on a document in Latin characters has to be true to the characters and marks of the
original. This means that diacritical marks not used in the German language have to be reproduced.
However, the personal status register has to be kept in German (Article 18 of the Ethnic Groups
Act). If documents drawn up in the language of an ethnic group are submitted upon registration, the
authority has to procure translation into German. On the other hand, extracts from the register have
to be translated into the respective minority language if requested (Article 20 Ethnic Groups Act).
Based on a ruling of the Constitutional Court (Constitutional Court Reports 14452/1996),
translation is mandatory even if the procedure to be recorded (e.g. wedding ceremony) was not
conducted in a minority language because the member of the ethnic group did not submit a request.
The Act Amending the Law on Name Changes (Namensrechtsänderungsgesetz) grants people a farreaching right to change their names. Members of linguistic minorities who adopted a Germanised
name have therefore become able to change back to the original name in the minority language.
Names may now be changed for any reason.
Name changes are subject to fees unless they are made for an important reason. Members of a
minority may invoke the reason pursuant to Article 2 para.1(10) of the Act Amending the Law on
Name Changes, stating that the intended change of name is necessary to avoid undue social
disadvantages and that these disadvantages cannot be prevented in any other form. In accordance
with Article 2, para. 2, this is also a valid reason for changing a first name.
Article 11, para.1 (b)(ii):
The regional broadcasting station for Carinthia broadcasts radio programmes in Slovene of a
duration of approximately 50 minutes daily between Monday and Friday and an additional
programme of 60 minutes on Wednesdays. It broadcasts a radio programme of 60 minutes on
Saturdays and a radio programme of 30 minutes on Sundays. In addition a bilingual programme of
54 minutes duration per week is to be broadcast by the ORF regional broadcasting station for
Carinthia; furthermore, a trilingual programme in German, Slovene and Italian will be broadcast
from Monday to Friday.
In cooperation with private radio station operators (Radio dva), a Slovene radio programme is
offered daily from 6 am to 6 pm on the frequency 105.5; in addition, the multilingual part (German,
Slovene, Croatian, Serbian and Spanish) of the private ethnic group radio programme can be
received between 6 pm and 6 am.
Article 11, para.1(c)(ii):
The ORF broadcasts the programme "Dober dan Koroska" in Slovene language in Carinthia every
Sunday from 1.30 pm to 2 pm.
25

Article 11, para.1(d):
The federal government’s support scheme for ethnic groups subsidises CDs with language courses
in minority languages, video productions, theatre productions and the like.
Article 11, para.1(e)(i):
The Carinthian weeklies "Nas tednik", "Slovenski Vestnik" and "Nedelja" published in Slovene
received financial aid under the government’s support scheme for ethnic groups and from the
general press subsidy granted pursuant to the 1985 Press Promotion Act. The weeklies "Nas tednik"
and "Slovenski Vestnik" were subsidised under the government’s support scheme for ethnic groups.
The periodical publication "Punt" received financial assistance in the framework of the support
scheme for journalism.
Article 11, para.1(f)(ii):
In addition to the funds granted under the support scheme for ethnic groups mentioned under
Article 11, para.1(d), general support measures, e.g. in the framework of programmes promoting the
arts, are available for audiovisual productions in Slovene.
Article 11, para.2:
The freedom of communication is fully guaranteed under the Austrian Constitution. In this context,
the following legal provisions are of relevance: Article 10 ECHR incorporated into the Austrian
Constitution; Article 13, para. 1 of the Basic Law on the General Rights of Citizens
(Staatsgrundgesetz über die allgemeinen Rechte der Staatsbürger), Law Gazette of the Reich No.
142/1867, the resolution of the Provisional National Assembly of 1918 on the abolition of
censorship, National Law Gazette No. 3/1918, as well as the Federal Constitution Act Guaranteeing
the Independence of Broadcasting, Fed. Law Gazette No. 396/1974. Cable TV and satellite
programmes from Slovenia can be received in Carinthia without restrictions.
Article 12, para.1(a) and para.1(d):
Under the government’s support scheme for ethnic groups, various cultural facilities and activities
committed to the furtherance of the Slovene language are promoted.
The decisive criterion of eligibility to aid under the support scheme for ethnic groups is the
promotion of the minority language. Hence, promotion of the language of an ethnic group is a sine
qua non for the provision of funds from this budget.
Article 12, para.1(f):
As a highly positive example the Carinthian Cultural Week has to be mentioned that took place for
the tenth time in 2002. This series of events is organised by the Carinthian Ethnic Group Office in
cooperation with the respective host city outside the indigenous settlement area. The Cultural Week
offers daily cultural events of the Slovene ethnic group in various cultural fields, e.g. theatre,
cinema, choirs, concerts and the like.

26

Article 12, para.2:
Activities or facilities to be promoted do not have to be located in the indigenous settlement area of
the ethnic group in order to be eligible to funds from the support scheme for ethnic groups. For
example, Vienna-based Slovene-speaking organisations for the ethnic group are granted financial
assistance from the support scheme for ethnic groups.
Article 12, para.3:
In pursuing its cultural policy abroad, Austria strives to highlight Austria’s linguistic diversity as it
its also reflected in the ethnic groups (e.g. see activities regarding Article 14).
Article 13, para.1(d):
Compliance with this provision is ensured by the prohibition of discrimination of the speakers of
minority languages (cf. comments regarding Article 7, para. 2) and the constitutional right to the
free use of any language in private life and in commerce pursuant to Article 66, para. 3 of the State
Treaty of St. Germain.
Article 14, para.1(b):
In the context of transfrontier exchanges, ARGE Alpen-Adria is of crucial importance. The
activities of and the stimulus provided by ARGE Alpen-Adria made a valuable contribution to a
heightened awareness of and a more in-depth approach to minority issues in the Central European
region. The exchange of best-practice solutions could help to mitigate conflicts in the member
regions. The activities organised by ARGE Alpen-Adria in the past have in general received a
positive feedback and enabled members of different minorities to establish direct contacts and get to
know one another at these cultural events. Direct co-operation of the regional authorities is ensured
by the fact that the Land of Carinthia is a member of ARGE Alpen-Adria and that it is represented
in this capacity by its Governor.
Cross-border co-operation between Austria and its neighbouring countries was intensified also in
the framework of activities of the external offices of the Austrian Institute of East and Southeast
European Studies (Österreichisches Ost- und Südosteuropa Institut). Members of the minorities
played a decisive role in these activities. Austria did not "interfere" with contacts pursuant to Article
17 of the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities but promoted them
actively.
Hungarian in the Hungarian language area of the Land of Burgenland:
Article 8, para.1(a)(ii):
In accordance with Article 2(a) of the 1995 Burgenland Act on Nurseries, State Law Gazette No. 63
as amended in Fed. Law Gazette No. 91/2002, Hungarian is the compulsory second language in
nurseries in specific communities defined in the law. In other communities of the Burgenland
Hungarian has to be used as a medium of instruction in nurseries if at least 25% of the
parents/guardians request this upon registration. In these nurseries Hungarian has to be used to the
extent necessary but no less than six hours weekly.

27

Article 8, para.1(b)(ii):
By virtue of the constitutional provision of Article 1, para. 1 of the Minority Schools Act for
Burgenland, Austrian nationals belonging to the Hungarian minority are granted a constitutional
right to Hungarian as a language of instruction or to learn Hungarian as a compulsory subject (inter
alia in the primary schools to be defined in accordance with Article 6 of this Act). Article 3 of the
Act provides for primary schools or classes at primary schools where instruction is provided in
Hungarian and German (i.e. bilingual primary schools or primary school classes). The Minority
Schools Act for Burgenland also guarantees the continuation of existing bilingual primary schools
(Article 6, para. 2) and permits the establishment of additional bilingual primary schools in the
event of long-term demand (Article 6, para.3).
Article 6, para. 1 of this Act stipulates that bilingual primary schools have to be available in these
communities and that, to the extent possible, all members of the Hungarian ethnic group registering
for attendance of a bilingual school should be able to attend such a school. In accordance with
Article 7, para. 1, this principle should be applied to the entire territory of Burgenland by
establishing school districts with entitlement to bilingual instruction; this ensures that persons living
in this Land outside the Hungarian language area can also benefit from bilingual instruction.
Article 8, para.1(c)(iii):
In conformity with the Minority Schools Act for Burgenland, the Hungarian language is taught in
lower secondary schools, a special higher secondary school and in "special language programmes"
also at other schools in Burgenland, i.e. generally in all state-run schools of Burgenland.
As far as the criteria for mandatory establishment of a bilingual lower secondary school are
concerned, the provisions described under Article 8, para. 1(b)(ii) are applicable.
Article 12 of the Minority Schools Act for Burgenland provides for a bilingual higher secondary
school. This school is located in Oberwart.
Article 8, para.1(d)(iv):
The legislation for lower secondary schools in Burgenland applies analogously to instruction at
polytechnic schools (i.e. 9th grade of compulsory schooling), that have the task of preparing young
people for choosing an occupation by offering vocational orientation and of providing basic
vocational training. Furthermore, the Minority Schools Act for Burgenland in general provides for
bilingual teaching at all schools in Burgenland, including vocational schools.
Article 8, para.1(e)(iii):
Due to the university autonomy guaranteed under the law, the powers of the government to
intervene in university study courses are limited. Hungarian is however offered at Austrian
universities as a study course.
Article 8, para.1(f)(iii):
Hungarian is taught at several adult education centres and in courses offered by organisations of the
ethnic group; these programmes are promoted under the federal government’s support scheme for
ethnic groups.
28

Article 8, para.1(g):
In Austria this requirement is met in particular by curricula taking into account the history and
culture reflected by the minority language (cf. in particular the Ordinance issued by the Federal
Ministry for Education that serves as a basis for designing the curricula for minority primary
schools and teaching in minority languages in primary and lower secondary schools in Burgenland
and Carinthia, Fed. Law Gazette No. 1966/118, as amended in Fed. Law Gazette Vol. II, No.
1998/309). Moreover, the subject "mother tongue education" (offered as an optional subject or
subject without formal assessment or in the framework of school autonomy) includes facts and
figures on the country of origin of the pupils concerned. This subject aims at fostering biculturality
as well as developing and consolidating bilingualism. A key objective is to support the respective
pupils in developing their personality and identity.
Article 8, para.1(h):
Article 13 of the Minority Schools Act for Burgenland provides for bilingual training programmes
for pre-school teachers and school teachers at the respective training facilities, which are designed
to ensure that the requirements of bilingual instruction at schools and nurseries are met.
Article 8, para.1(i):
In accordance with Article 15 of the Minority Schools Act for Burgenland, specific divisions
responsible for bilingual schooling have to be installed at the regional School Board for Burgenland
(Landesschulrat für Burgenland). Specialised inspectors qualified to inspect bilingual instruction
have to be appointed.
Article 8, para.2:
Article 6, para. 3 as well as Article 10, para. 3 of the Minority Schools Act for Burgenland stipulate
that bilingual instruction has to be offered in Burgenland also outside the indigenous settlement area
of the ethnic group if required.
Article 9, para.1(a)(ii):
In accordance with the Articles 13ff of the Ethnic Groups Act in conjunction with the Ordinance
regarding the Use of Hungarian as an Official Language, Hungarian is admissible as an official
language in addition to German before the district courts of Oberpullendorf and Oberwart as well as
before the Eisenstadt Regional Court. Everybody may request to use Hungarian as the official
language in criminal proceedings conducted against him/her before these courts.
Article 9, para.1(a)(iii):
There is no provision under the Austrian law stipulating that documents or evidence in criminal
proceedings may be submitted only in a specific language.
Article 9, para.1(b)(ii):
Based on the legislation referred to in the comments regarding Article 9, para.1(a), a party to a civil
lawsuit may use Hungarian as an official language before the courts listed.

29

Article 9, para.1(b)(iii):
There is no provision under the Austrian law stipulating that documents or evidence in civil
proceedings may be submitted only in a specific language.
Article 9, para.1(c)(ii):
In accordance with the Articles 13ff of the Ethnic Groups Act in conjunction with Article 4 of the
Ordinance regarding the Use of Hungarian as an Official Language, Hungarian is admitted as an
additional official language before the Burgenland Independent Administrative Senate
(Unabhängiger Verwaltungssenat), i.e. an administrative agency under Austrian law but a tribunal
as contemplated by Article 6 of the ECHR. The provisions basically correspond to those described
above.
Article 9, para.1(c)(iii):
There is no provision under the Austrian law on administrative proceedings applicable to
proceedings before the Independent Administrative Senates stipulating that evidence may be
submitted only in a specific language.
Article 9, para.1(d):
In accordance with Article 22 of the Ethnic Groups Act, the costs and fees arising from translations
due to use of a language admitted as an additional official language have to be borne ex officio.
Article 9, para.2(a):
As mentioned above, the validity of legal documents is not contingent on the language in which
there were drawn up.
Article 10, para.1(a)(ii) and para.1(c):
In accordance with the Articles 13ff. of the Ethnic Groups Act in conjunction with the Ordinance
regarding the Use of Hungarian as an Official Language, Hungarian is admitted as an additional
official language before administrative authorities within whose district one of the communities
listed in the Ordinance is located provided that the seat of this authority is in Burgenland. This
means that a person may apply to such an authority to use Hungarian. A person is entitled to submit
written and oral applications in this language and to receive decisions and orders of the authority in
German and Hungarian. (Article 16 of the Ethnic Groups Act).
Article 10, para.2(b) and para.2(d):
The explanations provided in the above paragraph apply analogously. Furthermore, Article 13, para.
4 of the Ethnic Groups Act authorises the communities listed in the Ordinance regarding the Use of
Hungarian as an Official Language to publish general official documents in the minority language.
Article 10, para.4(a):
In proceedings before the above- mentioned administrative authorities conducted by using
Hungarian as the official language, written and oral applications in Hungarian have to be translated
into German ex officio (Article 14, para. 1 Ethnic Groups Act). Pursuant to Article 15 of this Act,
30

the services of interpreters have to be used if necessary. If records of these proceedings are drawn
up in German, they have to be translated immediately into Hungarian. In accordance with Article 22
of this Act, costs arising from such translations or from interpretation have to be borne ex officio.
Article 10, para.5:
Based on Article 21 of the Personal Status Act (Personenstandsgesetz) in conjunction with Article
154 of the Austrian Civil Code (ABGB), a child is in general given his/her first name by the
parents. There is no requirement under the Austrian law that a German first name or German
surname must be given to the child. This is also implied in Article 5, para. 3 of the Personal Status
Ordinance (Personenstandsverordnung) stating that the transcription of names of persons to be
registered based on a document in Latin characters has to be true to the characters and marks of the
original. This means that diacritical marks not used in the German language have to be reproduced.
However, the personal status register has to be kept in German (Article 18 of the Ethnic Groups
Act). If documents drawn up in the language of an ethnic group are submitted upon registration, the
authority has to procure translation into German. On the other hand, extracts from the register have
to be translated into the respective minority language if requested (Article 20 Ethnic Groups Act).
Based on a ruling of the Constitutional Court (Constitutional Court Reports 14452/1996),
translation is mandatory even if the procedure to be recorded (e.g. wedding ceremony) was not
conducted in a minority language because the member of the ethnic group did not submit a request.
The Act Amending the Law on Name Changes (Namensrechtsänderungsgesetz) grants people a farreaching right to change their names. Members of linguistic minorities who adopted a Germanised
name have therefore become able to change back to the original name in the minority language.
Names may now be changed for any reason.
Name changes are subject to fees unless they are made for an important reason. Members of a
minority may invoke the reason pursuant to Article 2 para.1(10) of the Act Amending the Law on
Name Changes, stating that the intended change of name is necessary to avoid undue social
disadvantages and that these disadvantages cannot be prevented in any other form. In accordance
with Article 2, para. 2, this is also a valid reason for changing a first name.
Article 11, para.1(b)(ii) and para.1(c)(ii):
The regional broadcasting station for Burgenland broadcasts radio programmes in Hungarian daily
from 6.55 pm to 7 pm. Moreover, a Hungarian programme is broadcast on Sundays from 6.30 pm to
8 pm and a programme focusing on ethnic group issues is broadcast on Mondays from 8.50 pm to 9
pm. TV programmes in Hungarian language are broadcast by the ORF regional broadcasting station
for Burgenland on six Sundays per year; furthermore, a joint programme of the ethnic groups is
broadcast on four Sundays a year.
Article 11, para.1(d):
The federal government’s support scheme for ethnic groups subsidises CDs with language courses
in minority languages, video productions, theatre productions and the like.
Article 11, para.1(e)(i):
The periodical magazine "Örseg" published in Hungarian as well as other informative publications
in Hungarian language are granted financial assistance from the government’s support scheme for
ethnic groups. In general, the fact has to be highlighted that the aid granted to newspapers and other
print productions are of crucial importance in the context of the policy on ethnic groups.
31

Article 11, para.1(f)(ii):
In addition to the funds granted under the support scheme for ethnic groups mentioned under
Article 11, para.1(d), general support measures, e.g. in the framework of programmes promoting the
arts, are available for audiovisual productions in Hungarian.
Article 11, para.2:
The freedom of communication is fully guaranteed under the Austrian Constitution. In this context,
the following legal provisions are of relevance: Article 10 ECHR incorporated into the Austrian
Constitution; Article 13, para. 1 of the Basic Law on the General Rights of Citizens
(Staatsgrundgesetz über die allgemeinen Rechte der Staatsbürger), Law Gazette of the Reich No.
142/1867, the resolution of the Provisional National Assembly of 1918 on the abolition of
censorship, National Law Gazette No. 3/1918, as well as the Federal Constitution Act Guaranteeing
the Independence of Broadcasting, Fed. Law Gazette No. 396/1974. Cable TV and satellite
programmes from Hungary can be received in Burgenland without restrictions.
Article 12, para.1(a) and (d):
Under the government ’s support scheme for ethnic groups, various cultural facilities and activities
committed to the furtherance of the Hungarian language are promoted (most of the cultural facilities
and activities listed and referred to in Article 12, para. 1 are offered by organisations of the ethnic
group and therefore receive substantial aid under the government’s support scheme for ethnic
groups). In this context, the newly built library and archives centre equipped with state-of-the-art
technology deserves special mention; furthermore, the sector of adult education and advanced
training addressing the needs of the ethnic group is expanding.
The decisive criterion of eligibility to aid under the support scheme for ethnic groups is the
promotion of the minority language. Hence, promotion of the language of an ethnic group is a sine
qua non for the provision of funds from the support scheme for ethnic groups.
Article 12, para.2:
Activities or facilities to be promoted do not have to be located in the indigenous settlement area of
the ethnic group in order to be eligible to funds from the support scheme for ethnic groups. For
example, language-specific projects of Hungarian-speaking organisations located in the Länder of
Tyrol, Upper Austria and Styria are granted financial assistance from the support scheme for ethnic
groups.
Article 12, para.3:
In pursuing its cultural policy abroad, Austria strives to highlight Austria’s linguistic diversity as it
its also reflected in the ethnic groups (e.g. see activities regarding Article 14).
Article 13, para.1(d):
Compliance with this provision is ensured by the prohibition of discrimination of the speakers of
minority languages (cf. comments regarding Article 7 para. 2) and the constitutional right to the free
use of any language in private life and in commerce pursuant to Article 66, para. 3 of the State
Treaty of St. Germain.
32

Article 14(b):
In the context of transfrontier exchanges, ARGE Alpen-Adria is of crucial importance. The
activities of and the stimulus provided by ARGE Alpen-Adria made a valuable contribution to a
heightened awareness of and a more in-depth approach to minority issues in the Central European
region. The exchange of best-practice solutions could help to mitigate conflicts in the member
regions. The activities organised by ARGE Alpen-Adria in the past have in general received a
positive feedback and enabled members of different minorities to establish direct contacts and get to
know one another at these cultural events. Direct co-operation of the regional authorities is ensured
by the fact that the Land of Burgenland is a member of ARGE Alpen-Adria and that it is
represented in this capacity by its Governor.
Cross-border co-operation between Austria and its neighbouring countries was intensified also in
the framework of activities of the external offices of the Austrian Institute of East and Southeast
European Studies (Österreichisches Ost- und Südosteuropa Institut). Members of the minorities
played a decisive role in these activities. Austria did not "interfere" with contacts pursuant to Article
17 of the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities but promoted them
actively.
Czech in the Land of Vienna:
Article 8, para.1(a)(iv):
A nursery group using the Czech language is granted aid from the government’s support scheme for
ethnic groups.
Article 11, para.1(d):
The federal government’s support scheme for ethnic groups subsidises CDs with language courses
in minority languages, video productions, theatre productions and the like.
Article 11, para.1(f)(ii):
In addition to the funds granted under the support scheme for ethnic groups mentioned under
Article 11, para.1(d), general support measures, e.g. in the framework of programmes promoting the
arts, are available for audiovisual productions in the Czech language.
Article 11, para.2:
The freedom of communication is fully guaranteed under the Austrian Constitution. In this context,
the following legal provisions are of relevance: Article 10 ECHR incorporated into the Austrian
Constitution; Article 13, para. 1 of the Basic Law on the General Rights of Citizens
(Staatsgrundgesetz über die allgemeinen Rechte der Staatsbürger), Law Gazette of the Reich No.
142/1867, the resolution of the Provisional National Assembly of 1918 on the abolition of
censorship, National Law Gazette No. 3/1918, as well as the Federal Constitution Act Guaranteeing
the Independence of Broadcasting, Fed. Law Gazette No. 396/1974. Cable TV and satellite
programmes from the Czech Republic can be received in Vienna without restrictions.

33

Article 12, para.1(a) and para.1(d):
Under the government’s support scheme for ethnic groups, various cultural facilities and activities
committed to the furtherance of the Czech language are promoted (most of the facilities and
activities listed and referred to in Article 12, para.1 are offered by organisations of the ethnic group
and therefore receive substantial aid under the government’s support scheme for ethnic groups). In
this context, the Komensky school centre (providing continuous bilingual education from the
nursery to the final exam at the higher secondary school) deserves special mention. This centre also
manages very comprehensive archives and libraries and houses a theatre and rooms for events
available to the entire ethnic group.
The decisive criterion of eligibility to aid under the support scheme for ethnic groups is the
promotion of the minority language. Hence, promotion of the language of an ethnic group is a sine
qua non for the provision of funds from the support scheme for ethnic groups.
Article 12, para.3:
In pursuing its cultural policy abroad, Austria strives to highlight Austria’s linguistic diversity as it
its also reflected in the ethnic groups (e.g. see activities regarding Article 14).
Article 14(b):
Relevant projects launched by organisations of the ethnic group are subsidised from funds of the
government’s support scheme for ethnic groups to the extent possible. Programmes co-financed by
the EU (e.g. INTERREG III/A) are of increasing relevance in this context.
Slovak in the Land of Vienna:
Article 8, para.1(a)(iv):
A nursery group using the Slovakian language is granted aid from the government’s support scheme
for ethnic groups.
Article 11, para.1(d):
The federal government’s support scheme for ethnic groups subsidises CDs with language courses
in minority languages, video productions, theatre productions and the like.
Article 11, para.1(f)(ii):
In addition to the funds granted under the support scheme for ethnic groups mentioned under
Article 11, para.1(d), general support measures, e.g. in the framework of programmes promoting the
arts, are available for audiovisual productions in the Slovakian language.
Article 11, para.2:
The freedom of communication is fully guaranteed under the Austria n Constitution. In this context,
the following legal provisions are of relevance: Article 10 ECHR incorporated into the Austrian
Constitution; Article 13, para. 1 of the Basic Law on the General Rights of Citizens
(Staatsgrundgesetz über die allgemeinen Re chte der Staatsbürger), Law Gazette of the Reich No.
142/1867, the resolution of the Provisional National Assembly of 1918 on the abolition of
34

censorship, National Law Gazette No. 3/1918, as well as the Federal Constitution Act Guaranteeing
the Independence of Broadcasting, Fed. Law Gazette No. 396/1974. Cable TV and satellite
programmes from the Slovak Republic can be received in Vienna without restrictions.
Article 12, para.1(a) and para.1(d):
Under the government’s support scheme for ethnic groups, va rious cultural facilities and activities
committed to the furtherance of the Slovakian language are promoted (many facilities and activities
listed in Article 12, para.1 are offered by organisations of the ethnic group and therefore receive
substantial aid under the government’s support scheme for ethnic groups). In this context, the
activities of the Komensky school centre involving all the ethnic groups (i.e. continuous bilingual
education from the nursery to the final exam at the higher secondary school that also takes account
of the Slovakian language) deserve special mention.
The decisive criterion of eligibility to aid under the support scheme for ethnic groups is the
promotion of the minority language. Hence, promotion of the language of an ethnic group is a sine
qua non for the provision of funds from the support scheme for ethnic groups.
Article 12, para.3:
In pursuing its cultural policy abroad, Austria strives to highlight Austria’s linguistic diversity as it
its also reflected in the ethnic groups (e.g. see activities regarding Article 14).
Article 14(b):
Funds from the government’s support scheme for ethnic groups can be made available for these
activities.
Romanes in the Land of Burgenland:
Article 8, para.1(f)(iii):
Various organisations of the Roma ethnic group offer Romanes courses in the framework of the
adult education and further training programme and are granted financial aid from the government’s
support scheme for ethnic groups.
Article 11, para.1(b)(ii):
Funds provided from the government’s support scheme for ethnic groups enabled a Roma
organisation, that is a partner of a private local radio station and produces programmes in Romanes,
to buy production and broadcasting equipment.
Article 11, para.1(d):
The federal government’s support scheme for ethnic groups subsidises CDs with language courses
in minority languages, video productions, theatre productions and the like.

35

Article 11, para.1(f)(ii):
In addition to the funds granted under the support scheme for ethnic groups mentioned under
Article 11, para.1(d), general support measures, e.g. in the framework of programmes promoting the
arts, are available for audiovisual productions in Romanes.
Article 11, para.2:
The freedom of communication is fully guaranteed under the Austrian Constitution. In this context,
the following legal provisions are of relevance: Article 10 ECHR incorporated into the Austrian
Constitution; Article 13, para. 1 of the Basic Law on the General Rights of Citizens
(Staatsgrundgesetz über die allgemeinen Rechte der Staatsbürger), Law Gazette of the Reich No.
142/1867, the resolution of the Provisional National Assembly of 1918 on the abolition of
censorship, National Law Gazette No. 3/1918, as well as the Federal Constitution Act Guaranteeing
the Independence of Broadcasting, Fed. Law Gazette No. 396/1974. Cable TV and satellite
programmes can be received in Burgenland without restrictions.
Article 12, para.1(a) and para.1(d):
Under the government’s support scheme for ethnic groups, various cultural facilities and activities
committed to the furtherance of Romanes in Burgenland (Burgenland Romanes) are promoted (the
ethnic group engages in many of the activities listed in Article 12, para. 1, which are therefore
granted substantial aid under the support scheme for ethnic groups). In this context, the fact should
be highlighted that the codification of Romanes and the creation of a didactic system for this
language became possible as a result of aid under the support scheme for ethnic groups; hence a
standardised system of writing this language handed down orally in the past was established and the
cultural expression of the ethnic group now also extends to written forms (e.g. publication of
bilingual magazines of Roma associations, Romanes learning aids that are available also
electronically, a children’s magazine in Romanes and traditional narration).
The decisive criterion of eligibility to aid under the support scheme for ethnic groups is the
promotion of the minority language. Hence, promotion of the language of an ethnic group is a sine
qua non for the provision of funds from the support scheme for ethnic groups.
Article 12, para. 3:
In pursuing its cultural policy abroad, Austria strives to highlight Austria’s linguistic diversity as it
its also reflected in the ethnic groups (e.g. see activities regarding Article 14).
Article 14(b):
By granting assistance to the organisations of the Roma ethnic group transfrontier cooperation
projects become possible from time to time.
Slovene in the Land of Styria:
Article 8, para.1(a)(iv):
Assistance from funds of the government’s support scheme for ethnic groups could be granted
anytime to private nursery groups offering pre-school education also in the language of the ethnic
group.
36

Article 8, para.1(e)(iii):
Due to the university autonomy guaranteed under the law, the powers of the government to
intervene in university study courses are limited. Slovene is however offered at Austrian
universities as a study course.
Article 8, para.1(f)(iii):
Slovene is taught at several adult education centres and in courses offered by organisations of the
ethnic group; these programmes are promoted under the federal government’s support scheme for
ethnic groups.
Article 11, para.1(d):
The federal government’s support scheme for ethnic groups subsidises CDs with language courses
in minority languages, video productions, theatre productions and the like.
Article 11, para.1(e)(i):
The weeklies "Nas tednik" and "Slovenski vestnik" published in Slovene are subsidised from the
federal government budget and are available also in Styria.
Article 11, para.1(f)(ii):
In addition to the funds granted under the support scheme for ethnic groups mentioned under
Article 11, para.1(d), general support measures, e.g. in the frame work of programmes promoting the
arts, are available for audiovisual productions in Slovene.
Article 11, para.2:
The freedom of communication is fully guaranteed under the Austrian Constitution. In this context,
the following legal provisions are of relevance: Article 10 ECHR incorporated into the Austrian
Constitution; Article 13, para. 1 of the Basic Law on the General Rights of Citizens
(Staatsgrundgesetz über die allgemeinen Rechte der Staatsbürger), Law Gazette of the Reich No.
142/1867, the resolution of the Provisional National Assembly of 1918 on the abolition of
censorship, National Law Gazette No. 3/1918, as well as the Federal Constitution Act Guaranteeing
the Independence of Broadcasting, Fed. Law Gazette No. 396/1974. Cable TV and satellite
programmes can be received in Styria without restrictions.
Article 12, para.1(a) and para.1(d):
Under the government’s support scheme for ethnic groups, cultural activities committed to the
furtherance of the Slovene language are promoted. The support of a "house of culture" located in
the south of Styria organising cultural events (readings, exhibitions, etc. that are also subsidised by
the government’s support scheme for ethnic groups) on a regular basis should be highlighted in this
context.
The decisive criterion of eligibility to aid under the support scheme for ethnic groups is the
promotion of the minority language. Hence, promotion of the language of an ethnic group is a sine
qua non for the provision of funds from the support scheme for ethnic groups.
37

Article 12, para.2:
Activities or facilities to be promoted do not have to be located in the indigenous settlement area of
the ethnic group in order to be eligible to funds from the support scheme for ethnic groups.
Article 12, para. 3:
In pursuing its cultural policy abroad, Austria strives to highlight Austria’s linguistic diversity as it
its also reflected in the minority languages (e.g. see activities regarding Article 14).
Article 13, para. 1(d):
Compliance with this provision is ensured by the prohibition of discrimination of the speakers of
minority languages (cf. comments regarding Article 7 para. 2) and the constitutional right to the free
use of any language in private life and in commerce pursuant to Article 66, para. 3 of the State
Treaty of St. Germain.
Article 14(b):
In the context of transfrontier exchanges, ARGE Alpen-Adria is of crucial importance. The
activities of and the stimulus provided by ARGE Alpen-Adria made a valuable contribution to a
heightened awareness of and a more in-depth approach to minority issues in the Central European
region. The exchange of best-practice solutions could help to mitigate conflicts in the member
regions. The activities organised by ARGE Alpen-Adria in the past have in general received a
positive feedback and enabled members of different minorities to establish direct contacts and get to
know one another at these cultural events. Direct co-operation of the regional authorities is ensured
by the fact that the Land of Styria is a member of ARGE Alpen-Adria and that it is represented in
this capacity by its Governor.
Cross-border co-operation between Austria and its neighbouring countries was intensified also in
the framework of activities of the external offices of the Austrian Institute of East and Southeast
European Studies (Österreichisches Ost- und Südosteuropa Institut). Members of the minorities
played a decisive role in these activities. Austria did not "interfere" with contacts pursuant to Article
17 of the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities but promoted them
actively.
Hungarian in the Land of Vienna:
Article 8, para. 1(a)(iv):
Assistance from funds of the government’s support scheme for ethnic groups could be granted
anytime to a private nursery group offering pre-school education also in the language of the ethnic
group.
Article 8, para. 1(e)(iii):
Due to the university autonomy guaranteed under the law, the powers of the government to
intervene in university study courses are limited. Hungarian is however offered at Austrian
universities as a study course.
Article 8, para. 1(f)(iii):
38

Hungarian language lessons are offered by several organisation of the ethnic group and financial aid
is granted from the federal government’s support scheme for ethnic groups.
Article 11, para. 1(d):
The federal government’s support scheme for ethnic groups subsidises CDs with language courses
in minority languages, video productions, theatre productions and the like.
Article 11, para. 1(e)(i):
The bi- monthly magazine "Béci Napló" published in Hungarian is susidised from the support
scheme for ethnic groups.
Article 11, para. 1(f)(ii):
In addition to the funds granted under the support scheme for ethnic groups mentioned under
Article 11, para.1(d), general support measures, e.g. in the framework of programmes promoting the
arts, are available for audiovisual productions in Hungarian.
Article 12, para.1(a) and para.1(d):
Under the government’s support scheme for ethnic groups, Vienna-based organisations of the ethnic
group are granted assistance, that are engaged in many of the activities mentioned in para. 1.
The decisive criterion of eligibility to aid under the support scheme for ethnic groups is the
promotion of the minority language. Hence, promotion of the language of an ethnic group is a sine
qua non for the provision of funds from the support scheme for ethnic groups.
Article 12, para.2:
Activities or facilities to be promoted do not have to be located in the indigenous settlement area of
the ethnic group in order to be eligible to funds from the support scheme for ethnic groups.
Article 12, para.3:
In pursuing its cultural policy abroad, Austria strives to highlight Austria’s linguistic diversity as it
its also reflected in the ethnic groups (e.g. see activities regarding Article 14).
Article 13, para.1(d):
Compliance with this provision is ensured by the prohibition of discrimination of the speakers of
minority languages (cf. comments regarding Article 7 para. 2) and the constitutional right to the free
use of any language in private life and in commerce pursuant to Article 66, para. 3 of the State
Treaty of St. Germain.
Article 14(b):
By granting assistance to the organisations of the Hungarian ethnic group transfrontier cooperation
projects become possible from time to time.

39

