Strasbourg, 17 January 2014

MIN-LANG (2014) PR 2

EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES

Fifth periodical report
presented to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe
in accordance with Article 15 of the Charter

CROATIA

GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF CROATIA

FIFTH REPORT
BY THE REPUBLIC OF CROATIA ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE
EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES

ZAGREB, October 2013

1

CONTENT
1

INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................................. 4

2

PART I ............................................................................................................................... 5
2.1

Legislative amendments ............................................................................................. 5

2.2

Action Plan for the Implementation of the Constitutional Act on the Rights of

National Minorities ................................................................................................................ 5
2.3

Implementation of the Recommendations of the Committee of Ministers of the

Council of Europe (RecChL(2010)8) ................................................................................... 19
2.4
3

2011 Census in Croatia ............................................................................................ 20

PART II – Objectives and principles ............................................................................... 21
3.1

Article 7, paragraph 1 ............................................................................................... 21

3.2

Article 7, paragraph 3 ............................................................................................... 23

3.3

Article 7, paragraph 4 ............................................................................................... 24

3.4

Situation concerning the Slovenian language .......................................................... 26

3.5

Istro-Romanian dialect variants, variant of Hum na Sutli and variant of Bednja .... 34

3.6

Situation concerning the Slovenian language .......................................................... 34

3.7

Harmonisation of the statutes of self-government units and promotion of the equal

official use of minority languages ........................................................................................ 34
4

PART III ........................................................................................................................... 36
4.1

Territorial scope of the application of the undertakings entered into by the Republic

of Croatia under Part III of the Charter ................................................................................ 36
4.2

Article 8 – Education................................................................................................ 40

4.3

Article 9 – Judicial authorities ................................................................................. 51

4.4

Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services .................................... 56

4.4.1

Article 10, paragraph 1 ....................................................................................... 56

Minority language use in state administration bodies ...................................................... 56
4.4.2

Article 10, paragraph 1 ....................................................................................... 57

Minority language use in local and regional self-government units ................................ 57
4.4.3

Article 10, paragraph 3 ....................................................................................... 58

Minority language use in proceedings conducted by legal persons vested with public
powers 58
4.4.4
4.5

ID cards in the languages and scripts of national minorities.............................. 59

Article 11 – Public media ......................................................................................... 60

2

4.5.1

4.5.1.1

Croatian Television (HTV) ......................................................................... 60

4.5.1.2

Croatian Radio (HR) ................................................................................... 65

4.5.1.3

HRT web ..................................................................................................... 66

4.5.2
4.6

5

Croatian Radiotelevision (HRT) ........................................................................ 60

Fund for the Promotion of Pluralism and Diversity of Electronic Media .......... 66

Article 12 – Cultural activities and institutions ........................................................ 85

4.6.1

Libraries ............................................................................................................. 88

4.6.2

Archives, museums and galleries ....................................................................... 95

4.6.3

Performing arts, amateur culture and art, visual arts, new media and film ........ 96

4.7

Article 13 – Economic and social life ...................................................................... 99

4.8

Article 14 – Transfrontier exchanges ....................................................................... 99

4.8.1

Cultural cooperation agreements and programmes signed in the period 2009-

2012

101

Conclusion ...................................................................................................................... 101

3

INTRODUCTION

1
(1)

Pursuant to Article 15 of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
(hereinafter: the Charter), the Republic of Croatia hereby submits the 5th Periodical
Report for the period 2009-2012, developed in accordance with the revised outline for
the preparation of three-year periodical reports (CM(2009)42), adopted at the 1054th
meeting of the Ministers' Deputies of the Council of Europe on 15 April 2009.

(2)

Since the previous 4th Periodical Report by the Republic of Croatia on the
Implementation of the Charter of December 2009 covered data for the three-year
period 2006-2008 as well as part of the available data for 2009, the 5th Periodical
Report covers data for the three-year period 2009-2011 as well as part of data for 2012
in order to ensure that the report provides up-to-date data to the greatest possible
extent.

(3)

The following state administration bodies cooperated in developing the 5th Report:
Ministry of Justice, the authority responsible for the collection of data relating to
minority language use before judicial authorities;
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and European Integration, relating to international
cooperation and political issues;
Ministry of Economy, relating to economic and social issues;
Ministry of Culture, relating to cultural activities;
Ministry of the Interior, relating to the issue of documents in minority languages;
Ministry of Public Administration, relating to minority language use in state
administration bodies, bodies of local and regional self-government units and legal
persons vested with public powers;
Ministry of Maritime Affairs, Transport And Infrastructure, relating to the erection of
bilingual traffic signs, both in the Croatian language and Latin script and in the
language and script of a national minority;
Ministry of Science, Education and Sport, relating to educational issues;
Office of Human and National Minority Rights of the Croatian Government, relating
to international cooperation and political issues;
Agency for Supervision of Electronic Media, relating to public and private media;
Central Bureau of Statistics;
Croatian Radiotelevision, relating to public media;













(4)

The final draft report was delivered to all the bodies participating in its development
for the purpose of comments. The report was also delivered for comments to the
Council for National Minorities of the Republic of Croatia, the umbrella body of
national minorities at the central level, connecting institutions and interests of national
minorities at the state level. It is an autonomous body with the aim to promote
efficient participation of national minorities in the public life of the Republic of
Croatia, in particular in the field of consideration of and suggestions for regulation and
resolution of issues regarding the exercise and protection of the rights and freedoms of
national minorities.

(5)

The invitation to cooperate in preparing the 5th Report was also extended to all
umbrella associations of all the national minorities to which the provisions of the
4








Charter apply, pursuant to the declaration contained in the instrument of ratification of
the Republic of Croatia, as follows:
Italian Union,
Serbian Cultural Society “Prosvjeta”,
Union of Czechs in the Republic of Croatia,
Democratic Community of Hungarians,
Union of Slovaks, and
Union of Ruthenians and Ukrainians of the Republic of Croatia.

(6)

The invitation to participate in the development of the report was also extended to the
Union of Slovenian Societies in the Republic of Croatia, the umbrella association of
the Slovene national minority in the Republic of Croatia.

(7)

Out of the above stated associations of national minorities, comments were delivered
only by the Union of Ruthenians and Ukrainians in Croatia.

PART I

2
2.1

Legislative amendments
(8)

The Republic of Croatia has continuously upgraded the system of national minority
rights protection in the legislative and legal field, trying to respect the views of
national minorities to the maximum extent, which was inter alia confirmed by the
amendments to the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia and to the Constitutional
Act on the Rights of National Minorities in 2010.

(9)

The Amendments to the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia (OG 76/10) in June
2010 improved the equality of the members of national minorities. Instead of 10
autochthonous national minorities, names of all 22 national minorities in the Republic
of Croatia, including the Roma, are now explicitly mentioned in the Historical
foundations of the Constitution.

(10)

On 1 March 2012, the Minister of Public Administration issued Instructions for
Consistent Implementation of the Act on the Use of the Languages and Scripts of
National Minorities in the Republic of Croatia (OG 33/12), which, in line with the
Constitutional Act on the Rights of National Minorities (OG 155/02, 47/10, 80/10 and
93/11) and the Act on the Use of the Languages and Scripts of National Minorities in
the Republic of Croatia (OG 51/00 and 56/00), stipulate the manner of regulating the
right to equal official use of national minority languages and scripts by general acts,
i.e. by the statutes of local and regional self-government units, and the manner of
exercising the right to equal official use of national minority languages and scripts in
proceedings before the state bodies of first instance and legal persons vested with
public powers.

2.2

Action Plan for the Implementation of the Constitutional Act on the Rights of
National Minorities
(11)

In June 2008, the Government of the Republic of Croatia adopted the Action Plan for
the Implementation of the Constitutional Act on the Rights of National Minorities with

5

a view to continuing the promotion and exercise of national minority rights guaranteed
by the Constitutional Act. The Action Plan consisted of the following 11 chapters:
1. Official and public use of national minority languages and scripts,
2. Education in national minority languages and scripts,
3. Use of national minority insignia and symbols,
4. Cultural autonomy,
5. Right to practise one’s own religion and to establish religious communities with other
members of the religion,
6. Access to mass media,
7. Self-organisation and grouping in an effort to promote common interests,
8. Representation of national minority members in state and judicial administration
bodies, and the bodies of local and regional self-government units,
9. Participation of national minority members in public life through national minority
councils and representatives,
10. Protection from any activity undermining the exercise of rights and freedoms of
national minority members - Developing tolerance towards diversity and antidiscrimination,
11. National Programme for the Roma and Action Plan for the Decade of Roma Inclusion
2005–2015.
(12)

The analysis of the implementation of the Action Plan in the period from 2008 to 2010
has shown progress in the field of promotion of cultural autonomy and education in
the languages and scripts of national minorities, exercise of religious rights,
representation in the representative and executive bodies of local units, and in the
implementation of the National Programme for the Roma and Action Plan for the
Decade of Roma Inclusion 2005–2015, while in the field of the official use of national
minority languages and scripts, access of national minorities to public media, and
representation of national minorities in state administration bodies, judicial authorities
and administrative bodies of local units the progress achieved was still not
satisfactory.

(13)

With a view to further improvement of the implementation of the Constitutional Act
on the Rights of National Minorities, the Croatian Government adopted the Action
Plan for the Implementation of Constitutional Act on the Rights of National Minorities
for the Period 2011-2013 on 8 April 2011. The new Action Plan envisaged further
strengthening of national minority protection, especially in the fields in which
shortcomings had been perceived. For that purpose measures were established which
were significantly expanded in relation to the previous Action Plan, and concrete
objectives were set to be realised in the period 2011-2013.

(14)

The Action Plan for the Implementation of Constitutional Act on the Rights of
National Minorities for the Period 2011-2013 contains 12 chapters:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Official and public use of national minority languages and scripts,
Education in national minority languages and scripts,
Use of national minority insignia and symbols,
Cultural autonomy of national minorities,
Right to practise one’s own religion and to establish religious communities,
Access to mass media,
Self-organisation and grouping in an effort to promote common interests,

6

8. Representation of national minority members in representative and executive bodies
on state and local levels, state administration bodies, judicial bodies and the bodies of
local and regional self-government units,
9. Participation of national minority members in public life through national minority
councils and representatives,
10. Protection from any activity undermining the exercise of rights and freedoms of
national minority members - Developing tolerance towards diversity and antidiscrimination,
11. National Programme for the Roma and Action Plan for the Decade of Roma Inclusion
2005–2015.,
12. General supporting measures for the implementation of the Constitutional Act on the
Rights of National Minorities and the Action Plan.
(15)

With a view to promoting the national minority right to the official and public use of
one’s own language and script, implementation of the following 8 measures was
envisaged for the period 2011-2013:
 Measure 1.1 – Adoption and publication in the Official Gazette “Narodne novine” of
instructions which will regulate in detail the manner of regulation and exercise of the
right to equal official use of the languages and scripts of national minorities on state
and local levels.
o The measure was executed in March 2012.
 Measure 1.2 – Organisation of 4 regional seminars for national minority members and
representatives of local units on the right of national minority members to equal
official use of their language and script with a view to improving the exercise of
rights, and motivating and encouraging members of national minorities to exercise
their rights.
o The measure was executed in 2012. Regional seminars took place on 11 July in
Drniš for the territory of the counties of Šibenik-Knin and Zadar; on 12 July in
Rovinj for the territory of the Istria County; on 25 September 2012 in Vukovar for
the territory of the counties of Osijek-Baranja and Vukovar-Srijem, and on 27
September 2012 in Karlovac for the territory of the counties of Karlovac, SisakMoslavina and Lika-Senj.
 Measure 1.3 – Implementation of targeted supervision over the statutes of local selfgovernment units which had the obligation, in line with the Constitutional Act on the
Rights of National Minorities and the Act on the Use of the Languages and Scripts of
National Minorities in the Republic of Croatia, to regulate the exercise of the right to
equal official use of the language and script of a national minority, and failed to meet
the obligation.
o The execution of the measure was related to the implementation of measures
1.1 and 1.2, and its implementation is planned for 2013.
 Measure 1.4 – Statistical monitoring of the number and type of first and second
instance proceedings conducted in a minority language before the administrative bodies of
local units, and before first instance state administration bodies and legal persons vested
with public powers, and a detailed analysis of the situation.
o The measure was not fully executed in 2011. The body competent for
monitoring the exercise of rights developed a part of the project fiche under IPA
Component 1 Programming 2012-2013, which, within a wider project, proposes
the implementation of activities for the development and establishment of a unique
e-system for monitoring data and reporting on the exercise of minority rights in
Croatia, which will include data on the exercise of linguistic rights of national

7

minority members on all levels. The establishment of said system will mean the
establishment of a quality and continuous implementation of this measure.
 Measure 1.5 – Provision of information through leaflets and brochures to parties in
proceedings before judicial and other authorities obliged to implement the Act on the Use
of Languages and Scripts of National Minorities in the Republic of Croatia on the manner
in which parties may exercise the right to the use of a minority language in proceedings
conducted before those authorities.
o The measure was executed during 2012. The Ministry of Justice printed and
distributed a total of 4 900 leaflets on the use of minority languages in courts in
the local self-government units in which there is such a possibility as stipulated by
law. 100 copies were distributed to each of the 49 courts.
 Measure 1.6 – Placing information on the right to use minority languages and scripts
in a visible place in state administration bodes and bodies of local and regional selfgovernment units (posters, leaflets, brochures).
o The measure has not been executed. The execution of the measure was subject
to prior implementation of measures 1.1 and 1.2, which were implemented in
2012, so that the execution of this measure was postponed / planned for the period
after the implementation of the above measures, i.e. for 2013.
 Measure 1.7 – Keeping records of cases which were conducted or could have been
conducted (had the party not waived the right) in a minority language and script before all
the first instance judicial authorities obligated to proceed in a minority language, and
development of a detailed analysis of the situation based on said records.
o The measure was executed for 2011 and has been implemented continuously.
 Measure 1.8 – Collection and processing of data on the native language – 2011
Population and Housing Census
o The measure was fully executed in December 2012. The 2011 Population and
Housing Census was conducted in the period from 1 April to 28 April 2011
according to the state as of 31 March at 24:00 hours, and data on the native
language were officially published on the website of the Central Bureau of
Statistics on 17 December 2012.
(16)

With a view to promoting education in the languages and scripts of national
minorities, the implementation of the following 11 measures was envisaged:
 Measure 2.1 – Delivery of a seminar for national minority members and
representatives of competent bodies and institutions on the topic of education in the
languages and scripts of national minorities.
o The measure was executed for the academic year 2010/2011 and has been
implemented continuously. During the academic year 2010/2011, the Ministry
co-financed five professional meetings for teachers teaching in the languages
and scripts of the Czech, Slovak and Serbian national minority:
1) Seminar for all educational employees of the Czech national minority in the
Czech Republic (Models A, B and C), Boskovice, Czech Republic (26-30 April
2011);
2) Meeting of teachers teaching in the Czech language (Czech Home,
Daruvar);
3) Meeting of Serbian language teachers and 1st to 4th grade primary school
teachers under Model A (15 December 2011) – Serbian Orthodox Grammar
School, Zagreb;
4) Professional development of teachers teaching in the Serbian language in
Croatia, Vrnjačka Banja, Republic of Serbia, 2011;

8





5) Professional development of Slovak language teachers, Bački Petrovac.
Measure 2.2 – Organisation of professional discussions on incorporation of contents
related to national minority identity and culture in curricula (by subjects).
o The measure was partly executed. After conducting a wide discussion which
included parliamentary committees and state administration bodies,
educational institutions in Croatia, competent authorities, organisations and
agencies, institutions and associations, and a number of individuals, the
National Framework Curriculum for Preschool Education and General
Obligatory and Secondary Education in the Republic of Croatia was adopted
in 2011, which will serve as the basis for the development of curriculum
documents, primarily of subject-based curricula, including subject-based
curricula for education in the languages and scripts of national minorities.
Measure 2.3 – Delivery of professional development courses for teachers on national
minority rights under the Human Rights Education programme.
o The measure was executed for 2011 and has been implemented continuously.
Delivery of professional development courses for teachers on national minority
rights lies within the scope of the Education and Teacher Training Agency.
Civic education
In 2011, the Draft Curriculum for Civic Education was developed, which
includes education for an active participation of children and youth in the life
of their school, local community as well as Croatian and European society,
and the intercultural dimension which envisages for pupils to have a developed
cultural identity and intercultural competence, to be familiar with and to
respect the cultures of minority peoples, and for minority pupils to be familiar
with and to respect the culture of the majority people.
During 2011, seminars and workshops were organised to train teachers on
civic education - 1 102 participants were included, and in locally organised
professional development courses within county professional councils 3 000
educational employees were trained in 2011, including participants from the
ranks of national minorities.
Through cooperation of the Education and Teacher Training Agency with the
Migrations Institute from Zagreb and the Stawanger University from Norway
seminars were delivered on the topic of “Civic Education – Identity and
Interculturality Development Module” in Petrinja on 30 June 2011.
To specify some of the topics of the professional development courses for
teachers: What is discrimination and how to recognise it in school? and Civic
education curriculum and human rights, a professional meeting intended for
1st to 4th grade primary school teachers, held in Čakovec on 21 November
2011
For the purpose of holding said thematic meetings organised by the Education
and Teacher Training Agency a Council of Europe White Paper “Living
Together as Equals in Dignity” was published, promoting intercultural
dialogue. In said seminars, teachers are familiarised with the intercultural
dialogue approach, which is understood as an open and respectful exchange of
views between individuals, groups with different ethnic, cultural, religious and
linguistic backgrounds and heritage on the basis of mutual understanding and
respect.
7 professional meetings took place, too:
Civic education: How to integrate civic education in the primary school
curriculum in line with the National Framework Curriculum? – in Dubrovnik

9

on 7 March 2011; Civic education: Application of the civic education
curriculum in line with the National Framework Curriculum – in Osijek on 4
July 2011, in Split on 6 July 2011, in Rijeka on 11 July 2011, in Čakovec on 23
August 2011, in Vukovar on 25 August 2011, and in Zagreb on 29 August
2011.
In the field of history
The Fourth Croatian symposium on the teaching of history, held in Opatija
from 31 August to 2 September 2011, topic: Croats and minorities in Croatia:
shaping modern identities;
Three-day national professional meeting entitled Teaching about the Holocaust
and prevention of crimes against humanity, held on 25-27 January 2011,
Education and Teacher Training Agency in cooperation with numerous
domestic and foreign organisations.
In the field of Croatian language
A curriculum for teaching Croatian as a second language was developed with
the view to facilitating the learning of Croatian as a second language and
easier integration of the population of Roma pupils in the educational process.
A professional meeting entitled “What is discrimination and how to recognise
it in school? Civic education curriculum and human rights”, intended for
Croatian language teachers was held in Čakovec on 25 October 2011.
Four professional meetings were held to train teachers from the Međimurje
County on the topic of teaching Croatian as a second language (on 25 October
2011, 11 November 2011, 18 November 2011 and 25 November 2011).
In the field of extracurricular activities:
A Drama pedagogy workshop on social, linguistic and cultural inclusion of the
Roma, within the international project “Educational drama and theatre as a
means of encouraging Roma inclusion”, and as part of the national project for
Croatia “We learn together, we grow together”, was organised by the
Croatian Centre for Drama Education and the Education and Teacher
Training Agency, supported by the Budapest Open Society Foundation. 5
workshops for teachers took place in the counties of Međimurje, BrodPosavina, Sisak-Moslavina and the City of Zagreb.
Instructional methods and strategies used in professional meetings
concerning civic education
and human rights: lectures, workshops, project work, portfolio development
with a documented procedure of social problem solving, role play, individual
work of participants with case studies, group work, individual work, pair work,
etc.
Ensured materials for participants: Teachers' Manual - Project Citizen,
Teachers’ Manual - Foundations of Democracy, Council of Europe White
Paper - Living together as Equals in Dignity, Council of Europe
Recommendation on Education for Human Rights and Democratic Citizenship,
2010 and 2011 National Fair Brochures with Project Descriptions, manuals
and textbooks on consumer protection, materials available on the website of
the Education and Teacher Training Agency.
Results/outcome of professional development in the field of civic education
and human rights – teachers:
- were trained to integrate the civic education curriculum in the school
curriculum for the academic year 2011/12,

10

- acquired knowledge on the dimensions of civic competence they need to
develop in pupils,
- were trained to apply the methodology Project Citizen when proposing,
selecting and shaping a minor problem solution in a local community
- developed competencies in the field of group work methodology,
- developed competencies in the field of communication skills,
-developed competencies in the field of resolving conflict situations and
conflict transformation
- developed competencies in the field of school and peer mediation,
- were trained to lead students towards acquiring the skills of argumentation,
proving, logical inference, perceiving relevant facts, unbiased approach and
public speaking,
- were trained to familiarise pupils with the functioning and purpose of the
judicial system, importance of the rule of law and human rights protection
instruments,
- were trained to teach the fundamental values of democracy: authority,
justice, responsibility, privacy,
- acquired knowledge on the meaning of stereotypes, prejudice and
discrimination,
- acquired knowledge on how they emerge and influence behaviour,
- acquired knowledge on why prejudice is always a two-way street,
- acquired knowledge on the meaning of intercultural dialogue and how it is
applied,
-were trained for the development of identity and intercultural competence,
and for intercultural dialogue between minorities and the majority,
-were trained to develop identity and intercultural competence in pupils and to
manage diversity.
During 2011, the Education and Teacher Training Agency organised the
following professional meetings for educators and teachers who teach in the
languages and scripts of national minorities:
Czech national minority
10 meetings took place:
- Professional meeting of all the educational employees of the Czech national
minority, Models A, B and C, Daruvar, 21 February 2011;
- Professional council of specialist subject teachers teaching in Czech, Models
A and B, Končanica, 6 April 2011;
- Professional council of Czech language teachers and Czech kindergarten
teachers, Models A and B, Daruvar, 7 April 2011;
- Professional seminar of all the educational employees of the Czech national
minority in the Czech Republic, Models A, B and C, Boskovice, Czech
Republic, 26-30 April 2011;
- Professional council of specialist subject teachers teaching in Czech, Models
A and B, Končanica, 26 August 2011;
- Course on Czech language teaching methods, Model A, Czech Republic, 21
August – 11 September 2011;
- Professional meeting of all the educational employees of the Czech national
minority, Models A, B and C, Daruvar, 3 October 2011;
- Professional council of Czech language teachers and Czech kindergarten
teachers, Models A and B, Daruvar, 24 October 2011;

11

- Professional council of Czech language teachers in primary school grades 1
to 4, according to Models A and C, Daruvar, 8 November 2011;
- Professional council of specialist subject teachers teaching in Czech, Models
A and B, Končanica, 1 December 2011;
Hungarian national minority
The following professional meetings took place:
- Osijek, 5 January 2011, Social competence, lifestyle and competence of the
milieu, kindergarten/primary/secondary schools;
- Osijek, 27 April 2011, Multicultural contents, intercultural education,
kindergarten/primary/secondary schools;
- Budapest, 12 May 2011, Getting familiarised with the work of the alternative
school “Kincskereső”, kindergarten/primary/secondary schools;
Osijek,
26
August
2011,
Recognising
gifted
children,
kindergarten/primary/secondary schools.
Roma national minority
The following professional meetings took place:
What is discrimination and how to recognise it in school? Civic education
curriculum and human rights, a professional meeting intended for 1st to 4th
grade primary school teachers, held in Čakovec on 21 November 2011.
Professional meetings in the Međimurje County for 1st to 4th grade primary
school teachers are organised by the competent senior advisor as well as the
heads of county professional councils. There are 5 county professional
councils established in the Međimurje County. Each comprises about 60
teachers. The heads of county professional councils, in agreement with the
competent senior advisor, arrange professional meetings on topical issues. At
the beginning of each academic year the work of CPCs is planned by teachers
expressing their needs. During the academic year, the head of a CPC, in
agreement with the competent senior advisor, determines topics according to
the needs expressed by 1st to 4th grade primary school teachers, selects
lecturers and organises professional meetings with lectures and workshops.
A curriculum for teaching Croatian as a second language was developed with
the view to facilitating the learning of Croatian as a second language and
easier integration of the population of Roma pupils in the educational process.
A professional meeting entitled “What is discrimination and how to recognise
it in school? Civic education curriculum and human rights”, intended for
Croatian language teachers was held in Čakovec on 25 October 2011.
Four professional meetings were held to train teachers from the Međimurje
County on the topic of teaching Croatian as a second language (on 25 October
2011, 11 November 2011, 18 November 2011 and 25 November 2011).
A Drama pedagogy workshop on social, linguistic and cultural inclusion of the
Roma, within the international project “Educational drama and theatre as a
means of encouraging Roma inclusion”, and as part of the national project for
Croatia “We learn together, we grow together”, was organised by the
Croatian Centre for Drama Education and the Education and Teacher
Training Agency, supported by the Budapest Open Society Foundation, with 5
workshops delivered for teachers in the Međimurje County (20-22 October
2011 and 27-29 October 2011), the Brod-Posavina County (17-19 November
2011), the Sisak-Moslavina County (10-12 November 2011) and in the City of
Zagreb (6-8 October 2011).
During the academic years 2010/2011 and 2011/2012, the Education and

12

Teacher Training Agency produced professional opinions of preschool
curricula in five primary schools in Međimurje intended for the inclusion of
Roma minority children in the organised form of preschool education outside
the family.
Moreover, educational employees, i.e. professionally trained staff carrying out
said curricula for preschool aged children (preschool teachers) participate in
professional development courses delivered continuously by the Education and
Teacher Training Agency (both in the field of preschool education and in the
field of civic education and human rights).
Serbian national minority
9 professional meetings were held on inter-county and state levels.
At the beginning of work 7 years ago 4 professional councils were established
/ICPC/. Three were for Model A: History-Geography, Serbian language, ArtMusic; one was for Model C. Over time, due to a small number of teachers in
the Art-Music council, it was combined with the professional council HistoryGeography, both retaining their specificities within the council.
Professional councils convened in 2011:
- 26 April 2011, Zagreb, Orthodox Grammar School, ICPC meeting of
teachers under Model C from Daruvar to Kistanje;
- 28 April 2011, Vukovar, Primary School Dragutin Tadijanović, ICPC
History-Geography and Music-Art, and 1st to 4th grade primary school
teachers under Model A;
- 29 April 2011, Belgrade, Faculty of Philology, ICPC meeting of Serbian
language teachers and 1st to 4th grade primary school teachers under Model
A;
- 20 June 2011, Bobota, Primary School Bobota, ICPC History-Geography
and Music-Art, and 1st to 4th grade primary school teachers under Model A;
- 21 June 2011, Vukovar, Primary School Nikola Andrić, meeting of Serbian
language teachers and 1st to 4th grade primary school teachers under Model
A;
- 27 June 2011, Topusko, Primary School Vladimir Nazor, ICPC of teachers
under Model C from Daruvar to Kistanje;
- 15-17 September 2011, Zagreb, Croatian Writers’ Society, Days of Vladan
Desnica, organised by the Faculty of Philosophy in Zagreb and Prof. Dr. Sc.
Dragutin Roksandić, professional meeting of teachers teaching the national
group of subjects, 1st to 4th grade primary school teachers under Model A,
and teachers teaching under Model C in Serbian;
- 24-25 November 2011, Zagreb, University Rectorate, organised by the
Faculty of Philosophy in Zagreb and Prof. Dr. Sc. Dragutin Roksandić,
international meeting /Germany and France/ of teachers teaching the national
group of subjects, 1st to 4th grade primary school teachers under Model A,
and teachers teaching under Model C in Serbian;
- 15 December 2011, Zagreb, Serbian Orthodox Grammar School, ICPC
meeting of Serbian language teachers and 1st to 4th grade primary school
teachers under Model A.
During 2011, two Serbian language teachers were promoted to the title of
professor mentor.
Italian national minority
The following professional meetings took place:
- 3 one-day professional meetings (on 29 April 2011; 29 August 2011; 31

13



August 2011);
- 5 multi-day professional meetings in Italy in cooperation with the Italian
Union - Unione Italiana and the universities of Trieste and Venice, Trieste, 3-5
February 2011 (2 professional meetings) and Venice, 21-26 March 2011; 2024 June 2011; 10-14 October 2011.
Financial resources for the implementation of this measure were secured from
the state budget allocation for regular activities.
Measure 2.4 – Development and publication of the Romani language and culture
programme (Model C).
o In 2012, the Education and Teacher Training Agency became the holder of the
development of curricula for the purposes of primary and secondary education
in the languages and scripts of national minorities, including the development
of the curriculum for the Romani language and culture (according to Model
C).
Until the development and publication of the curriculum for the Romani
language and culture, and its introduction into primary schools, the Ministry
of Science, Education and Sport co-financed the implementation of special
forms of education (summer schools) for pupils of the Roma national minority
from the state budget resources.



Special educational forms were organised and implemented by Roma minority
associations, and in the academic year 2012/2013 3 associations implemented
such education for 162 pupils belonging to the Roma national minority:
Association for the Promotion of Roma Education in Croatia “Kali Sara”,
Roma for the Roma of Croatia and the Association of Roma women “Better
Future”.
Apart from the special educational forms, the MSES co-financed for the
purposes of Romani language standardisation the development of a Romani
grammar, publication of the book "Roma Folk Sayings”, publication of the
collection “The World Day of the Romani Language”, and organisation of the
World Symposium on the Romani Language. In 2012, the Romani language
was introduced as an elective subject at the Zagreb Faculty of Philosophy,
Department of Indology and Far Eastern Studies.
Financial resources for the implementation of this measure were secured from
the state budget allocation for regular activities.
Measure 2.5 – Securing textbooks for education in the languages and scripts of
national minorities in secondary schools
o The measure was executed for 2011 and has been implemented continuously.
The Ministry co-financed in 2011 the development/import of textbooks for
education in the languages and scripts of national minorities, allocating in
particular: HRK 88,410.03 to the Newspaper Publishing Institution Jednota
for the Czech language, HRK 1,947,267.41 to Prosvjeta d.o.o. for the Serbian
language, and HRK 914,322.56 to the Newspaper Publishing Institution EDIT
for the Italian language. The co-financing of the development of textbooks for
education in the languages and scripts of national minorities and for the
import of textbooks from their countries of origin amounted to the total of HRK
2,950,000.00.
The Ministry co-financed in 2012 the additional print of translated textbooks,
purchase of the translated textbooks, development of authored textbooks and

14









publication of translated textbooks for education in the languages and scripts
of national minorities to publishers as follows: HRK 137,676.90 to the
Newspaper Publishing Institution Jednota for the Czech language, HRK
148,766.39 to the Hungarian Educational and Cultural Centre for the
Hungarian language, HRK 497,914.00 to Prosvjeta d.o.o. for the Serbian
language, and HRK 828,594.26 to the Newspaper Publishing Institution EDIT
for the Italian language. The co-financing of the development of textbooks for
education in the languages and scripts of national minorities, import of the
textbooks from their countries of origin and the compensation of difference in
the prices of the textbooks amounted to the total of HRK 1,612,951.55.
Measure 2.6 – Adoption and monitoring of the implementation of necessary
regulations, and harmonisation of existing ones with the Constitutional Act on the
Rights of National Minorities and the Act on Education in the Languages and Scripts
of National Minorities.
o The measure was executed for 2011 and has been implemented continuously.
In 2011, the following regulations were adopted:
- Act on Amendments to the Primary and Secondary Education Act;
- Ordinance on Amendments to the Ordinance on the Content and Form of
Grade Report Cards and Other Public Documents and Pedagogical
Documentation and Records in Schools;
- Ordinance on Procedure for Establishing the Psychophysical Condition of a
Child, Pupil and on Composition of Professional Commissions;
- Decision on Elements and Criteria for Selecting Candidates for Enrolment in
Secondary Schools in Academic Year 2011/2012.
Measure 2.7 – Adoption of necessary curricula for all models of education in the
languages and scripts of national minorities (Models A, B, C) in accordance with the
National Framework Curriculum (NFC).
o The measure was partly executed. During 2011, the curricula for primary and
secondary education in minority languages and scripts under Model A (for
Czech, Hungarian, Serbian and Italian national minorities) were being
reworked in accordance with the expert opinions and suggestions of the
Education and Teacher Training Agency. Since the National Framework
Curriculum for Preschool Education and General Obligatory and Secondary
Education in the Republic of Croatia was adopted in 2011, the new reworked
curricula for education in the languages and scripts of national minorities
under Model A require further harmonisation with the NFC.
Measure 2.8 – Harmonisation of the statutes of primary schools with the Act on
Education in the Languages and Scripts of National Minorities.
o The measure was partly executed. Implementation of the measure is underway.
In line with the Act on Amendments to the Primary and Secondary Education
Act (OG 90/2011), the statutes of all Croatian primary and secondary schools
must be harmonised, including the statutes of 5 primary schools in the
Vukovar-Srijem County (PS Trpinja, PS Borovo, PS Bobota, PS Negoslavci
and PS Markušica).
Measure 2.9 – Collection and processing of data on the national minority language
used: a) in teaching the curriculum in kindergartens and other legal persons
implementing preschool curricula; b) in primary education; c) in secondary education.
o The measure was executed for 2011 and has been implemented continuously.
Data on the national minority language used in teaching the curriculum are
collected in the Annual Report for Kindergartens and Other Legal Persons

15





(17)








Implementing Preschool Curricula. Data on the national minority language
used in teaching are collected in the Primary Schools Statistical Paper and the
Secondary Schools Statistical Paper. The data collection is part of regular
statistical research.
Measure 2.10 – Collection and processing of data on the ethnicity of students: a)
enrolled in professional and university studies; b) who graduated from professional
and university studies; c) enrolled in masters or postgraduate specialist studies.
o The measure was implemented for 2011 and has been implemented
continuously. Data on students’ ethnicity are collected through individual
questionnaires: Application form for enrolment in university or professional
studies, Statistical paper for students who graduated from/completed
university or professional studies, and Application form for students enrolled
in postgraduate specialist studies.
Measure 2.11 – Collection and processing of data on the ethnicity of the holders of
master’s or specialist degrees; doctoral students and doctors of science.
o The measure was executed for 2011 and has been implemented continuously.
Data on ethnicity are collected through individual questionnaires: Statistical
paper for master's or specialist degree holders, Application form for doctoral
students, and Statistical paper for doctors of science. The data was collected
and processed. It is part of regular statistical research.
With a view to promoting cultural autonomy of national minorities, the
implementation of 11 measures was envisaged, out of which we here state 4 measures
which are of importance for this report:
Measure 4.2 – Financing of public communication activities (receiving and
disseminating information in minority languages and scripts): publicity and
publishing.
o The measure was executed for 2011 and has been implemented continuously.
During 2011, the implementation of the publicity programme was co-financed
with the amount of HRK 18,958,000.00, and the implementation of the
publishing programme was co-financed with HRK 2,812,000.00.
Measure 4.7 – Supporting the operation and increasing the holdings of the libraries of
national minorities.
o The measure was executed for 2011 and 2012, and has been implemented
continuously. In 2012, 10 employees from 9 national minorities were financed
(Hungarians, Czechs, Slovenians, Slovaks, Germans, Italians, Albanians,
Ruthenians and Ukrainians, Serbs). The amount of HRK 1,582,548.21 was
allocated for employees' salaries and current expenses..
Measure 4.8 . Supporting the publishing activity of national minority members.
o The measure was executed for 2011 and 2012, and has been implemented
continuously. In 2012, HRK 108,065.00 was spent on book purchase; HRK
35,000.00 on support for book publishing; HRK 36,200.00 on literary events
(HRK 77,000.00 was approved); HRK 30,000.00 on magazines. A total of HRK
209,265.00 was spent on the implementation of this measure.
Measure 4.11 – Collection and processing of data on the national minority language
used by amateur culture and arts associations in their work.
o The measure was executed for 2011 and has been implemented continuously.
Data on the national minority language used by amateur culture and arts
associations in their work are collected in the Amateur Culture and Arts
Associations Report. The data was collected, processed and published.
16

(18)

With a view to improving access to mass media, the implementation of the following 5
measures was envisaged:
 Measure 6.1 – Analysis of the programming of the Croatian Television and the
Croatian Radio according to the representation of programmes in national minority
languages and scripts, and adoption of conclusions on the need for a higher
representation of programmes in national minority languages in the Croatian
Radiotelevision (HRT) programming.
o The measure was executed for 2011 and has been implemented continuously.
The Council for National Minorities has established an insufficient
representation of national minorities in the programmes of the Croatian
Radiotelevision, meaning that the Croatian Television and the Croatian Radio
have failed to fulfil entirely the obligations in line with the provisions of Article
18, paragraph 1 of the Constitutional Act and Article 9 of the Croatian
Radiotelevision Act. The Council holds that topics on national minority
members are mostly handled in the political section, with sensationalist
accents, in what are still separate programmes for national minorities, and
that topics on national minorities have not been integrated in the overall
programming.
The 1.08% representation of minority topics on the achievements and problems
of national minorities in HRT and HR programmes at the annual level is
insufficient. It is necessary to amend the legislative framework by introducing
the obligation to report adequately on minority activities, and to include
minority representatives in the programming management councils of stateowned media. Moreover, it is necessary to continuously cooperate with media
houses for the purpose of education and regular meetings. The Assembly of
Minority Journalists should get more actively involved in the activities for
implementing the right of national minority members to adequate
representation in the Croatian Television and Croatian Radio programmes, in
such a way that it encourages journalists to abide by the code of practice and
rules of the profession, encourages tolerance, objective and fair reporting with
an emphasis on cultural activities, social acceptance, and points to important
problems and integration as well as initiate anti-discrimination campaigns
with the representatives of public media.
 Measure 6.2 – Encouraging national minority members to propose programmes
intended for national minority members via electronic media broadcasters, in tenders
for the award and use of the resources from the Fund for the Promotion of Pluralism
and Diversity of Electronic Media.
o The measure was executed for 2011 and has been implemented continuously.
The Office for National Minorities in cooperation with the Council for
National Minorities organised the seminar “Media and national minorities”,
held on 4 May 2011 in Opatija. Topics discussed at the seminar included the
exercise of national minority rights to access to the media and the role of the
media in the democratisation of Croatian society. The seminar also included
the analysis of reporting on national minorities in the media, and the showing
of the video accompanying the Council of Europe campaign “Dosta” (eng.
enough), which Croatia joined. The aim of the campaign is to overcome
prejudice against ethnic minorities, especially the Roma, and to suppress all
types of discrimination.
The representatives of the Office for National Minorities and the Council for

17







National Minorities participated in a two-day event entitled “Media and
national minorities in Croatia on the doorstep of the European Union”, held
from 18 to 19 November 2011 in Plitvice, organised by the Centre for
International and Security Studies of the Faculty of Political Sciences and the
Friedrich Ebert Foundation from Zagreb, where guidelines for active and
engaged participation of minorities in the media were defined.
Said seminars included the analysis of the Decision on the manner of
evaluating applications to the tender for the distribution of the resources of the
Fund for the Promotion of Pluralism and Diversity of Electronic Media, which
was adopted by the Council for Electronic Media on 24 May 2011 (OG
58/2011). The Council holds that the Agency has still not recognised or
established the right manner of evaluating applications for national minority
programmes, or established the realistic amounts of resources necessary to
fund those programmes. Furthermore, there is still insufficient control in
monitoring the content of programmes applied as national minority
programmes, and in spending the allocated resources for said programmes.
Measure 6.3 – Analysis of the representation of local radio and TV programmes in the
languages and scripts of national minorities, and adoption of conclusions on the need
for adequate representation of programmes in national minority languages in the
programming of local radio and TV stations.
o The measure was executed for 2011 and has been implemented continuously.
The Council for National Minorities has established an insufficient
representation of local radio and TV programmes in the languages and scripts
of national minorities in the programming of the Croatian Radiotelevision,
meaning that the Croatian Television and the Croatian Radio have failed to
fulfil entirely the obligations in line with the provisions of Article 18,
paragraph 1 of the Constitutional Act, and Article 9 of the Croatian
Radiotelevision Act.
It is proposed that the legislative framework be amended in such a way that
new radio stations in regional areas report on all the activities of national
minority members with a view to a more adequate representation of national
minorities in the programmes of local radio and TV stations.
Measure 6.4 – Overview of the co-financing of TV and radio programmes in the
languages and scripts of national minorities.
o The measure was executed for 2011 and has been implemented continuously.
See paragraph 4.5.2 (Fund for the Promotion of Pluralism and Diversity of
Electronic Media), points 173-178 for further details.
Measure 6.5 – Analysis of the use of funds from the Fund for the Promotion of
Pluralism and Diversity of Electronic Media awarded to programmes intended for
national minorities and programmes in national minority languages and scripts, with
comparative indicators.
- The measure was executed for 2011 and has been implemented continuously. The
analysis mentioned earlier has shown that the Agency has still not recognised or
established the right manner of evaluating applications for national minority
programmes, or established the realistic amounts of resources necessary to fund
those programmes. Furthermore, that by 2011 there is still insufficient control in
monitoring the content of programmes applied as national minority programmes,
and in spending the allocated resources for said programmes. However, it needs
to be stressed that the Electronic Media Act stipulates that the resources of the
Fund for the Promotion of Pluralism and Diversity of Electronic Media are used

18

-

2.3

to promote eight different categories of the contents of radio and TV producers,
among which are some high quality programmes for national minorities. On an
annual level, the production and broadcasting of about 1,200 different
programmes is promoted. The amounts of allocated funds for individual categories
depend first and foremost on the quantity and quality of programmes applied by
radio and TV broadcasters, over which the Council for Electronic Media has no
influence. Positive activities undertaken by the Agency are seen in the fact that the
programmes for national minorities are generally co-financed with a high
proportion. In 2012, for instance, the programmes of radio broadcasters were cofinanced with a 7.32% proportion, and of TV broadcasters with a 7.61%
proportion. Consequently, the problem of failing to draw higher amounts of funds
for programmes for national minorities cannot be the responsibility of the Council
for Electronic Media. With a view to additionally supporting programmes for
national minorities, and in line with the State Aid Act, the Council for Electronic
Media enabled through the Ordinance on the Fund for the Promotion of Pluralism
and Diversity of Electronic Media (OG 51/12 and 79/12) an increase in the
intensity of supports in cases of difficult (complex) or low-budget productions
which lack economic justification and attraction for a broad audience if a
programme is, inter alia:
aimed at preserving the language of national minority members and is fully
produced in the language of the national minority members – up to 30%
aimed at preserving the specificities of traditions – up to 30%
Moreover, in recognition of the need to invest in increasing media literacy of radio
and TV broadcasters, the organisation of a multi-day training for broadcasters on
various types of programmes, including those for national minorities, is underway.
The Council for Electronic Media expects this activity to assist broadcasters in
producing better quality programmes for national minorities, which will in turn
enable them to draw higher financial amounts.
Each year of the reporting period, the Council for Electronic Media introduced
some additional measures aimed at ensuring the highest possible quality of the
evaluation of applications to the Fund, and monitoring the use of allocated funds.
In 2011 and 2012, it hired an auditing company to conduct a financial audit of a
number of broadcasters, which established no shortcomings related to financial
justification of allocated funds. Additional regular supervision was introduced,
through which the Agency checks the programmes financed from the Fund, and
direct supervision of broadcasters is conducted as well. Said activities lead to
establishing a smaller number of deviations in the sense of non-compliance with
contractual obligations, based on which the Council for Electronic Media ordered
recovery of allocated funds. In late 2012, when adopting the decision to publish a
tender for awarding the resources from the Fund for 2013, the Council for
Electronic Media also stipulated some additional criteria aimed at encouraging
the production of quality programmes, and imposed the condition on broadcasters
to keep the recordings of all programmes supported from the Fund.

Implementation of the Recommendations of the Committee of Ministers of the
Council of Europe (RecChL(2010)8)
(19)

For the fourth evaluation report of the Council of Europe the Committee of Ministers
recommended that Croatia take note of the considerations and comments of the

19

Committee of Experts, and as a matter of priority the following recommendations
were highlighted:
Recommendation 1: continue efforts to promote awareness and tolerance vis-à-vis the
regional or minority languages and the cultures they represent as an integral part of the
cultural heritage of Croatia, both in the general curriculum at all stages of education and in
the media.
(20)

Relevant data is provided in Section 3.2 of the report.

Recommendation 2: take measures to ensure that speakers can use in practice their regional
or minority languages in relations with the relevant branches of the state administration.
(21)

Relevant data is provided in Section 2.2 of the report, dealing with action plans for the
implementation of the Constitutional Act on the Rights of National Minorities.

Recommendation 3: improve the system of regional or minority language education to make
it more easily accessible.
(22)

A detailed overview of the situation can be found in Section 4.2.

Recommendation 4: strengthen and, where relevant, introduce the teaching of Slovak,
Ruthenian and Ukrainian at all appropriate stages of education, in co-operation with the
speakers.
(23)

Detailed information on organisation and implementation of education in minority
languages at all appropriate stages, including Slovak, Ruthenian and Ukrainian, is
provided in Section 4.2 of the report, in paragraphs (73), (79), (83), (91), (92) and
(110).

Recommendation 5: continue efforts to introduce equal and official use of regional or
minority languages in those areas where there is a sufficient number of speakers, and to
ensure the implementation of local self-government statutes, if necessary with appropriate
assistance.
(24)
2.4

Relevant information is provided in Section 3.7 of the report.
2011 Census in Croatia

(25)

The latest census in Croatia was conducted in the period from 1 April to 28 April
2011, according to the state as of 31 March 2011. The results of the 2011 Census were
officially published on the website of the Central Bureau of Statistics on 17 December
2012.

(26)

The census results according to ethnicity indicate that there is a total of 4 284 889
inhabitants in Croatia, of which 9 641 or 0.22% are members of the Czech national
minority, 14 048 or 0.33% are members of the Hungarian national minority, 16 975 or
0.40% belong to the Roma national minority, 1 936 or 0.05% to the Ruthenian
national minority, 4 753 or 0.11% to the Slovak national minority, 10 517 or 0.25% to
the Slovene national minority, 186 633 or 4.36% to the Serbian national minority, 17

20

807 or 0.42% to the Italian national minority, 1 878 or 0.04% to the Ukrainian national
minority, etc.
(27)

As regards the census results according to the native language, for 4 096 305 or
95.60% of the total population Croatian is the native language, for 6 292 or 0.15% it is
Czech, for 10 231 or 0.24% it is Hungarian, for 14 369 or 0.34% Romani, for 1 472 or
0.03% Ruthenian, for 3 792 Slovak, for 9 220 or 0.22% Slovenian, for 52 879 or
1.23% Serbian, for 7 822 or 0.18% Serbo-Croatian, for 3 059 or 0.07% Croat-Serbian,
for 18 573 or 0.43% Italian, for 1 008 or 0.02% Ukrainian, etc.

PART II – Objectives and principles

3
3.1

Article 7, paragraph 1

In respect of regional or minority languages, within the territories in which such languages
are used and according to the situation of each language, the Parties shall base their policies,
legislation and practice on the following objectives and principles:
a) the recognition of the regional or minority languages as an expression of cultural
wealth;
(28)

The Constitution of the Republic of Croatia (OG 85/10 - consolidated text) stipulates
in Art. 15 that members of all national minorities are guaranteed the freedom of
expression of their nationality, free use of their language and script, and cultural
autonomy. The recognition of minority languages as cultural wealth is thus guaranteed
at the constitutional level.
b) the respect of the geographical area of each regional or minority language in order
to ensure that existing or new administrative divisions do not constitute an obstacle to
the promotion of the regional or minority language in question;

(29)

Regarding the comment of the Committee of Experts from paragraphs 48 and 49 of the
fourth evaluation report [ECRML (2010)9] and [MIN-LANG (2012)1] related to the
situation regarding the use of Czech in Daruvar and Hungarian in Beli Manastir, the
Republic of Croatia reports that there is no new information i.e. no additions to the
information delivered to the Council of Europe in the 4th periodical report by Croatia
on the implementation of the Charter. In practice, in accordance with the town
Statute, names of streets and places on the territory of the Town of Daruvar are
inscribed bilingually.
c) the need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in order to
safeguard them;

(30)

Regarding the comment of the Committee of Experts from paragraph 56 of the fourth
evaluation report [ECRML (2010)9] and [MIN-LANG (2012)1], the Republic of
Croatia reports that, with a view to further improvement of the exercise of national
minority rights, including the implementation of measures to promote minority
languages for the purpose of their preservation, the Croatian Government adopted the
Action Plan for the Implementation of the Constitutional Act on the Rights of National

21

Minorities for the Period 2011-2013, a detailed report on which is given above in
paragraphs (13) – (19).
(31)






With regard to the inquiry of the Committee of Experts from paragraph 16 [ECRML
(2008)1; MIN-LANG (2008)27], the Republic of Croatia stresses that various
programmes of 19 national minorities are receiving financial support from the State
Budget through the Council for National Minorities, including the national minorities
whose minority languages are referred to in Part III. of the Charter: Italians, Czechs,
Slovaks, Hungarians, Ruthenians and Ukrainians, Serbs, Germans, Austrians, Jews,
Slovenes, Albanians, Bosniaks, Roma, Montenegrins, Macedonians, Russians,
Bulgarians and Poles. Pursuant to the Council Decision and the established criteria,
the programmes financed are those of the associations and institutions of national
minorities in the field of publicity, publishing, cultural amateurism, cultural events,
programmes arising from bilateral contracts and agreements, as well as programmes
securing preconditions for the exercise of the cultural autonomy of national minorities.
Programmes concerning publicity, publishing, cultural amateurism and cultural events
were allocated the following amount of resources from the State Budget through the
Council for National Minorities:
HRK 41,843,800 in 2010,
HRK 41,336,318 in 2011, and
HRK 41,081,318 in 2012.
TOTAL = HRK 124,261,436.
d) the facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of regional or minority languages,
in speech and writing, in public and private life;

(32)

Special measures from the Action Plan for the Implementation of the Constitutional
Act on the Rights of National Minorities for the Period 2011-2013, which are aimed at
promoting the right of national minorities to official and public use of their language
and script, are described in detail in paragraph (15).
e) maintenance and development of links, in the fields covered by this Charter,
between groups using a regional or minority language and other groups in the State
employing a language used in identical or similar form, as well as the establishment of
cultural relations with other groups in the State using different languages;

(33)

The question was dealt with infra in Section 4.8 of this report.
f) the provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of regional
or minority languages at all appropriate stages;

(34)

The question was dealt with infra in detail in Section 4.2 of this report.
g) the provision of facilities enabling non-speakers of a regional or minority language
living in the area where it is used to learn it if they so desire;

(35)

Croatian educational policy is investing significant resources into enabling education
in the languages and scripts of national minorities, i.e. enabling primarily pupils, but
adults as well, to learn national minority languages and scripts.

22

(36)

With regard to the question of the Committee of Experts from paragraphs 25 and 113
[ECRML (2008)1; MIN-LANG (2008)27] concerning the possibility for adult nonspeakers of their mother tongue to learn it, that is, with regard to the estimate of the
Committee of Experts that the number of speakers of regional or minority languages
in Croatia is decreasing and the encouragement by the Committee to enable such
learning, we emphasize that national minority associations i.e. their unions, offer
minority language courses for adults, including both mother tongue speakers and nonspeakers.

(37)

Based on a Public Call, the Ministry of Science, Education and Sport awarded HRK 523,000
to national minority associations implementing special educational forms for the needs of
pupils belonging to national minorities, and 7 summer schools for pupils were financed with
the envisaged amount in 2012.

(38)

The Italian national minority in Zadar, for instance, provides Italian language courses
for adults for free or for a symbolic fee. In Istria, in bilingual towns and municipalities
Rovinj, Buje, Umag, Novigrad and Poreč, there are possibilities for learning Italian in
schools with regular classes in Croatian. The same is offered in Pula and Rijeka,
although these are not bilingual towns.

(39)

The Czech national minority organises free-of-charge Czech courses, with the
assistance of teachers from the Czech Republic, through their branches in towns
Virovitica, Bjelovar, Rijeka, Slavonski Brod, Nova Gradiška and Zagreb.

(40)

The Hungarian national minority offers a Hungarian course via the Educational and
Cultural Centre in Osijek and the Association for Cultivation of Hungarian Customs
Stari Jankovci.

(41)

The Ruthenian Language and Culture Institute in Prešov, Republic of Slovakia,
organised the international Summer School of Ruthenian Language and Culture from
14 June to 4 July 2010.
h) the promotion of study and research on regional or minority languages at
universities or equivalent institutions;

(42)

The question was dealt with infra in detail in Section 4.2 of this report.
i) the promotion of appropriate types of transnational exchanges, in the fields covered
by this Charter, for regional or minority languages used in identical or similar form in
two or more States.

(43)
3.2

The question was dealt with infra in Section 4.8 of this report.
Article 7, paragraph 3

The Parties undertake to promote, by appropriate measures, mutual understanding between
all the linguistic groups of the country and in particular the inclusion of respect,
understanding and tolerance in relation to regional or minority languages among the
objectives of education and training provided within their countries and encouragement of the
mass media to pursue the same objective.

23

(44)

With regard to the question of the Committee of Experts from paragraph 34 [ECRML
(2008)1; MIN-LANG (2008)27], in the part of the evaluation concerning the
promotion of awareness and tolerance towards regional or minority languages in the
curriculum, we state that on 20 July 2011 the Minister of Science, Education and Sport
adopted a Decision on the National Framework Curriculum for Preschool Education
and General Obligatory Education in Primary and Secondary School, a core document
serving as the basis for drafting any other curricular documents and for drafting school
curricula. Basic principles underlying the National Framework Programme are
multiculturalism and tolerance, as well as respect for diversity, so that pupils may
have a developed cultural identity and intercultural competence, be familiar with and
respect the cultures of minority peoples, and for minority pupils to be familiar with
and to respect the culture of the majority people.

(45)

Regarding the comment of the Committee of Experts from paragraph 80 of the fourth
evaluation report [ECRML (2010)9] and [MIN-LANG (2012)1] on the continuance of
efforts in promoting awareness and tolerance towards regional or minority languages
and the cultures they represent, especially with regard to the use of Serbian and the
Cyrillic script, we would like to refer to the implementation of measures from the
Action Plan for the Implementation of the Constitutional Act on the Rights of National
Minorities, which are described in detail in paragraphs (15) – (18).

3.3

Article 7, paragraph 4
In determining their policy with regard to regional or minority languages, the Parties shall
take into consideration the needs and wishes expressed by the groups which use such
languages. They are encouraged to establish bodies, if necessary, for the purpose of advising
the authorities on all matters pertaining to regional or minority languages.
(46)

Regarding the comment of the Committee of Experts from paragraph 84 of the fourth
evaluation report [ECRML (2010)9] and [MIN-LANG (2012)1] on the need to
continue efforts to strengthen the roles of the national minority councils, we state that
elections for the members of national minority councils and national minority
representatives in local and regional self-government units took place on 10 July 2011.
The elections were called for a total of 311 national minority councils in 187 selfgovernment units, and for a total of 227 national minority representatives in 129 selfgovernment units, and a total of 273 national minority councils and 169
representatives in self-government units were elected.

(47)

Under measure 9.3 “Organisation of seminars for newly elected members of national
minority councils and national minority representatives on their functions, rights and
obligations” from the Action Plan for the Implementation of the Constitutional Act on
the Rights of National Minorities for the Period 2011-2013, aimed at improving the
functioning of national minority councils and representatives, the Ministry of Public
Administration and the Academy of Local Democracy organised and delivered ten
regional seminars for the newly elected members of national minority councils and
national minority representatives during 2011 and 2012, in particular: in Split on 25
October 2011 for the territory of the counties of Split-Dalmatia and DubrovnikNeretva; in Knin on 26 October 2011 for the territory of the counties of Šibenik-Knin
and Zadar; in Gospić on 27 October 2011 for the territory of the counties of Lika-Senj
and Karlovac; in Poreč on 15 November 2011 for the territory of the Istria County; in

24

Rijeka on 16 November 2011 for the territory of the Primorje-Gorski Kotar County; in
Osijek on 21 May 2012 for the territory of the counties of Osijek-Baranja and
Vukovar-Srijem; in Lipik on 22 May 2012 for the territory of the counties of BrodPosavina and Požega-Slavonija; in Bjelovar on 23 May 2012 for the territory of the
counties of Bjelovar-Bilogora and Virovitica-Podravina; in Čakovec on 24 May 2012
for the territory of the counties of Međimurje, Varaždin and Koprivnica-Križevci; and
in Sisak on 25 May 2012 for the territory of the counties of Sisak-Moslavina,
Karlovac and Zagreb.
(48)

Furthermore, under measure 9.4 “Organisation of seminars for the representatives of
local and regional self-government units, members of national minority councils and
national minority representatives on the functioning of national minority councils and
representatives" from the Action Plan, the Office for National Minorities, in
cooperation with the Council for National Minorities and the Ministry of Public
Administration, organised six consultations on the role and improvement of the
functioning of national minority councils and representatives during 2011 and 2012,
which took place in Rijeka on 21 March 2011, in Osijek on 20 April 2011, in Sisak on
16 December 2011, in Varaždin on 6 July 2012, in Bjelovar on 29 October 2012, and
in Požega on 21 November 2012.

(49)

Upon adoption of the Instructions for Consistent Implementation of the Act on the Use
of the Languages and Scripts of National Minorities in the Republic of Croatia on 1
March 2012 (see paragraph (10)), under measure 1.2 of the above Action Plan (see
paragraph (15)), the Ministry of Public Administration and the Academy of Local
Democracy organised in 2012 four regional seminars for national minority members
and representatives of local units on the right of national minority members to equal
official use of their language and script aimed at improving the exercise of the right,
motivating and encouraging national minority members to invoke that right. The
seminars took place in Drniš on 11 July for the territory of the counties of ŠibenikKnin and Zadar; in Rovinj on 12 July for the territory of the Istria County; in Vukovar
on 25 September for the territory of the counties of Osijek-Baranja and VukovarSrijem, and in Karlovac on 27 September 2012 for the territory of the counties of
Karlovac, Sisak-Moslavina and Lika-Senj. Most of the participants in the
consultations from the ranks of national minorities were members of national minority
councils and national minority representatives in self-government units.

(50)

For the purpose of improving the functioning of national minority councils and
representatives, the Croatian Government adopted the Decision on Financing the
Programmes of National Minority Councils and Representatives in 2012 (OG 119/12)
on 25 October 2012. The Decision establishes the right to the financing of the
programmes of national minority councils and representatives in economically less
developed local self-government units. The Decision included a total of 98 councils,
each of which was eligible for programme financing in the amount of HRK 3,700, and
a total of 31 national minority representatives, each of whom was eligible for
programme financing in the amount of HRK 1,200.

(51)

Since the four-year term of the members of the Council for National Minorities had
expired, the Croatian Government appointed new members of the advisory body in
March 2011. From the ranks of distinguished cultural, professional, scientific and
religious national minority members, the representatives of Jewish, Serbian, Albanian,

25

Austrian and Montenegrin national minorities were appointed as members of the
Council for National Minorities. From the ranks of persons nominated by national
minority councils, the representatives of German, Slovene, Ukrainian, Macedonian,
Ruthenian and Slovak national minorities were appointed as members of the Council
for National Minorities. The Jewish national minority representative was appointed
Chairman of the Council, and the representative of the Serbian and German national
minorities were appointed Vice-Chairmen of the Council. Council members include 8
Members of the Croatian Parliament representing national minorities.
(52)

3.4

The Office of Human and National Minority Rights continued to organise seminars on
the implementation of the Framework Convention for the Protection of National
Minorities in the reporting period. Two more seminars were delivered in Zagreb in
order to enable members of all national minorities to participate in the discussion on
the implementation of that international document for the promotion of national
minority rights. The seminar was organised to initiate public discussion on the
implementation of the Framework Convention for the Protection of National
Minorities as an important international document which protects national minority
rights in a comprehensive way. The seminar was attended by experts from the field of
national minority rights, representatives of state institutions, a Member of the Croatian
Parliament representing national minorities, distinguished members of national
minority associations, representatives of local and regional authorities, members of
national minority councils and representatives of line ministries and other state bodies
involved in the implementation of the Framework Convention, and among the
speakers was Prof. Dr. Rainer Hofmann, the then President of the Council of Europe’s
Advisory Committee on the Framework Convention for the Protection of National
Minorities.
Situation concerning the Slovenian language

(53)

In the previous, 4th periodical report by Croatia, it was reported on the state of
Slovenian in Croatia and activities oriented towards promoting the protection of
Slovenian. It was stressed that, in the declaration accompanying the instrument of
ratification of the Charter, the Republic of Croatia opted for the protection of 7
minority languages pursuant to Part III of the Charter, and that in practice the
enjoyment of the rights guaranteed by the Charter is applied to other minority
languages as well, thus applying the good practice of promoting the objectives and
principles of the protection of minority language use to other minority languages in
Croatia, too.

(54)

As regards data from the 2001 Census, the results of the 2011 Census indicate that in
the ten-year period between the two censuses the number of Slovene minority
members in Croatia dropped by 2 656 i.e. from 13 173 to 10 517, while the number of
those considering Slovenian their mother tongue fell by 2 652 i.e. from 11 872 to 9
220.

(55)

During the reporting period, Slovenian continued to enjoy the rights and protection of
the Republic of Croatia in accordance with positive law. For the members of the
Slovene national minority, funds continued to be allocated for the triennial magazine
in Slovenian “Novi odmev”, published by the Cultural Education Society “Slovenski
dom” from Zagreb, quarterly magazine in Slovenian “Planika”, published by the

26

Slovene Society “Triglav” from Split, yearbook “Liburnijska priloga“, published by
the Slovene Cultural Education Society “Snežnik“ from Lovran, bulletin “Mavrica”,
published by the Slovene Cultural Society “Istra” from Pula, and magazine “Novo
glasilo”, published by the Cultural Society “Bazovica” from Rijeka. The Slovene
Cultural Society “Istra” from Pula published the monograph “Pictia” by Rok Zelenko,
and the chronicle-book of the Slovene Cultural Association France Prešern “Naših 15
godina” (Our 15 years), edited by Milena Ambroži. In 2012, funds from the Croatian
state budget amounting to HRK 205,000 were allocated to the said publicity and
publishing programmes.
(56)

Every year, the Council for the National Minorities allocates funds to national
minority associations through the Decision on the Distribution of Funds Allocated
from the State Budget of the Republic of Croatia, with a view to promoting minority
rights, which, among other things, include the right to use one’s native minority
language. In the period 2009-2012, associations of the Slovene national minority were
allocated resources from the state budget for the programmes of cultural amateurism,
cultural events and other activities for the promotion of the Slovenian language and
culture in the amount of HRK 3,343,900. Below is an overview of funds allocated
from the 2009, 2010, 2011 and 2012 state budgets.

Table 1 – Funds allocated in 2009
UNION OF SLOVENE SOCIETIES IN
THE REPUBLIC OF CROATIA, ZAGREB

864,000

1. Publicity
1.1 “Novi odmev“, magazine – CES SLOVENSKI DOM
3 issues, 28 pages, A4 format, circulation 750 copies
1.2 “Planika” – SCS TRIGLAV, SPLIT
6 issues, 20-24 pages, A4 format, circulation 350 copies
1.3 “Liburnijska priloga-Kažipot”, yearbook – SCES SNEŽNIK, LOVRAN
2 issues, 24 pages, A5 format, circulation 400 copies
1.4 “Mavrica”, Society bulletin, 4 issues – SCS ISTRA, PULA
24 pages, 17x24, circulation 350 copies
1.5 “Kažipot”, information bulletin
11 issues, A5 format, circulation 700 copies /CES Bazovica, Rijeka/
Overhead expenses

213,000
78,000
42,000
7,000
16,000
40,000
30,000

2. Publishing
33,000
2.1 Annex to monograph “Slovenski dom 1929-2009”, by Ilinka Todorovski
and Silvin Jerman - CES SLOVENSKI DOM
circulation 500 copies, 50 pages, A4 format
12,000
2.2 book-monograph “Slovenski dom Bazovica (1947-2007)” by Prof.
Barbara Riman and Mr.Sc. Kristina Riman, 55-60 sheets, circulation
400 copies, format 24x30, CES Bazovica (bilingual)
15,000
2.3 monographic bulletins (4) “Slovenska baština u PGŽ“ by Marjana Mirković
- SCES SNEŽNIK, LOVRAN
circulation 1,500 copies, 24 sheets, A4 format
6,000

27

3. Cultural amateurism and events
„Slovenski dom“, Zagreb
1. Cultural amateurism
1.1 mixed choir
1.2 mixed choir of the spiritual group “A. M. Slomšek”
1.3 creative workshop
1.4 ensemble Slovenica
1.5 exhibitions in Slovenski dom
2. Cultural events
2.1 Slovene Cultural holiday, Slovene National Holiday and
Reformation Day
2.2 80th jubilee of Slovenski dom
3.2 Slovene Society “Triglav“, Split
1. Cultural amateurism
1.1 drama group and traditional holidays
1.2 art exhibitions
1.3 “Idrija lace“
1.4 mixed choir
2. Cultural events
2.1 Slovene Cultural Holiday – Cultural Bridge/Culture Without
Frontiers
2.2 Croatian National Holiday and Slovenian National Holiday
3.3 Cultural Education Society “Bazovica”, Rijeka
1. Cultural amateurism
1.1 mixed choir
1.2 folkloric dance ensemble
1.3 literary group and library
1.4 art and other exhibitions
1.5 guest performances of the society
1.6 drama and recital group
3.4 Slovene Association “France Prešern“, Šibenik
1. Cultural amateurism
1.1 ethno group “Pridne ruke“ - mixed choir and group
1.2 female choir „Prešenovke“
2. Cultural events
2.1 Slovenian Days of Culture – Prešern Day
3.5 Slovene Cultural Society “Lipa”, Zadar
1. Cultural events
1.1 Slovene Cultural Holiday “Prešern Day”
1.2 2009 Art Colony Turanj – exhibition
3.6 Slovene Cultural Society “Istra”, Pula
1. Cultural amateurism
1.1 mixed choir and group
2. Cultural events
2.1 Days of Slovenian Culture
2.2 Slovene Cultural Holiday on 8 February
2.3 3 art exhibitions during 2009
3.7 Slovene Cultural Education Society “Snežnik”, Lovran

618,000
126,000
103,000
60,000
20,000
8,000
5,000
10,000
23,000
10,000
13,000
134,000
110,000
10,000
10,000
35,000
55,000
24,000
14,000
10,000
150,000
60,000
10,000
5,000
15,000
15,000
45,000
57,000
47,000
15,000
32,000
10,000
10,000
13,000
4,000
9,000
43,000
20,000
15,000
6,000
2,000
16,000

28

1. Cultural amateurism
1.1 meetings of the choirs
2. Cultural events
2.1 exhibitions of paintings, photography and handicraft
2.2 Slovenian Film Days
3.8 Slovene Cultural Society “Stanko Vraz”, Osijek
1. Cultural events
1.1 2009 Days of Slovenian Culture in Osijek
3.9 Slovenian Cultural Society “Lipa“, Dubrovnik
1. Cultural events
1.1 “Cultural Bridge” – exhibition of paintings by academic painters
from Croatia and Slovenia
1.2 Presentation of the children’s book VRTITAČKE by academic Luka
Paljetak
1.3 National Holiday
3.10 Cultural Society “Slovenski dom“, Karlovac
1. Cultural amateurism
1.1 Slovene Cultural Holiday “Prešern Day”
Overhead expenses

10,000
5,000
1,000
14,000
14,000
23,000
8,000
10,000
5,000
7,000
7,000
35,000

Table 2 – Funds allocated in 2010
UNION OF SLOVENE SOCIETIES IN
THE REPUBLIC OF CROATIA, ZAGREB

835,900.00

1. Publicity
1.1 “Novi odmev”, magazine – CES SLOVENSKI DOM
3 issues, 28 pages, A4 format, circulation 750 copies
1.2 “Planika” – SCS TRIGLAV, SPLIT
6 issues, 20 pages, A4 format
1.3 “Liburnijska priloga”, yearbook – SCES SNEŽNIK, LOVRAN
1 issue, 24 pages, A5 format, circulation 400 copies
1.4 “Mavrica“, Society bulletin, 4 issues – SCS ISTRA, PULA
20-24 pages, 17x24, circulation 350 copies
1.5 “Kažipot”, information bulletin
12 issues, A5 format, circulation 700 copies /CES Bazovica, Rijeka/

208,700.00

2. Publishing
2.1 monograph “Slovenski likovni umjetnici u Hrvatskoj” (Slovene
visual artists in Croatia) by Ing. Polona Jurinić - CES SLOVENSKI
DOM
circulation 500 copies, 254 pages, A4 format
2.2 book-monograph “Grožnjanska kronika-grad umjetnika”
(Grožnjan chronicle – town of artists) by Rok Zelenko, 56 pages,
circulation 1000 copies, format 15x28, SCS ISTRA, PULA
2.3 collection of poems “Tri minute života” (Three minutes of life) by
Barbara Slivar, 133 poems, circulation 500 copies, 100 pages, A5

32,000.00

84,700.00
47,000.00
10,000.00
20,000.00
47,000.00

8,500.00
12,500.00

6,000.00

29

format, SCS ISTRA, PULA
2.4 monographic bulletins (5) “Slovenska baština u PGŽ” (Slovene
heritage in PGC) by Mr. Sc. Daina Glavočić – SCES SNEŽNIK,
LOVRAN, circulation 500 copies, A4 format

5,000.00

Table 3 – Funds allocated in 2011

UNION OF SLOVENE SOCIETIES IN
THE REPUBLIC OF CROATIA, ZAGREB
1. Publicity
1.1 “Novi odmev”, magazine – CES SLOVENSKI DOM, Zagreb
3 issues, 28 pages, A4 format, circulation 750 copies
1.2 “Planika” – SCS TRIGLAV, SPLIT
6 issues, 20 pages, A4 format, circulation 350 copies
1.3 „Liburnijska priloga“, yearbook – SCES SNEŽNIK,
LOVRAN
1 issue, 24 pages, A5 format, circulation 400 copies
1.4 “Mavrica“, Society bulletin, 4 issues – SCS ISTRA, PULA
4 issues, 20-24 pates, format 17x24, circulation 350 copies
1.5 “Kažipot”, information bulletin
12 issues, 24-48 pages, A5 format, circulation 700 copies /CES
Bazovica, Rijeka/
2. Publishing
2.1 monograph “Slovenci u hrvatskom športu” (Slovenes in Croatian
sport) by Eduard Hemar and Vinko Luncer – CES SLOVENSKI
DOM, Zagreb
circulation 500 copies, 157 pages, A4 format
2.2 book-chronicle of SCS ISTRA “Prvih 10 godina” (The first 10
years) by Maja Tatković, 100 pages, circulation 500 copies, format
17x20cm, SCS ISTRA, PULA
2.3 monographic bulletins (5) “Slovenska baština u PGŽ” (Slovene
heritage in PGC) by Mr. Sc. Daina Glavočić – SCES SNEŽNIK,
LOVRAN, circulation 500 copies, A4 format
3. Cultural amateurism and events
3.1 “Slovenski dom“, Zagreb
1. Cultural amateurism
1.1 mixed choir Slovenski dom
1.2 mixed choir of the spiritual group “A. M. Slomšek”
1.3 creative workshop
1.4 exhibitions in Slovenski dom
1.5 SUDAR ensemble
2. Cultural events
2.1 Slovene Cultural Holiday, national holidays and Reformation
Day
3.2 Slovene Society “Triglav“, Split
1. Cultural amateurism
1.1 drama and recital section
1.2 art exhibitions

822,000.00
195,000.00
75,000.00
44,000.00

7,000.00
20,000.00

49,000.00
37,000.00

15,000.00

13,000.00

9,000.00
590,000.00
146,000.00
131,000.00
60,000.00
28,000.00
10,000.00
16,000.00
17,000.00

15,000.00
141,000.00
128,000.00
10,000.00
11,000.00
30

1.3 “Idrija lace“
1.4 mixed choir
2. Cultural events
2.1 Slovene Cultural Holiday
3.3 Cultural Education Society “Bazovica”, Rijeka
1. Cultural amateurism
1.1 mixed choir
1.2 folkloric dance ensemble
1.3 literary group and library
1.4 art and other exhibitions
1.5 guest performances of the society
1.6 drama and recital group
3.4 Slovene Cultural Society “Lipa”, Zadar
1. Cultural events
1.1 Slovene Cultural Holiday “Prešern Day”
1.2 2011 Art Colony Turanj – exhibition
3.5 Slovene Cultural Society “Istra”, Pula
1. Cultural amateurism
1.1 mixed choir and vocal group
2. Cultural events
2.1 2011 Days of Slovene Culture
2.2 Cultural Holiday on 8 February
2.3 art exhibitions during 2011
3.6 Slovene Cultural Education Society “Snežnik”, Lovran
1. Cultural events
1.1 Days of Slovene Culture in Lovran
3.7 Slovene Cultural Society “Stanko Vraz”, Osijek
1. Cultural events
1.1 celebration of 201th anniversary of the brirth of Stanko Vraz
3.8 Slovenian Cultural Society “Lipa“, Dubrovnik
1. Cultural events
1.1 handicraft exhibition
1.2 Cultural Bridge – Literary evening, Dubrovnik
1.3 Croatian National Holiday and Slovenian National Holiday
3.9 Cultural Society “Slovenski dom“, Karlovac
1. Cultural events
1.1 Slovene Cultural Holiday “Prešern Day”
3.10 Slovene Cultural Society France Prešeren, Šibenik
1. Cultural amateurism
1.l ethno group Pridne roke
1.2 female choir Prešenovke
1.3 Mladi smo, ker pojemo
3.11 Slovene Cultural Society “Nagelj”, Varaždin
1. Cultural amateurism
1.1 ethno group
3.12 Slovene Cultural Society “Oljka”, Poreč
1. Cultural amateurism
1.1 creative workshop Oljka 2011
2. Cultural events

45,000.00
62,000.00
13,000.00
13,000.00
127,000.00
62,000.00
13,000.00
7,000.00
17,000.00
18,000.00
10,000.00
18,000.00
5,000.00
13,000.00
58,000.00
36,000.00
22,000.00
11,000.00
6,000.00
5,000.00
8,000.00
8,000.00
9,000.00
9,000,00
10,000.00
4,000.00
3,000.00
3,000.00
13,000.00
13,000.00
36,000.00
10,000.00
19,000.00
7,000.00
14,000.00
14,000.00
10,000.00
4,000.00

31

2.1 Cultural amateurism festival Poreč 2011
2.2 2011 cultural events of the society “Oljka”, Poreč

3,000.00
3,000.00

Table 4 – Funds allocated in 2012
UNION OF SLOVENE SOCIETIES IN
THE REPUBLIC OF CROATIA, ZAGREB

822,000.00

1. Publicity
1.1 “Novi odmev“, magazine – CES SLOVENSKI DOM, Zagreb
3 issues, 28 pages, A4 format, circulation 750 copies
1.2 “Planika” – SCS TRIGLAV, SPLIT
4 issues, 20 pages, A4 format
1.3 “Liburnijska priloga“, yearbook – SCES SNEŽNIK, LOVRAN
1 issue, 16 pages, A5 format, circulation 400 pages
1.4 “Mavrica“, Society bulletin, 4 issues – SCS ISTRA, PULA
4 issues, 20-24 pates, format 17x24, circulation 350 copies
1.5 “Novo glasilo”, magazine, CAS “Bazovica”, Rijeka
4 issues, 24 pages, A4 format, circulation 700 copies
2. Publishing
2.1 monograph “Pictia” by Rok Zelenko – SCS ISTRA, Pula
circulation 500 copies, 156 pages, 22x20 format
2.2 book-chronicle of SCS Dr France Prešern “Naših 15 godina”
(Our 15 years), ed.-in-chief Prof. Milena Ambroži, 80 pages,
circulation 500 copies, format 17x20cm

189,000.00

3. Cultural amateurism and events
3.1 “Slovenski dom“, Zagreb
1. Cultural amateurism
1.1 mixed choir Slovenski dom
1.2 mixed choir of the spiritual group “A. M. Slomšek”
1.3 creative workshop
1.4 exhibitions in Slovenski dom
1.5 SUDAR ensemble
2. Cultural events
2.1 Prešern Day – Culture Day
3.2 Slovene Society “Triglav“, Split
1. Cultural amateurism
1.1 drama and recital section
1.2 art exhibitions
1.3 “Idrija lace“
1.4 mixed choir
2. Cultural events
2.1 Days of Slovenian Culture

75,000.00
45,000.00
9,000.00
20,000.00
40,000.00
26,000.00
13,000.00

13,000.00
607,000.00

60,000.00
28,000.00
10,000.00
16,000.00
15,000.00
15,000.00

10,000.00
11,000.00
45,000.00
62,000.00
26,000.00

32

3.3 Cultural Education Society “Bazovica”, Rijeka
1. Cultural amateurism
1.1 mixed choir
1.2 folkloric dance ensemble
1.3 literary group and library
1.4 exhibitions
1.5 guest performances of the society
1.6 drama and recital group
1. Cultural events
1.1 65th anniversary of Slovenski dom CES “Bazovica”
3.4 Slovene Cultural Society “Lipa”, Zadar
1. Cultural events
1.1 Slovene Cultural Holiday “Prešern Day”
1.2 2012 Art Colony Turanj – exhibition
3.5 Slovene Cultural Society “Istra”, Pula
1. Cultural amateurism
1.1 mixed choir and vocal group
2. Cultural events
2.1 2012 Days of Slovene Culture
2.2 Cultural Holiday on 8 February
2.3 art exhibitions during 2012
3.6 Slovene Cultural Education Society “Snežnik”, Lovran
1. Cultural events
1.1 Days of Slovene Culture in Lovran
3.7 Slovenian Cultural Society “Lipa“, Dubrovnik
1. Cultural events
1.1 Cultural Bridge – Literary evening, Dubrovnik
1.2 Days of Slovene Culture
1.3 photography exhibition
3.8 Cultural Society “Slovenski dom“, Karlovac
1. Cultural events
1.1 Slovene Cultural Holiday “Prešern Day”
3.9 Slovene Cultural Society France Prešeren, Šibenik
1. Cultural amateurism
1.l ethno group Pridne roke
1.2 female choir Prešenovke
2. Cultural events
2.1 celebration of “Prešern Day”
3.10 Slovene Cultural Society “Nagelj”, Varaždin
1. Cultural amateurism
1.1 folklore and acting group “Nagelj”
3.11 Slovene Cultural Society “Oljka”, Poreč
1. Cultural amateurism
1.1 creative workshop Oljka 2012

62,000.00
13,000.00
7,000.00
17,000.00
15,000.00
10,000.00
15,000.00

5,000.00
13,000.00

36,000.00
11,000.00
6,000.00
5,000.00

8,000.00

5,000.00
3,000.00
5,000.00

13,000.00

10,000.00
16,000.00
10,000.00

14,000.00

4,000.00

33

2. Cultural events
2.1 Prešern Days in Poreč and Slovene Evening
3.5

6,000.00

Istro-Romanian dialect variants, variant of Hum na Sutli and variant of Bednja
(57)

With regard to the question of the Committee of Experts from paragraph 48 [ECRML
(2008)1; MIN-LANG (2008)27], we state that the Ministry of Culture of the Republic
of Croatia issued a decision, pursuant to the Act on the Protection and Preservation of
Cultural Goods (OG 69/99, 151/03, and 157/03) and the Ordinance on the Register of
Cultural Goods of the Republic of Croatia (OG 37/01), establishing that IstroRomanian dialect variants, the variant of Hum na Sutli and the variant of Bednja have
the attribute of a cultural good, and were as such registered in the list of protected
cultural goods of the Register of Cultural Goods of the Republic of Croatia.

(58)

In the previous reporting period a system of protection measures was established,
which was implemented through programmes financed through the Ministry of
Culture. With a view to preserving the Istro-Romanian dialect variant, the variant of
Hum na Sutli and the variant of Bednja, various financial projects and activities of
field research, documentation, translation of dictionaries and preservation of said
variants in the value of HRK 170,000 were financed.

3.6

Situation concerning the Slovenian language
(59)

3.7

(60)

Regarding the observations of the Committee of Experts from paragraph 85, and the
invitation to Croatian authorities from paragraph 86 of the fourth evaluation report
[ECRML (2010)9] and [MIN-LANG (2012)1] to consider applying Part II of the
Charter to the Roma languages, we note that in April 2012 Croatia received a nonpaper by the Special Representative of the Secretary General of the Council of Europe
for Roma Issues on the position of the Romani language in Croatia within the Charter,
in which, inter alia, it is proposed that Croatia consider the possibility of withdrawing
its reservations to the Charter, in order to strengthen the protection of the Romani
language. In August 2013, the Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs of the
Republic of Croatia requested and received the consent of the Ministry of Public
Administration for withdrawing the reservation.
Harmonisation of the statutes of self-government units and promotion of the equal
official use of minority languages
Regarding the comments of the Committee of Experts from paragraph 23 of the fourth
evaluation report [ECRML (2010)9] and [MIN-LANG (2012)1], we state the
following:

- Look into whether there are still areas where a regional or minority language is not in equal
and official use but there is nevertheless a territorial presence and a sufficient number of
speakers of that regional or minority language for Part III of the Charter to apply, for
example by using the census 2011 data;
(61) Upon the publication of the official results of 2011 Census an analysis of the situation
regarding local self-government units in which Part III of the Charter applies based on
the proportion of national minority members in the overall population, i.e. based on

34

the proportion of at least 1/3 of national minority members in a unit. See paragraph
(65) and table 6 for details.
- Address those towns and municipalities to which the previous paragraph applies and
encourage them to introduce the equal and official use of regional or minority languages
through their statutes, in accordance with the Act on the Use of the Languages and Scripts of
National Minorities;
- These measures should be carried out by the competent central government body or bodies,
in close co-operation with the towns and municipalities and national minority representatives
in question;
(62)

During the reporting period, under the Action Plan for the Implementation of the
Constitutional Act on the Rights of National Minorities for the Period 2011-2013,
numerous targeted measures were implemented to regulate equal official use of
minority languages by local statutes in line with the Act, accordingly. See paragraph
(15), measures 1.1, 1.2 and 1.5 for details.

(63)

Previously, under the 2008 Action Plan for the Implementation of the Constitutional
Act on the Rights of National Minorities, the measure of education of municipal
prefects, mayors, county prefects and their respective deputies, and local civil servants
on the official and public use of the languages and scripts of national minorities on the
level of local units was implemented, with 4 regional meetings - in Topusko, Bizovac,
Zadar and Pula – held during May and June 2010.

(64)

We emphasise that, in line with the Instructions for Consistent Implementation of the
Act on the Use of the Languages and Scripts of National Minorities in the Republic of
Croatia, adopted in March 2012 (measure 1.1), municipalities and towns/cities where
national minority members constitute at least a third of the population of such unit,
and which are, in accordance with the law, obliged to lay down and regulate expressly
the right to equal official use of national minority languages and scripts on the entire
territory of the unit, must regulate in detail the exercise of said right through their
statutes, i.e. lay down expressly each right of which the exercise on the territory of the
unit is guaranteed by the Act.

- Continue efforts to harmonise/ supervise statutes;
- Continue efforts to ensure the implementation of statutes (if necessary with financial
assistance).
(65)

The Action Plan for the Implementation of the Constitutional Act on the Rights of
National Minorities for the Period 2011-2013 envisages the measure of implementing
targeted supervision over the statues of local self-government units which were, under
the Constitutional Act on the Rights of National Minorities and the Act on the Use of
the Languages and Scripts of National Minorities in the Republic of Croatia, obliged
to regulate the exercise of the right to equal official use of the language and script of a
national minority, and have failed to meet that obligation (measure 1.3). The execution
of this measure is planned for 2013 because it was subject to previous implementation
of measures 1.1 and 1.2 of the Action Plan. See paragraph (15) for details.

(66)

It should be noted that the planning of appropriate execution of the targeted
supervision measure in 2013 was partly also subject to the publication of the official

35

results of the 2011 Census, which were only published in mid-December 2012.
Moreover, it should be noted that relevant regulations do not stipulate deadlines within
which a local self-government unit in which the right to equal official use of the
language and script of a national minority exists on the basis on the proportion of
national minority members in the population of the unit (at least 1/3) is obliged to
stipulate and regulate the exercise of said right on its territory in its statute, i.e.
deadlines for the unit to harmonise its statute with the relevant regulations. In this
regard, the Ministry of Public Administration issued an opinion that the statutory
regulation of the exercise of said right, i.e. the harmonisation of local self-government
statutes should be undertaken within the “appropriate” deadline from the day of
official publication of 2011 Census results, on which the self-government units will be
provided with more detailed instructions. Provided that the provision of Article 28 of
the Act on the Use of the Languages and Scripts of National Minorities in the
Republic of Croatia is applied properly, and it stipulates that municipalities,
towns/cities and counties shall harmonise their statutes with the provisions of the Act
within six months from the day of its entry into force, and shall deliver them without
delay to the central state administration body competent for supervision over the
application of the Act, the “appropriate” deadline should not exceed six months from
the date of official publication of 2011 Census results.

PART III

4
4.1

Territorial scope of the application of the undertakings entered into by the
Republic of Croatia under Part III of the Charter

(67)

With regard to the recommendations of the Committee of Ministers from the second
evaluation report [ECRML (2005)3] and the question of the Committee of Experts
from paragraph 56 of the third evaluation report [ECRML (2008)1; MIN-LANG
(2008)27], which referred to Croatia’s declaration accompanying the instrument of
ratification concerning the territorial scope of the application of obligations under Part
III of the Charter, we take the liberty of stating that a decision has been adopted with
regard to the withdrawal of the Croatian reservation in relation to Article 7, paragraph
5 of the European Charter for Regional and Minority Languages, the initiation of a
formal procedure in line with existing legislation is underway, and upon its
completion the Secretariat General of the Council of Europe will be notified about the
withdrawal of the reservation.

(68)

Related to statements from the 4th Periodical Report on the Application of the Charter,
the Republic of Croatia states that during the fifth reporting period there was again no
need perceived or considered to amend domestic regulations establishing the manner
of protection of the right to use minority languages and scripts.

36

Table 5 - List of territories in Croatia subject to Part III of the Charter – state until
publication of official 2011 Census results in December 2012
TERRITORIAL UNITS
(MUNICIPALITIES AND
TOWNS/CITIES)

MINORITY
LANGUAGE

 Municipality of Končanica

Czech

BASIS FOR THE
PROTECTION OF
THE MINORITY
LANGUAGE
46.67%



Hungarian

Town of Daruvar (districts Ljudevit
Selo, Daruvar, Donji Daruvar, Gornji
Daruvar and Doljani)
Statute

Municipality of Bilje
35.05%

Ruthenian

Slovak
Serbian





 Municipality of Kneževi Vinogradi

40.90%

 Municipality of Ernestinovo
(community Laslovo)

Statute

 Municipality of Petlovac (community
Novi Bezdan)

Statute

 Municipality of Tompojevci
(community Čakovci)

Statute

 Municipality of Tordinci (community
Korođ)

Statute

 Municipality of Bogdanovci
(community Petrovci)

Statute

 Municipality of Tompojevci
(community Mikluševci)<0}

Statute

 Municipality of Punitovci

35.57%

 Town of Našice (community Jelisavec)
Town of Vrbovsko

Statute
36.23%

Town of Vukovar

Statute

 Municipality of Biskupija

77.29%

Municipality of Borovo

86.57%

 Municipality of Civljane

68.61%



Municipality of Dvor

60.87%



Municipality of Erdut

53.91%

 Municipality of Ervenik

94.94%

 Municipality of Gračac

38.82%

Municipality of Gvozd

53.03%

 Municipality of Jagodnjak

64.72%

 Municipality of Kistanje

57.14%

 Municipality of Kneževi Vinogradi

Statute



37

TERRITORIAL UNITS
(MUNICIPALITIES AND
TOWNS/CITIES)

MINORITY
LANGUAGE



BASIS FOR THE
PROTECTION OF
THE MINORITY
LANGUAGE

 Municipality of Krnjak

61.55%

 Municipality of Markušica

90.76%

 Municipality of Negoslavci

97.20%

Municipality of Plaški

45.99%

 Municipality of Šodolovci

84.55%



Municipality of Trpinja

89.30%



Municipality of Udbina

43.36%



Municipality of Vojnić

49.99%



Municipality of Vrhovine

53.03%

 Municipality of Donji Lapac

73.56%

 Municipality of Nijemci (communities
Banovci and Vinkovački Banovci)

Statute

 Municipality of Brtonigla–Verteneglio

37.37%

 Municipality of Grožnjan – Grisignana

51.21%

 Town of Buje

Statute

 Town of Cres

Statute

Italian



Town of Novigrad

Statute



Town of Poreč

Statute



Town of Pula

Statute

 City of Rijeka

Statute



Town of Rovinj

Statute



Town of Umag

Statute

 Town of Vodnjan

Statute



Municipality of Bale

Statute



Municipality of Fažana

Statute



Municipality of Funtana

Statute

 Municipality of Kaštelir-Labinci

Statute

 Municipality of Ližnjan (community
Šišan)
Statute

Municipality of Motovun
Statute


Municipality of Oprtalj

Statute

 Municipality of Tar-Vabriga
Statute
Municipality of Višnjan (communities
Višnjan, Markovac, Deklevi, Benčani,
Štuti, Bucalovići, Legovići, Strpačići,
Barat and Farini)
Statute
38

TERRITORIAL UNITS
(MUNICIPALITIES AND
TOWNS/CITIES)

MINORITY
LANGUAGE

(69)

Municipality of Vrsar

BASIS FOR THE
PROTECTION OF
THE MINORITY
LANGUAGE
Statute

The number of local self-government units to which Part III of the Charter applies on
the basis of the proportion of national minority members in the population of a unit
remained after the official publication of 2011 Census results the same as in the
previous period. According to 2011 Census results, members of a national minority
constitute at least a third of the local population in a total of 27 local self-government
units, in particular: Serbian national minority members in 23 units, and members of
the Czech, Hungarian, Slovak and Italian national minorities in one unit each. In the
previous period, according to 2011 Census results, members of the Serbian national
minority constituted at least a third of the population in 21 local self-government units,
members of Hungarian and Italian national minorities in two units each, and members
of Czech and Slovak national minorities in one unit each.

Table 6 – Overview of territorial units in Croatia subject to Part III of the Charter
based on the proportion of national minority members in overall population of selfgovernment units - state after publication of official 2011 Census results in December
2012

TERRITORIAL UNITS
(MUNICIPALITIES AND
TOWNS/CITIES)

MINORITY
LANGUAGE

PROPORTION OF
NATIONAL
MINORITY
MEMBERS IN
UNIT’S
POPULATION

Czech

 Municipality of Končanica

47.03%

Hungarian

 Municipality of Kneževi Vinogradi

38.66%

Slovak

 Municipality of Punitovci
Town of Vrbovsko

36.94%
35.22%

Town of Vukovar

34.87%

Serbian





 Municipality of Biskupija

85.46%

Municipality of Borovo

89.73%

 Municipality of Civljane

78.66%

 Municipality of Donji Kukuruzari

34.82%



Municipality of Dvor

71.90%



Municipality of Erdut

54.56%

 Municipality of Ervenik

97.19%

 Municipality of Gračac

45.16%

Municipality of Gvozd

66.53%

 Municipality of Jagodnjak

65.89%



39

TERRITORIAL UNITS
(MUNICIPALITIES AND
TOWNS/CITIES)

MINORITY
LANGUAGE



Italian

PROPORTION OF
NATIONAL
MINORITY
MEMBERS IN
UNIT’S
POPULATION

 Municipality of Kistanje

62.22%

 Municipality of Krnjak

68.61%

 Municipality of Markušica

90.10%

 Municipality of Negoslavci

96.86%

Municipality of Plaški

45.55%

 Municipality of Šodolovci

82.58%



Municipality of Trpinja

89.75%



Municipality of Udbina

51.12%



Municipality of Vojnić

44.71%



Municipality of Vrhovine

80.23%

 Municipality of Donji Lapac

80.64%

 Municipality of Grožnjan – Grisignana

39.40%

4.2 Article 8 – Education
Paragraph 1:
subparagraph a) item iii
subparagraph b) item iv
subparagraph c) item iv
subparagraph d) item iv
subparagraph e) item ii
subparagraph f) item ii
subparagraph g)
subparagraph h)
(70)

Education in the languages and scripts of national minorities is an integral part of the
overall education system, and the basic educational policy documents refer inter alia
to this segment of the education system.

(71)

The right of national minority members to education in their language and script is,
first of all, guaranteed by the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia, the
Constitutional Act on the Rights of National Minorities (OG 155/02, 47/10, 80/10 and
93/11), the Act on Education in the Languages and Scripts of National Minorities
(OG 51/00 and 56/00), and other primary and secondary legislation, such as the
Primary and Secondary Education Act (OG 87/08, 86/09, 92/10, 105/10, 90/11, 16/12,
86/12), Act on Primary and Secondary School Textbooks (OG 36/06, 141/06, 152/08,
86/09) and the Ordinance on State Matura Exam (OG 97/08).

(72)

It needs to be emphasized that education in the languages and scripts of national
minorities is carried out under special programmes and models, approved by the
40

Ministry of Science, Education and Sport. There are three models of the organisation
and implementation of education in the national minority languages and scripts in the
Croatian education system, as follows:
(73)

MODEL A – all the teaching is carried out in a national minority language and script,
with obligatory learning of the Croatian language in the amount of hours equal to that
of the minority language classes. This teaching model is implemented in special
schools where the entire teaching is carried out in the language of the members of a
particular national minority, or in special sections within schools providing education
in the Croatian language.

(74)

MODEL B – bilingual teaching is provided in such a way that the natural science
subjects are taught in the Croatian language, and the humanistic sciences subjects in
the language of the members of a national minority. This model is implemented in
special sections within schools providing education in the Croatian language.

(75)

MODEL C – minority language and culture are taught (cultivated) in such a way that
the minority language and the culture of a particular national minority are taught in
addition to regular classes in the Croatian language, in the amount of two to five hours
a week, whereby students learn the language and literature of the national minority,
geography, history, music and art.

(76)

In addition, special forms of education are organised, such as summer and winter
schools, correspondence and consultation classes, distance learning classes etc. The
Ministry of Science, Education and Sport co-finances the organisation and
implementation of all the models and forms of teaching in the languages and scripts of
national minorities.

(77)

Education in the languages and scripts of national minorities is implemented, under
different models, for the Czech, Hungarian, Serbian, Italian, Albanian, Austrian and
German, Macedonian, Slovak, Slovene, Ukrainian, Ruthenian, Russian and Jewish
national minorities. Although education in the languages and scripts of national
minorities is implemented from preschool age to university and higher education level,
for those national minorities who do not initiate education in their language and script,
or the institutional form of education in the language and script of a national minority
is not organised for objective reasons, the language and script of the national minority
are learned and cultivated in the form of summer and winter schools, correspondence
and consultation classes etc.

(78)

The curriculum for regular classes under Models A, B and C is produced by the
Ministry of Science, Education and Sport, after it has consulted and obtained the
opinions of minority associations, pursuant to the Act on Education in the Languages
and Scripts of National Minorities. The curricula for summer and winter schools, and
correspondence and consultation classes are set by the associations which organise
those forms of education.

(79)

During 2011, the curricula for primary and secondary education in minority languages
and scripts under Model A (for Czech, Hungarian, Serbian and Italian national
minorities) were being reworked in accordance with the expert opinions and
suggestions of the Education and Teacher Training Agency.

41

(80)

In 2011, the National Framework Curriculum for Pre-School Education and
Obligatory General and Secondary Education in the Republic of Croatia (NFC),
which is the basis for the development of stated curricula, including curricula for
education in the languages and scripts of national minorities.

(81)

Model A is applied in primary and secondary schools for: Italian national minority,
Serbian national minority, Hungarian national minority, and Czech national minority
in primary school.

(82)

Model B is applied for the Hungarian national minority in primary school, and for the
Czech and Serbian national minority in secondary school.

(83)

Model C is applied in primary school for, inter alia, the Czech national minority,
Hungarian national minority, Serbian national minority, Slovak national minority,
Ukrainian national minority, Ruthenian national minority; in secondary school for the
Hungarian and Serbian national minorities.

(84)

The adoption of the pedagogical standards for preschool, primary and secondary
education provided for the strengthening of education in the languages and scripts of
national minorities, since it became an integral part of the documents on standards for
each segment of the education system.

(85)

Although the above standards proscribe the number of students in a class section, this
does not apply to the minimum number of students required to form a class section
with education in the language and script of a national minority, since the Act on
Education in the Languages and Scripts of National Minorities does not establish the
minimum number of students in a class section or group. It is thus possible that there
is a group of three students in a school for whom a comprehensive programme in the
language and script of a national minority is conducted (Model A).

(86)

In case there are technical reasons which make it impossible to continue a minority
language programme in a school, as it once happened with two students, transport was
offered for them to another school which carries out the entire education in the
language and script of the national minority (Model A), or the students could continue
learning the minority language and culture under a different model (Model C).

Number of participants under models A, B and C of organisation and delivery of teaching in the
languages and scripts of national minorities and by national minorities

(87)

In the academic year 2011/2012 there was a total of 10 329 children/pupils/students (4
665 m/5 664 f) in 187 educational institutions, in 856 classes/groups, and 1 234
educators/teachers.

42

Table 7
2010/11
National
minorities

Albanians
Czechs
Hungarians
Macedonians
Germans &
Austrians
Russians
Ruthenians*
Slovaks
Slovenes
Serbs
Italians
Ukrainians*
Jews
TOTAL:
KG, PS, SS
(A, B, C)

2011/12

No. of
children/
pupils/
participants
m/f

No. of
instituti
ons
KG/PS/
SS

No. of
classe
s/grou
ps

No. of
educators,
teachers

125
53/72
950
408/542
1 231
546/685
56
24/32
53
20/33
28
11/17
70
33/37
483
227/256
45
18/27
3 742
1 885/1 857
2 861
1 051/1 810

6

13

6

23

78

73

27

148

110

5

12

5

1

6

5

1

3

1

4

12

3

11

38

7

1

4

1

59

322

561

26

159

432

-

-

-

-

53
37/16

1

8

2

9 697
4 313/5 384

164

803

1 206

No. of
children in
KG,
pupils in PS
and SS
m/f
142
59/83
983
441/542
1 154
543/611
61
25/36
55
26/29
79
36/43
51
28/23
491
244/247
105
31/74
4 059
2 130/1 929
3 052
1 052/2 000

No. of
institutio
ns
KG/PS/S
S

No. of
classes/
groups
KG, PS,
SS

8

16

8

27

80

80

31

140

113

6

13

5

1

6

4

4

5

4

2

7

2

12

53

9

2

6

3

63

353

563

27

163

433

47
20/27
50
30/20

3

6

3

1

8

7

10 329
4 665/5 664

187

856

1 234

No. of
educators,
teachers

* In 2010/2011, data for Ruthenians and Ukrainians are indicated jointly.

Preschool education

(88)

At the beginning of the academic year 2011/2012, a total of 2 107 children were in the
preschool education system in 58 kindergartens (1 104 m/1 003 f). pripadnika
nacionalnih manjina.

(89)

At the beginning of the academic year 2011/2012, a total of 1 752 children were
included in the system of preschool education in their mother tongue in 27
kindergartens (867 m/885 f), out of whom: 158 children (72 m/86 f) belonging to the
Czech national minority, 158 children (83 m/75 f) belonging to the Hungarian national
minority, 424 children (210 m/214 f) belonging to the Serbian national minority, and 1
012 children (502 m/510 f) belonging to the Italian national minority. In 2011, the
number of children included in preschool education increased in all national
minorities.

43

Table 8
National
minorities
Czechs
Hungarians
Serbs
Italians
TOTAL

No. of
children
m/f
148
67/81
148
73/75
403
195/208
947
502/445
1 646
837/809

2010/2011
No. of
No. of
KG
groups

No. of
educators

2

6

14

4

8

12

8

18

34

11

36

98

25

68

158

No. of children
m/f
158
72/86
158
83/75
424
210/214
1.012
502/510
1 752
867/885

2011/2012
No.
No. of
of
groups
KG
3
8
5

No. of
educators
14

9

12

9

18

34

11

49*

98

27

72

158

Note: The Table shows data for those national minorities whose children, in line with Article 15 of the State
Pedagogical Standard for Preschool Education, have preschool education in the language and script of the
respective national minority.
*Higher number of children due to increased interest in nursery school groups.

(90)

In line with Article 50 of the Preschool Education Act and the Ordinance on the
Manner of Managing State Budget Resources and Preschool Education Co-financing
Benchmarks (Art. 2, indent 4, and Art. 6), HRK 1,454,500.00 were allocated from the
2011 State Budget and spent on preschool children belonging to national minorities.

Primary education
(91)

At the beginning of the academic year 2011/2012, a total of 6 830 pupils (3 388 m/3
442 f) in 140 primary schools, 680 classes/educational groups with 776 teachers were
included in primary education in the languages and scripts of national minorities under
all models (A, B and C).

(92)

Model A included five (5) counties: 310 pupils (170 m/140 f) in Czech, 211 pupils
(105 m/106 f) in Hungarian, 2 207 pupils (1 176 m/1 010 f) in Serbian and 1 464
pupils (722 m/742 f) in Italian. Model A covered a total of 4 242 pupils (2 224 m/2018
f) in 35 primary schools, 313 classes and 668 teachers.

Table 9 – MODEL A
National
minorities
Czechs
Hungarians
Serbs
Italians
Jews
TOTAL

No. of pupils
m/f
291
153/138
208
104/104
1 992
1 014/978
1 341
662/679

2010/2011
No.
No. of
of
classes
PSs
3
18

No. of
teachers

No. of pupils
m/f

46

310
170/140
211
105/106
2 207
1 176/ 1 010
1 464
729/735

4

28

60

18

168

283

11

99

279

-

-

-

-

3 832
1 933/1 899

36

313

668

50
30/20
4 242
2 224/2 018

2011/2012
No.
No. of
of
classes
PSs
3
18

No. of
teachers
46

4

28

60

17

168

283

11

99

279

1

8

7

35

313

668

44

(93)

Model B included 29 pupils (12 m/17 f) in 3 counties and three (3) primary schools.

(94)

In the academic year 2011/2012, the organisation of teaching under Model B was
approved for two primary schools and for members of two national minorities:
in Serbian in PS Ernestinovo in Ernestinovo,
in Czech in the Czech Primary School “Josip Ružička” in Končanica.

-

Table 10 – MODEL B
National
minorities
Czechs

No. of
pupils
m/f
-

2010/2011
No. of PSs
No. of
classes

2011/2012
No. of
classes

No. of
teachers

No. of pupils
m/f

No. of
PSs

2
2F
11
4/7

1

1

1

1

4*

1

-

-

-

No. of
teachers

Hungarians

8
4/4

1

4

1

Serbs

-

-

-

-

16
8/8

1

5

6

TOTAL

8
4/4

1

4

1

29
12/17

3

10

8

Note*: 1 combined I-IV grade class

(95)

Model C included a total of 2 609 pupils in 18 counties and 102 primary schools (1
182 m/1 427 f), in particular: 142 pupils (59 m/83 f) in Albanian, 424 pupils (171
m/253 f) in Czech, 718 pupils (310 m/408 f) in Hungarian, 61 pupils (25 m/36 f) in
Macedonian, 55 pupils (26 m/29 f) in German, 51 pupils (28 m/23 f) in Ruthenian and
47 pupils (20 m/27 f) in Ukrainian, 58 pupils (28 m/30 f) in Russian, 491 pupils (224
m/247 f) in Slovak, 41 pupils (20 m/21 f) in Slovene, and 521 pupils (251 m/270 f) in
Serbian.

Table 11 – MODEL C
National
minorities
Albanians
Czechs
Hungarians
Macedonians
Germans &
Austrians
Russians
Ruthenians*
Slovaks
Slovenes

No. of
pupils
m/f
125
53/72
387
153/234
783
338/445
56
24/32
53
20/33
28
11/17
70
33/37
483
227/256
45
18/27

2010/2011
No. of
No. of
PSs
groups

No. of
teachers

6

13

6

15

70

12

17*

92

13

5

17

4

1

6

4

1

3

1

4

12

3

11

55

7

1

4

1

No. of
pupils
m/f
142
59/83
424
171/253
718
310/408
61
25/36
55
26/29
58
28/30
51
28/23
491
244/247
41
20/21

No. of
PSs

2011/2012
No. of
groups

No. of
teachers

8

16

8

15

50

15

20

110

14

6

12

4

1

6

6

4

5

4

2

7

2

12

53

7

1

4

1

45

Serbs

444
217/227

23

86

28

521
251/270

29

88

36

Ukrainians*

-

-

-

-

3

6

3

TOTAL

2 527
1 131/
1 396
6 367
3 068/
3 299

83

366

81

101

357

100

120

683

750

47
20/27
2 609
1 182/
1 427
6 830
3 388/
3 442

139

680

776

TOTAL
A, B, C

(96)
-

-

In the academic year 2011/2012, the organisation of teaching under Model C was
approved for 15 primary schools and seven (7) national minorities:
of Albanian language and culture in PS Vijenac in Osijek;
of Czech language and culture in PS Vladimir Nazor in Daruvar;
of Macedonian language and culture in PS Antun Bauer in Vukovar;
of Russian language and culture in three (3) primary schools: PS Konjščina in
Konjščina, PS Prelog in Prelog and PS Ivan Gundulić in Zagreb;
of Slovak language and culture in PS Mladost, Jakšić;
of Serbian language and culture in eight (8) primary schools: PS Zrinskis i Frankopans
(LS Vrhovine) in Otočac, PS Plaški in Plaški, PS Dragojle Jarnević in Karlovac, PS
Siniša Glavašević in Vukovar, PS Vladimir Nazor in Topusko, PS Stari Jankovci in
Stari Jankovci, PS Skakavac in Skakavac, and PS 22 June in Sisak;
of Ukrainian language and culture in PS Antun Matija Reljković (LS Šumeće and LS
Kaniža) in Bebrina.

Secondary education
(97)

At the beginning of the academic year 2011/2012, secondary education in the
languages and scripts of national minorities under all models (A, B and C) included 1
697 pupils (820 m/877 f) in 21 secondary schools, 152 classes (Models A and B) and
20 groups (Model C).From that number, 56 pupils (21 m/35 f) attended classes in
Hungarian (under Model A), 872 pupils (475 m/397 f) in Serbian (under Models A
and C), 552 pupils (261 m/339 f) in Italian (Models A and C), and 89 pupils (25 m/64
f) in Czech (Models B and C).

(98)

In the academic year 2011/2012, the organisation of Czech language and culture
classes under Model C was approved for the X. Grammar School “Ivan Supek” in
Zagreb and for the Industry and Trade School in Virovitica, organisation of Slovene
language and culture classes for the Varaždin Grammar School, organisation of Italian
language and culture classes in the Pakrac Secondary School, and organisation of
Russian language and culture classes in the Čakovec School of Economics.

46

Table 12 – MODEL A
National
minorities
Hungarians

Serbs

Italians
TOTAL

2010/2011
No. of
No. of
SSs
classes

No. of
pupils
m/f
57
20/37

No. of
teachers

No. of pupils
m/f

1

11

22

56
21/35

884
451/433

9

78

210

872
475/397

573
245/328
1 514
757/788

4

60

157

14

149

389

2011/2012
No. of
No. of
SSs
classes

552
261/291
1 480
757/723

No. of
teachers

1

10

27

7

78

210

4

60

157

12

148

394

Table 13 – MODEL B
National
minorities
Czechs
TOTAL

No. of
pupils
m/f
39
11/28
39

2010/2011
No. of SSs
No. of
classes

No. of
teachers

1

4

1.6

1

4

1.6

No. of
pupils
m/f
38
9/29
38

2011/2012
No. of SSs
No. of
classes

No. of
teachers

1

4

2

1

4

2

Table 14 – MODEL C
National
minorities
Czechs

No. of
pupils
m/f
21
6/15

2011/2011
No. of SSs
No. of
groups

No. of
teachers

2

2

1

No. of
pupils
m/f
51
16/35

2011 /2012
No. of SSs
No. of
groups

No. of
teachers

4

6

2

Slovenes

-

-

-

-

64
11/53

1

4

1

Russians

-

-

-

-

1

2

1

Serbs

19
8/11
-

1

1

1

1

4

1

-

-

-

1

4

1

Total

40
14/26

3

3

2

21
8/13
19
9/10
24
10/14
179
54/125

8

20

7

TOTAL:
A, B, C

153

1 593
782/842

18

396

21

172

403

Italians

(99)

1 697
820/877

It should be mentioned that the founders of two secondary schools, namely the
Orthodox Grammar School “Katarina Kantakuzina Branković” and the Zagreb
Madrasa “Dr. Ahmed Smajlović”, are religious communities.

State Matura Exam
(100)

The Ordinance on State Matura Exam (OG 97/08) stipulates in Art. 4, para 3 and 4 the
conditions of taking the State Matura Exam for students taught in the language and

47

script of a national minority. The exams are conducted by the National Centre for
External Evaluation of Education in cooperation with schools.
(101)

Within the obligatory part of the State Matura, pupils taught in the languages and
scripts of national minorities are obliged to take the test of Croatian and of the
minority language in which they are being taught, and for the third obligatory test they
can choose between Maths and a foreign language. The State Matura was conducted in
three (3) languages and scripts of national minorities (Serbian, Hungarian and Italian).
There was no interest in taking the State Matura in Czech. Funds amounting to HRK
523,086.00 were spent on State Matura preparation.

Higher education
(102)

At the University Juraj Dobrila in Pula, a total of 333 students were included in the
professional degree programme Preschool education (in Croatian and Italian) in the
academic year 2011/2012.

(103)

There were a total of 197 students in the integrated undergraduate and graduate degree
programme Teacher Training Programme (in Croatian and Italian).

(104)

At the Faculty of Philosophy of the University Josip Juraj Strossmayer in Osijek, a
total of 52 students were enrolled in the undergraduate degree programme Hungarian
language, whereas 12 students were enrolled in the graduate degree programme
Hungarian language and literature; ptions: teacher training option, communicology
option.

Textbooks for classes in the languages and scripts of national minorities
(105)

In line with Article 15 of the Act on Education in the Languages and Scripts of
National Minorities (OG 51/00 and 56/00), schools with education in the languages
and scripts of a national minority used in 2011, like in previous years, textbooks from
the countries of origin first and foremost for teaching the mother tongue (Czech,
Hungarian, Serban and Italian), but other subjects as well, with the approval of the
Ministry of Science, Education and Sport.

(106)

In line with Article 16 of the Act on Education in the Languages and Scripts of
National Minorities, funds for the co-financing of the development of textbooks in the
languages and scripts of national minorities were ensured, so that textbooks for
children attending classes in the language and script of a national minority would cost
their parents the same as the textbooks for children attending classes in Croatian.

(107)

The Ministry co-financed in 2011 the development/import of textbooks for education
in the languages and scripts of national minorities, in particular: in Czech (NPI
Jednota – HRK 88,410.03), in Serbian (Prosvjeta d.o.o. – HRK 1,947,267.41), in
Italian (EDIT – HRK 914.322,56).

(108)

In 2011, the co-financing of the development/import of textbooks for education in the
languages and scripts of national minorities amounted to the total of HRK
2,950,000.00.

48

Table 15
National minority

Minority
publisher
Jednota
Daruvar
Hungarian ECC,
Osijek
Prosvjeta, Zagreb

Czech national minority
Hungarian
national
minority
Serbian
national
minority
Italian national minority

EDIT, Rijeka
TOTAL:

Funds in HRK
2010
497,129.65

Funds in HRK
2011
88,410.03

Increase/
decrease
+ 408,719.62

361,096.54

*

- 361,095.54

1,712,907.00

1,947,267.41

+ 234,360.41

728,863.21
3,299,996.40

914,322.56
2,950,000.00

+ 185,459.35
- 249,996.40

*At the end of 2011, the Hungarian Educational and Cultural Centre recovered funds amounting to HRK
176,552.62 to the SB.

Table 16
2010./2011.
National minority
Czech national
minority
Hungarian
national minority
Serbian national
minority
Italian national
minority
Σ

textbooks
authored

textbooks
translated

textbooks
imported

Σ

1

-

8

9

-

4

-

4

12

-

-

12

-

6

-

6

13

10

8

31

textbooks
authored

2011./2012.
textbooks
textbooks
translated
imported
-

Σ

2

9

-

18

6

-

-

6

8

10
37

9
9

19
54

11
18

(109)

In 2011, a total of 54 requests were received for the approval of textbooks and
accompanying additional teaching resources for the needs of classes in the languages
and scripts of national minority, or by individual national minority and origin of
textbooks: 11 requests for textbooks in Czech (2 authored and 9 translated), 18
requests for textbooks in Hungarian (18 translated), 6 requests for textbooks in
Serbian (6 authored), and 19 requests for textbooks in Italian (10 translated and 9
imported).

(110)

Participation in the work of professional commissions for the assessment of textbooks
for education in the languages and scripts of national minorities is remunerated
through copyright contracts. The Ministry of Science, Education and Sport paid HRK
63,504.00 for that purpose in 2011.

(111)

The Education and Teacher Training Agency announced a public call for the
submission of requests for the approval of additional teaching resources in 2011. Four
readers for the primary school and four readers for the grammar school in Czech were
approved.

Teachers and advisors in classes in the languages and scripts of national minorities
(112)

In line with Article 10 of the Act on Education in the Languages and Scripts of
National Minorities, the classes in educational institutions are taught primarily by

49

teachers belonging to the respective national minority and other persons who have a
full command of the minority language.
(113)

In line with the requirements of schools, the Ministry of Science, Education and Sport
approves the recruitment of teachers and expert associates for teaching classes in the
languages and scripts of national minorities, and allocates salaries for their work.

(114)

For the purposes of teaching in the languages and scripts of national minorities, seven
(7) expert associates were employed, in particular: two (2) full-time expert associates
for the Italian national minority (one expert associate for the overall development of
classes, and the other for Italian language classes), two (2) advisors for the Serbian
national minority, one full time, and the other part time, one (1) part-time advisor for
the Czech national minority, one (1) part-time advisor for the Hungarian national
minority and one (1) part-time advisor for the Slovak national minority. No expert
advisors were appointed for the Ruthenian and Ukrainian national minorities. Some of
the candidates for expert advisors proposed by the national minorities did not meet the
criteria required for an expert advisor, or did not represent a rational choice.

(115)

For 2011, a total of HRK 19,570,420.29 was paid for the salaries of native language
teachers in education in the languages and scripts of national minorities and for native
language and culture teaching (Model C). The MSES gave its consent in 2011 for the
head of programme in the PS Siniša Glavašević Vukovar with classes in Serbian, and
all other prior consents necessary after the retirement of a teacher in accordance with
the law.

Professional development of teachers and advisors
(116)

Professional development of teachers teaching in the languages and scripts of national
minorities is conducted continuously, and professional development of all teachers
falls within the scope of the Education and Teacher Training Agency. The Education
and Teacher Training Agency is an institution which performs professional and
advisory tasks in the field of education.

(117)

In the field of preschool, primary and secondary education, among other tasks, the
Agency organises and delivers professional development courses for educational
employees, and provides professional assistance and instructions to educational
employees.

(118)

In 2011, 34 professional meetings for 1 110 teachers (161 m/949 f) were organised by
the Education and Teacher Training Agency:

- 10 professional meetings for 243 (32 m/211 f) teachers of the Czech national minority;
- 4 professional meetings for 132 (17 m/115 f) teachers of the Hungarian national
minority;
- 9 professional meetings for 410 (77 m/333 f) teachers of the Serbian national minority;
- 11 professional meetings for 325 (35 m/290 f) teachers of the Italian national minority.
(119)

Funds for the delivery of professional meetings were ensured in cooperation of the
Education and Teacher Training Agency, MSES and founders of schools, who

50

refunded the costs of teachers’ participation in the professional meetings to their
schools.
(120)

The Ministry co-financed the delivery of five (5) professional meetings for teachers
involved in education in the languages and scripts of national minorities: two (2)
professional meetings for the teachers of the Czech national minority, one (1)
professional meeting for the teachers of the Slovak national minority, and two (2)
professional meetings of teachers involved in education in the Serbian language and
Cyrillic script.

Pupils/participants in state competitions and festivals
(121)

Pupils belonging to national minorities who attend classes in their native language
participated in state competitions and festivals on an equal footing with pupils
attending classes in Croatian, and equal rules, rights and obligations applied to
everyone.

(122)

Pupils belonging to national minorities can present their work in their native language
at the LiDraNo state festival.

(123)

Apart from said programmes for the Roma national minority, in 2011, the Ministry of
Science, Education and Sport co-financed through a tender a project of the Union of
Hungarian Associations entitled “Playroom for children in Hungarian” with HRK
30,000.00, and a project of the association Alliance for Scientific, Cultural and
Humanitarian Activities entitled “Children together” with HRK 30,000.00.

(124)

In 2011, the already traditional project “Children together” gathered children from 39
schools (32 primary and 7 secondary) from the territory of the counties of VukovarSrijem and Osijek-Baranja, in which classes were taught both in Croatian and in the
languages and scripts of national minorities. The goal of the project was to promote a
healthy competitive spirit in a friendly environment, and to establish an atmosphere of
mutual trust and friendship among children and youth in a multinational milieu. The
project proved that it is possible to exercise the right to joint creative work regardless
of differences, nationality, religion and language, with a view to promoting education
in the languages and scripts of national minorities through integration and joint
activities of primary school children who are members of minorities and the majority
people in Podunavlje. The Ministry co-financed the project with HRK 50,000.00.

4.3 Article 9 – Judicial authorities
Paragraph 1:
subparagraph a) item ii, iv
subparagraph b) item ii, iii
subparagraph c) item ii, iii
subparagraph d)
(125)

In compliance with Article 9 of the Charter and Article 12 of the Act on the Use of the
Languages and Scripts of National Minorities, the Ministry of Justice committed the
judicial authorities in the towns/cities where the obligatory use of a regional or
minority language is laid down in the town/city statute, to put up bilingual name plates
on the buildings of the judicial authorities, to facilitate the unrestricted use of the

51

minority language, and to enable the use of the language of national minority members
in judicial proceedings without charge.
(126)

The Ministry of Justice regularly collects data on judicial authorities which conduct
proceedings in the languages of national minorities. With regard to the above, data for
1 April 2009, and for 2010 and 2011 are as follows:

(127) COUNTY AND MUNICIPAL COURTS
 The County Court in Pula had no cases conducted in a minority language.
 The municipal courts in Buje, Labin, Pazin, Pula and Poreč did not conduct a single
case in a minority language, nor did any party request of waived the right to have the
proceedings conducted in a minority language.
 The Municipal Court in Rovinj conducted a total of 18 proceedings in the Italian
minority language, out of which 3 civil, 10 probate and 5 land registration
proceedings, and in 130 proceedings parties waived the right (Italian), out of that 18
criminal, 53 civil, 16 non-contentious, 28 probate and 15 land registration
proceedings.
 At the County Court in Bjelovar there were no proceedings conducted in a minority
language.
 At the Municipal Court in Bjelovar 1 criminal proceeding was conducted in the Czech
minority language, and the Municipal Court in Daruvar had no proceedings in a
minority language, although parties in 101 proceedings were offered to have the
hearing conducted in a minority language, in particular in Albanian in 5 criminal
proceedings, in Romani in 2 criminal proceedings, in Czech in 9 criminal proceedings,
in Macedonian in 1 criminal proceeding, in Polish in 1 criminal proceeding, in
Hungarian in 1 criminal proceeding, in Italian in 4 and in Serbian in 78 criminal
proceedings, but the parties waived the right.
 At the County Court in Šibenik there were no proceedings in a minority language, nor
were there any at the municipal courts in Knin and Šibenik, and there were no parties
who requested or waived the right to have the proceedings conducted in a national
minority language.
 At the County Court in Osijek there were no proceedings in a minority language, nor
were there any at the municipal courts in Beli Manastir, Đakovo, Našice, Valpovo and
Osijek, and there were no parties who requested or waived the right to have the
proceedings conducted in a national minority language.
 At the County Court in Vukovar there were no proceedings in a minority language,
nor were there any at the municipal courts in Vinkovci, Županja and Vukovar, and
there were no parties who requested or waived the right to have the proceedings
conducted in a national minority language.
 At the Municipal Court in Ivanić Grad 1 civil proceeding was conducted in Czech.
(128) MISDEMEANOUR COURTS


At the Misdemeanour Court in Pula 30 proceedings were conducted in the Italian
minority language, while parties in 171 misdemeanour proceedings waived the right to
52

have the proceedings conducted in the national minority language (Italian) despite this
being offered to them.


At the Misdemeanour Court in Rovinj there were no proceedings conducted in a
minority language, although in 46 proceedings parties were offered to have the
proceedings conducted in the Italian minority language, but waived that right.

 At the Misdemeanour Court in Pazin 1 proceeding was conducted in the Italian
minority language, and in 2 proceedings parties were offered to have the proceedings
conducted in the Serbian minority language, but waived that right.


At the Misdemeanour Court in Umag there were 6 proceedings conducted in the
Italian minority language, and in 10 proceedings parties waived that right (Italian),
while 2 parties waived the right to use the minority language and script (Italian).



The misdemeanour courts in Šibenik and Knin had no misdemeanour cases conducted
in a minority language, nor did any party request or waive the right to have the
proceedings conducted in a minority language.



The misdemeanour courts in Đakovo, Našice, Valpovo and Beli Manastir had no
misdemeanour cases conducted in a minority language, nor did any party request or
waive the right to have the proceedings conducted in a minority language.



The Misdemeanour Court in Osijek conducted 1 proceeding in Hungarian, and in 30
proceedings parties were offered that right, in particular to have the proceedings
conducted in Hungarian in 3 cases, in Czech in 1 case, and in Serbian in 26 cases, but
all the parties waived that right.



At the Misdemeanour Court in Vukovar there were no misdemeanour proceedings
conducted in a minority language, in 1 case the party was offered to have the
proceeding conducted in Hungarian, and in 11 cases in Serbian, but the parties waived
that right.



At the Misdemeanour Court in Vinkovci there were no misdemeanour proceedings
conducted in a minority language, and in 159 cases parties waived the right to have the
proceedings conducted in a minority language, in particular in Hungarian in 23
proceedings, in Ruthenian in 2 proceedings, in Slovak in 1 proceeding and in Serbian
in 133 proceedings.

 The Misdemeanour Court in Križevci conducted 1 misdemeanour proceeding in the
Serbian minority language and 1 in the Ukrainian minority language.


The Misdemeanour Court in Vrbovec conducted 1 misdemeanour proceeding in the
Ukrainian minority language.

 The Misdemeanour Court in Ivanić Grad had no misdemeanour proceedings
conducted in a minority language, and in 1 case the party was offered but waived the right
to have the proceeding conducted in Serbian.

53

(129)

On the territory of the County of Istria, bilingual name plates are, apart from the
courts, also used by state attorney offices, with national minority members being
entitled to use their minority language. Public notaries on the territory of the County
of Istria draft notarial deeds in Italian if parties request that probate proceedings be
conducted in Italian, or when issuing a Life Certificate for the purpose of exercising
the right to pension etc. Public notaries use bilingual office name plates, stamps and
seals, in Croatian and Italian.

(130)

On the territory of other counties and within the scope of competences of county
courts, according to the data delivered by the judicial authorities to the Ministry of
Justice, there were no requests of national minority members to use the language of a
national minority in judicial proceedings. On the territory of other counties, judicial
authorities and public notaries do not use bilingual name plates, letter heads, stamps
and seals, since there were no such requests by national minority members.

(131)

In 2009, the Ministry of Justice, in cooperation with the Faculty of Graphic Arts in
Zagreb, conducted a tender for the selection of the best conceptual design of a
promotional poster which would encourage national minority members to actively use
their minority language before judicial authorities in the territories where that right is
guaranteed to them under the positive law. Students of the Faculty of Graphic Arts,
Communicology Department participated in the tender. The panel for the selection of
the best conceptual design comprised two representatives of the Ministry of Justice,
one representative of the Council for National Minorities and two from the Faculty of
Graphic Arts in Zagreb. The panel met on 2 June 2009 to select three best designs,
which were awarded financial prizes. Posters were produced and distributed to courts
in which parties are entitled to use their minority language.

(132)

In 2012, the Ministry of Justice printed and distributed a total of 4 900 leaflets on the
use of minority languages in courts in the local self-government units in which there is
such a possibility as stipulated by law. 100 copies were distributed to each of the 49
courts.

(133)

As regards the additional question of the Committee of Experts from paragraph 161
due to concerns of Serbian speakers that the Serbian language and Cyrillic script can
no longer be used in the court in another town, since the court in Vrbovsko has been
merged with that court, we clarify this below:
Pursuant to the Territories and Seats of Courts Act (Official Gazette 144/10, 84/11),
the Municipal Court in Ogulin was established for the territories of the municipalities
of Josipdol, Plaški, Saborsko and Tounj as well as the towns of Ogulin and Vrbovsko.
Therefore, under the project of court network rationalisation, the Municipal Court in
Vrbovsko was merged with the Muncipal Court in Ogulin, and only the land registry
department remained in Vrbovsko.
Under Article 1, paragraph b) of the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages, which the Republic of Croatia ratified through the Act Ratifying the
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages on 17 October 1997, the
concept of a „territory in which the regional or minority language is used“ means the
geographical areas in which, under Article 12 of the Croatian Constitution (Official
Gazette, consolidated text 85/10) and Articles 7 and 8 of the Constitutional Act on

54

Human Freedoms and the Rights of Ethnic and National Communities or Minorities
(OG 51/00), local self-government units introduced the official use of the minority
language by their statutes.
Since the jurisdiction of the Municipal Court in Ogulin was established for the
territories of the municipalities of Josipdol, Plaški, Saborsko and Tounj as well as the
towns of Ogulin and Vrbovsko, and Article 9 of the European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages obliges judicial authorities to introduce the official use of a
minority language only in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of
residents using the regional or minority languages justifies it, which is not the case for
the district of the Municipal Court in Ogulin, the Croatian language and Latin script
are in official use in said court.
Despite the above mentioned, Serbian speakers have no reason to be concerned about
the use of the Serbian language and Cyrillic script before the Municipal Court in
Ogulin or, for that matter, any other Croatian court, since this is ensured by the
supreme act of the Republic of Croatia – the Croatian Constitution (OG, consolidated
text 85/10), as well as other acts such as the Constitutional Act on the Rights of
National Minorities (OG 155/02, 47/10, 80/10, 91/11), the Act on the Use of the
Languages and Scripts of National Minorities (OG 16/00) and the Courts Act (OG
150/05, 16/07, 113/08, 153/09, 116/10, 122/10, 27/11 and 130/11).
Article 12 of the Croatian Constitution stipulates that the Croatian language and Latin
script are in official use in the Republic of Croatia, and in individual local units
another language and Cyrillic or some other script may be introduced in official use
together with the Croatian language and Latin script under conditions specified by
law, while Article 26 stipulates that all citizens of the Republic of Croatia and aliens
are equal before the courts, state and other bodies vested with public powers.
The Constitutional Act on the Rights of National Minorities (OG 155/02, 47/10, 80/10,
91/11) stipulates in Article 7, paragraph 1, item 1 that the Republic of Croatia shall
ensure the exercise of special rights and freedoms of national minority members,
which they enjoy individually or jointly with other members of the same national
minority, or, where so specified in this Constitutional Act or special legislation, jointly
with the members of other national minorities, in particular: 1. use of their language
and script, privately and publicly, and in official use.
The Act on the Use of the Languages and Scripts of National Minorities (OG 16/00)
stipulates in Article 5 that equal official use of a national minority language and script
on the territory of a municipality, town/city or county shall be established, inter alia, in
the proceedings before judicial authorities of the first instance, while Article 14
stipulates that when a party decides to use the national minority language and script
which is in equal official use, the authority conducting the proceeding is obliged, in
conformity with procedural regulations, to ensure the participation of the party in the
proceedings in the minority language and script, and formal copies of acts in cases in
which parties opted for the use of a national minority language and script shall
delivered to the party both in the Croatian language and Latin script and in the
language and script used by the party in the proceedings.
Article 19, paragraph 1 states that authorities conducting second instance proceedings
do so in the Croatian language and Latin script. By way of derogation from paragraph

55

1 of this Article, if the parties appearing in person before the second instance authority
used a national minority language and script in equal official use in the first instance
proceedings, the proceedings shall be conducted in the same manner as the first
instance proceedings.
Finally, the provision of Article 5 of the Courts Act (OG 150/05, 16/07, 113/08,
153/09, 116/10, 122/10, 27/11 and 130/11), which stipulates that courts try on the
basis of the Constitution, laws, international agreements and other valid sources of
law, ensures equal use of the Serbian language and Cyrillic script in all courts in the
Republic of Croatia.
In addition, it should be mentioned that a check in the Petitions and Complaints
Service of the Directorate for the Organisation of Judiciary proved that there were no
petitions or complaints received from parties related to the inequality of the Serbian
language and Cyrillic script before the Municipal Court in Ogulin.
4.4 Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
Paragraph 1:
subparagraph a) item iii, iv
subparagraph b)
subparagraph c)
Paragraph 2:
subparagraph a)
subparagraph b)
subparagraph c)
subparagraph d)
subparagraph g)
Paragraph 3:
subparagraph a)
subparagraph b)
subparagraph c)
Paragraph 5
4.4.1 Article 10, paragraph 1
Minority language use in state administration bodies
(134)

With regard to the question of the Committee of Experts from paragraphs 171 and 179
of the fourth evaluation report [ECRML (2010)9] and [MIN-LANG (2012)1], we refer
to paragraphs (15) and (70) - (76) for relevant information.

(135)

In the previous, Fourth Periodical Report on the Application of the Charter, an
overview was given of the status concerning requests made by parties in state
administration offices in the counties to exercise the right to equal official use of a
national minority language and script. In that regard, related to the exercise of the right
to use a minority language and script in the proceedings before first instance state
bodies and the organisational units of central state administration bodies proceeding in
the first instance, no significant changes in relation to the previous reporting period
were perceived during 2010, 2011 and 2012. State administration offices in the
counties have not reported a single case of the exercise of the right to use a minority

56

language and script in the proceedings they conducted in the three-year period. The
main reason for not exercising said right seems to have been a lack of interest shown
by national minority members.
(136)

The state administration office in the County of Istria reported that stamps, seals and
name plates in the seat of the Pula office, and in branch offices in which equal official
use of Italian minority language and script is prescribed by the statutes of local selfgovernment units, are bilingual, in Croatian and Italian. However, the County of Istria
reported for 2011 that institutions on the state level mostly did not abide by the
provisions on the exercise of the right to equal official use of Italian language and
script, which is regulated in the town and municipal statutes; that the names of selfgovernment units and individual settlements governed by the Act on the Territories of
Counties, Towns/Cities and Municipalities were not fully respected i.e. applied; and
that appropriate names of individual places and geographic localities on the territory
of the county were not fully respected i.e. applied.

4.4.2 Article 10, paragraph 1
Minority language use in local and regional self-government units
(137)

With regard to the question of the Committee of Experts from paragraph 186 of the
fourth evaluation report [ECRML (2010)9] and [MIN-LANG (2012)1], we refer to
paragraph (15) for relevant information.

(138)

In the previous, 4th Periodical Report on the Application of the Charter, a detailed
overview was given of the status concerning the exercise of the right to the use of
national minority languages and scripts in self-government units, and the status
concerning the harmonisation of statutes with the provisions of the Constitutional Act
on the Rights of National Minorities and the Act on the Use of the Languages and
Scripts of National Minorities in the Republic of Croatia. It was assessed that, in
relation to the issue in question, no significant changes occurred during 2010, 2011
and 2012, that is, that the status concerning the harmonisation of the statutes of local
self-government units with relevant regulations, and the status concerning the exercise
of national minority rights in practice has not changed significantly in the three-year
period in relation to the description in the 4th Periodical Report

(139)

Moreover, no significant changes were perceived regarding the uneven approach of
self-government units to statutory regulation of the exercise of the right to equal
official use of the languages and scripts of national minorities, and the fact that some
units, despite the existing obligation, have not harmonised their statutes with relevant
regulations or have not done it in an appropriate manner. In that regard we emphasise
the importance of the execution of the measure from the Action Plan for the
Implementation of the Constitutional Act on the Rights of National Minorities for the
Period 2011-2013 related to the adoption of the Instructions for Consistent
Implementation of the Act on the Use of the Languages and Scripts of National
Minorities in the Republic of Croatia, which, inter alia, clearly stipulates the manner
of regulating the right to equal official use of national minority languages and scripts
by general acts i.e. statutes of local and regional self-government.

57

(140)

Regarding the question of the Committee of Experts from paragraph 196 of the fourth
evaluation report [ECRML (2010)9] and [MIN-LANG (2012)1] about the erection of
bilingual traffic signs, in the Croatian language and Latin script, and in the language
and script of a national minority, we state that in the period 2010-2012 requests for the
erection of bilingual traffic signs were submitted by Italian minority members in the
County of Istria and Serbian minority members on the territory of the counties of
Osijek-Baranja and Vukovar-Srijem.

On the territory of the Istria County bilingual traffic signs in Croatian and Italian were
erected for place names on the A9 motorway section Umag-Kanfanar-Pula (along the
complete western stretch of the so-called Istrian Y, section from Umag to Kanfanar), and the
interchanges of A8 motorway Kanfanar-Pazin-Matulji (section from Kanfanar to Rogović),
which are situated on bilingual territory. For the purpose of ensuring continuity, and logical
and coherent traffic management, bilingual directional traffic signs were also put up on A9
Umag-Kanfanar-Pula and interchanges Baderna, Medaki and Kanfanar, which are not located
on bilingual territory. Bilingual traffic signs in Croatian and Italian were also put up on link
roads which connect motorways A9 and A8 with the state and county roads system on the
bilingual territory. Said traffic signs were put up during 2011, when the motorway A9 and
section of the A8 from Kanfanar to Rogović were opened for traffic. Bilingual traffic signs
have been erected continuously on county and local roads on the territory of the Istria County
since 2005 following the procedures and approvals of appropriate project documentation by
the competent entities managing those roads.
The Ministry of Maritime Affairs, Transport and Infrastructure received on 23 April 2012 a
request by the municipalities of Erdut, Negoslavci, Markušica, Trpinja, Borovo, Šodolovci
and Jagodnjak from the territory of the counties of Osijek Baranja and Vukovar-Srijem to
have traffic signalisation changed on their territory by putting up bilingual traffic signs, i.e. to
add the Serbian language and Cyrillic script to the Croatian language and Latin script on
traffic signs in equal font size, based on the application of Instructions for Consistent
Implementation of the Act on the Use of the Languages and Scripts of National Minorities in
the Republic of Croatia of 1 March 2012. Based on the statement of the Ministry of Public
Administration of 28 May 2012, the Ministry of Maritime Affairs, Transport and
Infrastructure sent a letter to the Joint Council of Municipalities – Vukovar (JCM) on 15 June
2012, informing it on the proper manner to proceed in order to have traffic signalisation
changed and supplemented in accordance with the Instructions. In line with the instructions
received, the JCM addressed Hrvatske ceste d.o.o. on 25 July 2012 with a request for
assistance in developing a comprehensive transportation plan which would elaborate on
traffic management on state and county roads by changing traffic signalisation so as to
inscribe traffic signs bilingually. Subsequently, Hrvatske ceste d.o.o. requested, in line with
the provisions of Article 10 of the Act on the Use of the Languages and Scripts of National
Minorities in the Republic of Croatia, the statutes of local government and self-government
units, on the basis of which it will be established if the right in question can be exercised on
the entire territory of a local government and self-government unit or in some parts of it.
4.4.3 Article 10, paragraph 3
Minority language use in proceedings conducted by legal persons vested with public powers
(141)

In regard to the exercise of the right to the use of a minority language and script in
proceedings before legal persons vested with public powers during 2010, 2011 and

58

2012, no significant changes were recorded in relation to the status described in the
4th Periodical Report.
(142)

Regarding the question of the Committee of Experts from paragraph 215 of the fourth
evaluation report [ECRML (2010)9] and [MIN-LANG (2012)1] about the manner of
ensuring representation of national minority members in the Council for Electronic
Media:

Article 68 of the Electronic Media Act (OG 153/09, 84/11, 94/13) stipulates that the Council
consists of seven members, one being the Chairman of the Council. The Chairman and other
members of the Council are appointed and dismissed by the Croatian Parliament on proposal
of the Croatian Government. In the procedure of nomination of Council members, the
Croatian Government announces a public call for nominations of candidates for Council
members. The Chairman and members of the Council are appointed for a five-year term and
are eligible for reappointment. Only citizens of the Republic of Croatia who possess
professional knowledge, competences and experience in radio or television activities, or in
publishing, cultural or similar activity, are eligible for membership of the Council. Council
members should be public employees who distinguished themselves in public life by
advocating respect for democratic principles and the rule of law, development and
enhancement of the highest values of the constitutional order of Croatia, civil society
development, defence of human rights and freedoms as well as the protection of the freedom
of expression, as Article 68 of said Act stipulates.
Consequently, we emphasise that the manner of realising and ensuring representation of
national minority members in the Council is not in our scope of competence. The Croatian
Government is the proposer of Council members, and the Ministry of Culture is the holder of
legislative drafting related to the media.
4.4.4 ID cards in the languages and scripts of national minorities
(143)

The provision of Article 9, paragraph 2 of the Constitutional Act on the Rights of
National Minorities (OG 155/02, 47/10, 80/10 and 93/11) stipulates that national
minority members are entitled to have their ID card form printed and filled out in the
language and script they use. Under the provision of Article 8, paragraphs 2 and 3 of
the Identity Card Act (OG 11/02, 122/02 and 31/06), when this is regulated by special
law or international contracts, the ID card form for a national minority member is
printed also in the language of the national minority, and is filled out in the Croatian
language and Latin script, as well as the language and script of national minority
members.

(144)

During 2010, 2011 and 2012, members of national minorities were issued the
following number of ID cards printed in the languages and scripts of national
minorities:

Table - ID cards issued in the languages and scripts of national minorities
National minority
- Italian national minority

2010

2011

2012

2 163

2 319

2 608

59

- Serbian national minority

71

62

81

- Hungarian national minority

32

31

23

- Czech national minority

9

18

28

- Ruthenian national minority

-

4

1

- Roma national minority

-

-

1

2 275

2 434

2 742

TOTAL

(145)

In 2010, 2011 and 2012, there were no requests submitted to police directorates and
stations of the Ministry of the Interior to have administrative proceedings conducted in
national minority languages and scripts, but citizens were issued, on request, 1 032
bilingual certificates of the facts of which the Ministry of the Interior keeps official
record in 2010, 804 certificates in 2011 and 726 in 2012.

4.5 Article 11 – Public media
Paragraph 1:
subparagraph a) item iii
subparagraph d)
subparagraph e) item ii
Paragraph 2
Paragraph 3
4.5.1 Croatian Radiotelevision (HRT)
(146)

The task of the HRT as a public service broadcaster is to reflect the public.

(147)

It should be noted that the HRT does not have the so-called “diversity policy” prescribed treatment models for minority issues within its programme scheme, nor is
there any so-called positive discrimination of minorities in hiring associates.
Nevertheless, reflecting the society as a whole, HRT programmes often, directly or
indirectly, address minority issues. Minority languages, however, can be found almost
exclusively in specialized programmes.

4.5.1.1 Croatian Television (HTV)
(148)

With regard to the question of the Committee of Experts from paragraph 189 [ECRML
(2008)1; MIN-LANG (2008)27], a detailed presentation of the language-specific
presence of regional or minority languages on the Croatian public television is given
below.

(149)

The National Minorities, Diaspora and Civil Society Desk within the Croatian
Television News and Information Desk produces a weekly multinational magazine
Prizma, which has run continuously for over 16 years, since March 1993. Prizma is
one of the very few programs which are broadcast throughout the year, without a
summer break, on HTV1 on Saturdays from 13:20h-14:05h. Its viewing share is
between 4 and 5%. The programme is financed exclusively from the HRT resources.

60

(150)

The multinational news magazine Prizma covers all aspects of the life of minorities:
from political participation, work of councils, representatives and institutions to
minority cultures, traditions, education in minority languages and life in Croatia in
general. It is an attractive programme which seeks to convey the message of
multiculturalism through individual life stories, so as to attract even the audience
which traditionally does not follow more serious public programmes. The programme
follows the minorities in a systematic way, reporting for them, but also about them –
and trying to evoke a positive emotion in the viewer, which is the first step in
understanding other people and their differences. The programme does not have a
folkloric character, but addresses minority rights issues, where the traditional aspect is
less prominent.

(151)

Individual minorities are represented in the programme in proportion to their share of
the population, but also depending on the degree of their organization. Although the
HTV programme scheme also includes other minority languages, the information
specified bellow concerns those regional or minority languages in Croatia which are
covered by Part III of the Charter.

Table 1 - Prizma 2010 – 2012
minorities

no. of features

CZECHS
HUNGARIANS
RUTHENIANS
SLOVAKS
SERBS
ITALIANS
UKRAINIANS
MULTINATIONAL EVENTS
(coordinations of minority councils,
joint cultural events, etc.)
INTERCULTURAL EVENTS
(NGO activities, human rights, etc.)

length

120
89
12
30
228
132
38

8:19:40
5:12:20
47:00
1:56:40
14:43:20
7:38:30
2:31:30

103

6:42:00

51

3:49:00

(152)

National minority members who are speakers of minority languages talk in their
language in the programme, with Croatian subtitles. Although no distinction is made
between the languages protected and those not protected by the Charter, for three
languages - Czech, Italian and Hungarian - there are journalists who produce entire
feature stories in minority languages.

(153)

Unfortunately, after the training of young journalists from who are national minority
members and minority language speakers in 2005, only two of them, having met the
conditions, remained involved in the Prizma programme, and in relation to the
previous report there is no journalist now who could create features in Hungarian or
Serbian.

61

(154)

The new organisational structure of the HRT envisages the establishment of
cooperation with colleagues producing programmes for minorities for the radio
stations within the HRT, to increase the possibility of creating entire features in
minority languages...

(155)

As announced in the previous report, the HTV started with the production of
documentary reportage programmes which address individual minority topics in
detail. Through the prism of the intimate stories of individuals, it portrays the position
of a minority community in the country – the degree of its integration, to which extent
it is threatened by assimilation, and the extent to which indigenous Croats see it as a
threat. Furthermore, the authenticity of minority identities in Croatia is portrayed,
with their different interests, lifestyles, traditions and cultural customs. The series
started with the very national minorities protected by the Charter. The programme is
produced in minority languages in its entirety, with Croatian subtitles. The
protagonists as well as expert associates are members of national minorities. The
programme is produced within the National Minorities, Diaspora and Civil Society
Desk of the HTV's News and Information Desk, and is financed solely from the HRT
resources.

Table 2 – Manjinski mozaik (Minority Mosaic) 2010 – 2012
Minority
CZECHS
HUNGARIANS
RUTHENIANS
SLOVAKS
SERBS
ITALIANS
UKRAINIANS

(156)

(157)

(158)

no. of episodes

length

10
9
3
5
15
10
3

2:30:00
2:15:00
45:00
1:15:00
3:45:00
2:30:00
45:00

The programme is aired once a week, on HTV1 on Fridays at 18:55, so the minority
content aired in a very attractive timeslot has been very well received by the audience,
by both minorities and the majority.
All the programmes dedicated to minorities have had reruns on HRT+, and since the
start of HTV4 Prizma has been repeated twice a week, and Manjinski mozaik several
times, regardless of the date of the first airing.
Journalists from the National Minorities, Diaspora and Civil Society Desk also handle
minority topics for daily news and information programmes, so that they are also
represented in the most popular and attractive HTV programmes such as Hrvatska
uživo (Croatia live), Dnevnik (Journal – evening news) and Vijesti iz kulture
(Cultural news).

62

Table 14 – HTV news and information programmes 2010-2012
Programme
Dnevnik
Hrvatska uživo
Vijesti iz kulture

no. of features

length

203
80
107

4:13:11
7:40:05
1:51:59

(159)

However, the sound inserts in these programmes are in Croatian, and not in the
languages of national minorities. The reason for this is twofold; on the one hand, the
fast pace of daily news programmes often leaves no time for providing subtitles, so
voice-over is used, and on the other hand, minority members, when appearing in the
"mainstream" programmes, often want to speak in Croatian, not in a minority
language.

(160)

The National Minorities, Diaspora and Civil Society Desk has continued to participate
in the EBU’s (European Broadcasting Union) documentary co-production series City
Folk, in which inhabitants of European metropolises are presented.

(161)

National minority members participate in the programmes of the Religious
Programming Desk, but the criterion for their participation is not their ethnic
affiliation, but affiliation with a religious community. The HTV follows the activities
of and cooperates with over 40 religious communities, regardless of whether they have
signed a contract with the HRT.

(162)

Programming for Children and Youth, one of HTV's main public programme
schemes, followed and covered contents intended for national minorities in 2010 and
2011. National minority members in Croatia were addressed within various projects,
features and entire episodes of TV programmes.
 A half-hour TV show Koga briga? (Who cares?), aired every Tuesday and Wednesday
during 2010, covered a series of topics addressing, inter alia, national minorities.
 Targeted topics included:
Holokaust, 19/05/2010
Obrazovanje Roma (Education of Roma), 10/02/2010
Udruga Čeha (Association of Czechs), 14/04/2010 – members of Češke besede Zagreb
speak about the culture, tradition and identity of Czechs in Croatia
 The programme Navrh jezika (On the tip of the tongue) has continuously aired
features which assert the linguistic culture of both Croatian and other languages. It
covered Romani, Hebrew and Hungarian.
 The episode of the series Mijenjam svijet (I am changing the world) aired on 18
November 2010, emphasised in conversations with young people in Vukovar the need
to re-establish the co-existence of Croats and Serbs.

63

 In the series Ta politika (That politics), there was a 10-minute discussion with the
pupils of the Jewish primary school Lauder Hugo Kohn on the concept of democracy
– 1/12/2010
 Crna kutija (Black box), a cycle of documentaries addressing human rights, included
three half-hour episodes covering specifically or directly the problems of national
minorities. Apart from the premieres, they were rerun several times due to their
significance and promotion of tolerance as the foundation of civilised society. They
are intended for viewers aged 12 to 49.
CRNA KUTIJA – Right to equality, HTV2, 03/10/2011
CRNA KUTIJA – National minority rights, HTV 2, 24/10/2011
CRNA KUTIJA – Human trafficking, HTV 2, 20/09/2011
 In cooperation with the exterior production company Hula hop d.o.o., the HTV
produced and aired the film I ja sam ciganka (I'm a gypsy, too), about an association
which helps Roma children study and write homework. The film was aired several
times because its content advocates the principles of promoting and educating the
youth as well as other targeted groups.









In 2010, HTV’s Documentary Programming Desk aired seven documentaries in which
national minorities are represented.
Ćiribirci – Istro-Romanians
Crni biseri (Black pearls) - Roma
Moj prijatelj romski pomagač (My friend the Roma helper)
Prevareni (Deceived) - Serbs
Lepu mamu imaš (You've got a beautiful mom) - Serbs
Ulični svirači (Street musicians) - Romanians
Rahim Ademi – heroj (Rahim Ademi – a hero) – Albanians






HTV’s Entertainment Desk recorded and aired the following concerts in 2010:
Sevdah in Lisinski
Ezerki & 7/8
Big Band & Uroš Perič – a concert in the Bajsić Studio
Jadranka Stojaković with Japanese musicians

(163)

(164)

National minority ensembles participated in the programme Lijepom našom (Across our
beautiful) during 2010, as follows:
 Samobor, 18/02/2010, Vesele Štajerke (Merry Styrian women) – Slovenes
 Đurđevac, 12/03/2010, FA „Ordongos“ – Hungarians
 Bjelovar, 28/03/2010, Češka obec – Czechs
 Čačinci, 26/04/2010, CAS Miljevci – Slovaks
 Subotica, 13/10/2010, HCC „Nepkör“ – Hungarians i CAS „Jedinstvo – Egyseg“ –
Hungarians and Serbs
 Vukovar, 17/12/2011, SCAS „Prosvjeta“ – Serbs
 Umag, 23/03/2011, FSZT „Bale“ – Bale – Italians
(165)

HTV’s Mosaic Programming Desk covers topics and events related to national
minorities in Croatia very often and in various programmes. The programme Dobro

64

jutro, Hrvatska (Good morning Croatia) announces and follows all social, cultural and
sports events on a daily basis, including those concerning national minority members,
performances of minority cultural and arts societies, and promotes the work and
festivals of minority associations.
(166)

With the launch of two new channels - HTV3 and HTV4 - an additional possibility
arose for broadcasting information related to minorities, and to air films in languages
which Croatia is committed to protect through European film cycles.

4.5.1.2
(167)

Croatian Radio (HR)

The Croatian Radio broadcasts a series of programmes on minorities and for the
minorities on short and medium wave, and some of them are broadcast in minority
languages:
 News and information programming – FM – Internet – short wave
o Systematic reporting in the news and information programmes on daily events
in the work of national minorities, monitoring of the work of the Council for
National Minorities, monitoring of the work of the Committee on Human and
National Minority Rights of the Croatian Parliament.
o Programme for national minorities "Multikultura” - 55 minutes, every Saturday
from 16:05-17:00h – a mosaic programme about the life and work of national
minorities (feature stories, discussions, interviews).
o Programme “Agora” – 55 minutes, on Tuesday from 09:05h-10:00h twice a
month – a mosaic programme (discussions, features on the work of national
minorities)
o Informative programmes of regional centres: Radio Sljeme, Radio Dubrovnik,
Radio Split, Radio Zadar, Radio Rijeka, Radio Pula, Radio Knin, Radio Osijek
– systematic reporting on the activities of national minorities in those areas


HR’s international channel “Glas Hrvatske” (The voice of Croatia) – satellite –
Internet – medium wave – short wave
o Programme for national minorities “Multikultura” - 55 minutes, rerun on
Sundays from 13:05h-14:00h
o Giornale Radio – daily programme for the Italian minority, 10 to 15 minutes,
live transmission on Radio Rijeka at 16:00h
o Programme for Hungarians – 10 - 15 minutes daily, live transmission on
Radio Osijek



Radio Osijek – FM – Internet
o Programme for Hungarians - daily from 18:30h to 19:00h
o Programme for Slovaks – on Sundays from 19:15h to 19:45h.



Radio Rijeka – FM – Internet
o News in Italian, daily at 10:00h, 12:00h and 14:00h – except Sunday, up to 5
minutes in length
o News and information programme for the Italian minority - Giornale Radio at
16:00h – daily except Sunday – up to15 minutes in length.



Radio Pula – FM
o News for the Italian minority, daily at 11:00h and 14:00h

65

o Extensive news and information programme for the Italian national minority
“Mezz’ora italiana” daily from 16:30h – 17:00h
o “Duga” (Rainbow) – a programme for national minorities – broadcast on
Wednesdays from 20:10h to 20:40
o Programme “Pola piu” – financed by the Italian Government – broadcast daily
at 17:05, 30 minutes


Radio Knin – FM
o Religious programme intended for the Orthodox – broadcast on Wednesdays
from 18:10h to 18:40h.



Radio Dubrovnik – FM
o Programme “Divan” – broadcast every last Tuesday of the month from 19:30
to 20:00

4.5.1.3
(168)

HRT web

Since May 2008, minorities have been designated on the HRT's official web portal as
a separate category, so that the website provides information on the minorities in the
country on a daily basis, more extensive than what is broadcast on TV and radio
channels. The web content consists of video fragments and accompanying texts about
current minority events, as well as more extensive information on minorities in our
country.

4.5.2 Fund for the Promotion of Pluralism and Diversity of Electronic Media
(169)

The Council for Electronic Media implements the programme of distribution of the
resources of the Fund for the Promotion of Pluralism and Diversity of Electronic
Media on the basis of the State Aid Act (OG 140/05), the Decision on Publication of
Rules on State Aid for Cinematographic and Other Audiovisual Industry (OG 46/08
and 144/11), the Electronic Media Act (OG 153/09 and 84/11) and the Ordinance on
the Fund for the Promotion of Pluralism and Diversity of Electronic Media (OG
51/12).

(170)

On 19 July 2010, the Council for Electronic Media adopted the decision based on the
implemented Public Tender no. 1/10 on the distribution of the resources of the Fund
for the Promotion of Pluralism and Diversity of Electronic Media.

TV broadcasters were allocated the following resources for programmes for national
minorities in Croatia:
Broadcaster
Gradska televizija d.o.o.
KA-Vision d.o.o.
Kanal RI d.o.o.

Programme
Most (Bridge)
Iver (Sliver)
Mozaik (Mosaic)
Etno smotra (Ethno festival)

Mijor d.o.o. Čakovečka
televizija
Glas Roma (The voice of Roma)
Nezavisna istarska televizija Non solo cronaca

Amount
67,569.62
68,894.51
121,890.29
68,894.51

66

Nezavisna televizija d.o.o.
OAR d.o.o.
Otvorena televizija d.o.o.

Notiziario
Čuvari baštine (Heritage protectors)
Vijesti (News)
Mostovi (Bridges)
Svakodnevica (Everyday life)
Duga (Rainbow)

Slavonsko brodska televizija
d.o.o.
Jednaki (Equals)
Televizija Jadrana d.o.o.
Jutarnja ćakula (Morning chat)
Televizija
Slavonije
i
Baranje
Dravataj
Otvoreni studio (Open studio)
Vijesti plus (News plus)
Televizija Šibenik d.o.o.
Prekretnica (Turning point)
TV Nova Pula
Comunita
Televizija
Primorja
i
Gor.Kotara
Iz drugog kuta (From another angle)
Dobar dan, Rijeko (Hello, Rijeka)
Naši užanci (Our customs)
Televizija Sljeme d.o.o
Zajednice (Communities)
Varaždinska televizija d.o.o. Svijet Roma (The Roma world)
Romska glazba (The Roma Music)
Susjedi (Neighbours)
VTV d.o.o.
Suživot (Coexistence)
Ukupno

116,590.72
55,645.57
99,367.09
125,864.98
54,320.67
3,974.68

147,063.29
107,316.46
98,042.19

88,767.93
79,493.67

117,915.61
91,417.72
1,513,029.51

Radio broadcasters were allocated the following resources for programmes for national
minorities in Croatia:
Broadcaster

Programme
Pod plavim nebom (Under the blue
Arena radio d.o.o.
sky)
Emisija zajednice Talijana gr.Rov.
(Programme of the Italian community
Arting d.o.o. Radio Rovinj
of Rovinj)
Bosco d.o.o. Primorski radio Primorski plus (Primorje plus)
Moja obitelj (My family)
U zajedništvu (Togetherness)
CIK dr. B.Milanović Radio
Istra
Microfono aperto
Difuzija d.o.o. Radio Dunav Spektar (Spectrum)
DTR d.o.o. Radio Zona
Buzet
Relacije (Relations)
Glas Podravine
Gradski putokazi (Town signposts)
Glas Slavonije Slavonski
radio
D - Funk
Gradski radio Osijek
Jonapot

Amount
2,351.75

23,778.77

15,155.70
27,959.66
26,130.52
7,055.24
16,200.92
22,210.94
20,904.42

67

Hilaris d.o.o. Radio Imotski
Hit radio d.o.o.

Hrvatski katolički radio
Hrvatski radio Čakovec

Hrvatski radio Karlovac d.o.
Hrvatski radio Valpovština
Hrvatski radio Vukovar
d.o.o.
Hrvat.radio rad.post.Nova
Gr.
IC Bjelovar BBR
IC Virovitica RP Virovitica
IC Zaprešić Radio Zaprešić
Ilok ton d.o.o. Radio Ilok
Infantinfo d.o.o.
Rad.Maestral
Jadranka d.d. Radio
M.Lošinj
KL Eurodom Radio KL
Krugoval 93,1 Garešnica
d.o.o.
Kult radio d.o.o.
Mea media d.o.o. Radio
Aktiv
Meda centar d.o.o.
Stud.Centar

Zajedno (Together)
Hit Reporter
Radio most (Radio bridge)
Dnevnik Hit radija (Hit Radio journal)
Lijepo je biti zajedno (It's nice to be
together)
Znakovi vremena (Tokens of time)
All informative programmes
Parlafon
Tužibaba (Tell-tale)
Manjinski forum (Minority forum)
Različitosti-most povezivanja
(Differences - bridge of cohesion)

8,100.46

11,497.43

18,552.63

11,497.73
23,517.47
22,472.25

Mozaik 8 (Mosaic 8)

16,200.92

Mostovi povjerenja (Bridges of trust)
Živjeti u manjini (Living in a minority)
Županijski dnevnik (County journal)
Kultura utorkom (Culture Tuesdays)
Mostovi zajedništva (Bridges of
togetherness)
Emisija slovačke manjine (Slovak
minority programme)

15,155.70

U manjini (In a minority)
Emisija zajednice Talijana
(Programme of the Italian community)
Makedonske minute (Macedonian
minutes)
Konac, kolaž nacionalnih manjina
(Thread, national minority collage)
Kam pindžaramen

10,974.82

Naš glas (Our voice)

10,452.21

Povratnik (Returnee)
Zapivaj klapo (Sing, klapa)
Moj život (My life)
Media-Mix-Radio 105 d.o.o. Život Roma (Life of Roma)
Međimurje donat
Maj benji d mnji-Za bolje sutra (Maj
Rad.Međimurje
benji d mnji – For a better tomorrow)
Tam prek (Over there)
M-Media d.o.o.
Grad.rad.Čakovec
Perspektiva (Perspective)
National Fair
Moslavački list Rad.
Moslavina
Mozaik (Mosaic)

20,381.80
2,874.36
14,633.09
25,607.91

24,562.69
17,768.75
16,984.84
16,200.92

8,361.77
14,894.40

17,507.45

9,406.99
18,813.97
68

Identitet-emisija za pripad.srp.n.m
(Identity – programme for Serbian
Mosor studio Radio Krka
min. m.)
Raznolikost baštine (Heritage
diversity)
Nacionalna jela (National dishes)
Mosor studio Radio DinNacionalne raznolikosti (National
Don
diversity)
Nacionalno blago (National treasure)
Novi radio d.o.o. Đakovo
Most (Bridge)
Obiteljski radio Radio
Aktualni sadržaj-prilog (Topical
Antena
content – feature)
Planex radio d.o.o. Radio
Svijet je lopta šarena (The world is a
Megat.
colourful ball)
Prahin Inc d.o.o. Radio SVN Zajedništvo (Togetherness)
Radio 052 d.o.o.
II treno da Pisino
Radio Banovina
Tu je moj dom (This is my home)
Emisija na romskom jeziku (A
Radio Banska kosa d.o.o.
programme in Romani)
Razgovor sa povodom (Conversation
with a cause)
Pravoslavlje vera sveta (Orthodoxy, a
holy religion)
Mađarska emisija (Hungarian
Radio Baranja
programme)
Male manjine (Small minorities)
Radio Bljesak d.o.o.
I mi smo tu (We are here, too)
Radio Brod
Etnos
S drugim notama (With other tones)
S onu stranu Save (On the other side
of the Sava)
Radio entar Studio Porč
Eufraziana (Euphrasian Basilica)
Emisija na češkom jeziku (Programme
Radio Daruvar
in Czech)
Zavičajna razglednica (Postcard from
the homeland)
Malo nas je al'smo vrijedni (We’re
Radio Delta d.o.o.
few, but worthy) – Serb. min.
Malo nas je al'smo vrijedni – Alban.
min.
Malo nas je al'smo vrijedni – Bosn.
Min.
Radio Donji Miholjac d.o.o. Events and festivals
Days of Kapelna Residents
Serbian National Minority Days
Romane droma-romski putevi
Radio Drava
(Romane droma – paths of the Roma)
Radio Đakovo d.o.o.
Mi smo Slovaci (We are Slovaks)

14,371.79

8,361.77
15,939.62
5,226.10
11,497.43
9,145.68
13,326.56
13,326.56

15,939.62

24,301.38
19,336.58

9,929.60
9,668.29

25,869.21

9,929.60

21,427.03
13,849.18

69

Radio Đurđevac
Radio Grubišno Polje d.o.o.
Radio Jaska d.o.o.
Radio Kaštela d.o.o.
Radio Koprivnica
Radio Labin d.o.o.

Radio Ludbreg
Radio Mrežnica
Radio Našice

Radio Ogulin
Radio Orahovica
Radio Pitomača

Radio postaja Drniš d.o.o.
Rad.post.Grada Kraljevice
Radio postaja Nedelišće
d.o.o.

Radio postaja Novska d.o.o.
Radio Ragusa
Radio Salona
Radio Senj d.o.o.

Radio Sisak d.o.o.
Radio Sjeverozapad

Mađari (Hungarians)
Tanec na Makedonski
International Roma Day
Mađarska manjina (Hungarian
minority)
Češka reč
Spektar (Spectrum)
Malo nas je al' nas ima
Romska riječ (Romani word) Romano
lafi
Settimanale albonese
Malen broj, važan broj (Small number,
important number)
Nacionalne manjine-život u zajednici
(National minorities – community life)
Manjinske vijesti (Minority news)
Manjinski dnevnik (Minority journal)
Kvapka slovenskeho života
Makedonski minuti
Manjine su naše bogatstvo (Minorities
are our wealth)
Nacionalne manjine u našem kraju
(National minorities in our area)
Tolerancija na naš način (Tolerance in
our way)
Mađarske minute (Hungarian minutes)
Drava nas spaja (The Drava connects
us)
Kod kuće (At home)
Svijet na dlanu (The world in the palm
of the hand)
Glas Roma
Romska riječ Romano lafi
Međimurski Rusi (The Međimurje
Russians)
Naši korijeni (Our roots)
Diwan
Malo pomalo (Little by little)
Šušur (Throng)
Senjsko ča (The Senj Chakavian)
Manjinski parlamentarac (Minority
parlamentarian)
Sisački mostovi (Sisak Bridges)
Svijet kao globalno sijelo Varaždin kao globalni grad (Sisak as a
global site – Varaždin as a global city)

27,698.35

18,552.67
22,210.94
10,713.51
5,487.41
9,929.60

24,823.99
18,030.06
6,532.63
24,301.38
19,597.89
8,361.77

27,737.04
18,291.36
6,532.63

21,949.64
15,939.62
12,803.95
5,226.10
2,613.05

22,210.94

7,316.55

70

Radio Slunj d.o.o.
Radio Star TV Radio
Eurostar
Radio Terezija d.o.o.
Radio Trsat d.o.o.
Rapsodija d.o.o. Radio
Borovo

Reful radio d.o.o.
Ross d.o.o. Radio 057
Slavonska posavina d.o.o.
S-Tel d.o.o. Radio Quirinus
Studio M d.o.o.
Športski radio Radio Cibona

Val Media d.o.o. Radio Val
Vanga d.o.o. Radio Giardini
Zagrebački radio d.o.o.
Total
(171)

Okrugli stol (Round table)

8,623.07

Senza confini
Većinom i manjini (Widely to
minority, too)
Viribus

19,597.89
10,452.21
13,326.56

Baština (Heritage)
Muzičke legende (Music legends)
Pozivnica (Invitation)
Zajedno nedjeljom u 2 (Together on
Sunday at 2)
Slovačke pjesme i razgovori (Slovak
songs and talks)
Moj dom (My home)
Pletenica (Braid)
Bakina škrinjica (Grandma’s chest)
Hrvati prek Mure (Croats across the
Mura)
Festival Kre Mure i Drave (Festival
Beside the Mura and Drava)
Multi kulti
Danas predstavljamo (Today we
present)
Velelučani u svijetu (People from Vela
Luka in the world)
Bogatstvo naroda (Wealth of peoples)
Događaji na zagrebački (Events in the
Zagreb way)

23,778.77
12,803.95
19,075.28
17,246.14
7,055.24

13,849.18

10,974.82
12,542.65
14,110.48
5,487.41
1,285,399.21

On 10 August 2011, the Council for Electronic Media adopted the decision on the
distribution of the resources of the Fund for the Promotion of Pluralism and Diversity
of Electronic Media based on the Public Tender no. 1/11.

Television broadcasters were allocated the following resources:

Broadcasters and categories
KANAL RI d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Kolaž (Collage)
KA-VISION d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Iver (Sliver)
MIJOR d.o.o.

Allocated
amount
111,545.10
111,545.10
116,733.24
116,733.24
155,644.32
71

Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Glas Roma (The voice of Roma)
NEZAVISNA TELEVIZIJA d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Dva frtalja (Two quarters)
OAR d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Mostovi (Bridges)
OTVORENA TELEVIZIJA ZAGREB d.d.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Svakodnevica (Everyday life)
SLAVONSKO-BRODSKA TELEVIZIJA d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Jednaki (Equals)
TELEVIZIJA DALMACIJA d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Zajedno (Together)
TELEVIZIJA JADRAN d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Ćakule na Jadranu (Chats on the Adriatic coast)
TELEVIZIJA PRIMORJA I GORSKOG KOTARA d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Iz drugog kuta (From another angle)
TELEVIZIJA SLAVONIJE I BARANJE d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Otvoreni studio nacionalne manjine (National
minorities open studio)
TELEVIZIJA ŠIBENIK d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Prekretnica (Turning point)
TV ISTRA D.O.O.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Non solo cronaca
TV NOVA d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Comunita
VTV - VARAŽDINSKA TELEVIZIJA d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Svijet Roma (The Roma world)
VTV d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Suživot (Coexistence)
Z1 TELEVIZIJA d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Vesna Kljajić uživo (Vesna Kljajić live)

155,644.32
124,515.46
124,515.46
140,079.89
140,079.89
64,851.80
64,851.80
119,327.31
119,327.31
72,489.29
72,489.29
51,881.44
51,881.44
72.634.02
72,634.02
103,762.88
103,762.88
129,703.60
129,703.60
171,208.75
171,208.75
77,822.16
77,822.16
178,990.97
178,990.97
114,139.17
114,139.17
41,505.15
41,505.15

72

1,791,062.00

Total
Radio broadcasters were allocated the following resources:

Broadcasters and categories
ARENA RADIO d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Identitet (Identity)
ARTING - RADIO ROVINJ d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Quatro cicacole in familia
CENTAR SEDAM d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Amici-emisija za pripadnike talijanske manjine (Amici –
programme for Italian minority members)
CIK Dr. BOŽO MILANOVIĆ d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Microfono aperto
DIFUZIJA d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Spektar (Spectrum)
DOMAĆI RADIO D.O.O.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Domaći prišlići (Indigenous incomers)
DTR d.o.o. za TV i radio difuziju
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Domaće u tri (Domestic at three)
GLAS PODRAVINE d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Civilian
GLAS SLAVONIJE d.d.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
D-Funk
HILARIS d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Zajedno (Together)
HIT RADIO d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Naši ljudi (Our people)
HRVATSKI KATOLIČKI RADIO
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Snaga dijaloga (The power of dialogue)

Allocated
amount
18,181.20
18,181.20
31,312.06
31,312.06
19,696.30
19,696.30
30,807.03
30,807.03
25,251.66
25,251.66
10,100.66
10,100.66
14,140.93
14,140.93
19,191.26
19,191.26
33,837.23
33,837.23
14,140.93
14,140.93
20,201.33
20,201.33
25,251.66
25,251.66

73

HRVATSKI RADIO - RADIO GOSPIĆ d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Povratak i obnova (Return and Reconstruction)
HRVATSKI RADIO KARLOVAC d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Manjinski forum (Minority forum)
HRVATSKI RADIO VUKOVAR d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Mozaik 8 (Mosaic 8)
ILOK TON d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Wysielanie v slovenskej
INFANTINFO d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
U manjini (In a minority)
INFORMATIVNI CENTAR BJELOVAR
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Živjeti u manjini (Living in a minority)
JADRANKA d.d.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Emisija zajednice Talijana (Programme of the Italian
community)
KRUGOVAL 93,1 MHz GAREŠNICA d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Konac (Thread)
KULT RADIO d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Kam pindžaramen
MEDIA-MIX-RADIO 105 d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Život Roma (Life of Roma)
MOSLAVAČKI LIST d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Mozaik (Mosaic)
MOSOR STUDIO d.o.o.; RADIO KRKA
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Identitet - Emisija za pripadnike srpske nacionalne
manjine (Identity – a programme for Serbian national
minority members)
NETGATE d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Perspektiva (Perspective)
NOVI RADIO d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Most (Bridge)

20,201.33
20,201.33
17,676.16
17,676.16
22,726.49
22,726.49
31,550.00
31,550.00
19,191.26
19,191.26
13,130.86
13,130.86
28,281.86
28,281.86
21,211.39
21,211.39
23,736.56
23,736.56
13,635.90
13,635.90
19,696.30
19,696.30
15,151.00

15,151.00
20,201.33
20,201.33
14,645.96
14,645.96

74

NOVOSTI d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Multikultura (Multiculture)
PLANEX RADIO d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Etno FM
PRIMORSKI RADIO d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Rijeka zajedništva (River of togetherness)
PRO RADIO d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Zajedništvo (Togetherness)
RADIO 052 d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
II treno da Pisino
RADIO BANSKA KOSA d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Istočni tokovi (Eastern flows)
RADIO BARANJA d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Baranjske manjine (Minorities in Baranja)
RADIO BLJESAK d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
I mi smo tu (We are here, too)
RADIO CENTAR - STUDIO POREČ d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
La parenzana
RADIO DARUVAR d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Češka emisija-Česke vysilani (Czech programme Česke vysilani)
RADIO DELTA d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Vijeće srpske nacionalne manjine (Serbian National
Minority Council)
RADIO DONJI MIHOLJAC d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Days of Kapelna Residents and Serbian National
Minority Days
RADIO ĐAKOVO d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Mi smo Slovaci (We are Slovaks)
RADIO ĐURĐEVAC d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Nacionalne manjine - Mađari (National minorities –

21,211.39
21,211.39
17,676.16
17,676.16
8,585.56
8,585.56
16,666.10
16,666.10
18,181.20
18,181.20
19,191.26
19,191.26
24,241.59
24,241.59
22,221.46
22,221.46
32,322.13
32,322.13
43,432.86
43,432.86
16,666.10
16,666.10
16,401.39
16,401.39
31,817.09
31,817.09
16,666.10
16,666.10

75

Hungarians)
RADIO GRUBIŠNO POLJE d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Češka reč
RADIO KL EURODOM d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Makedonske minute (Macedonian minutes)
RADIO LABIN d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Settimanalle albonese
RADIO LUDBREG d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Nacionalne manjine-život u zajednici (National
minorities – community life)
RADIO NAŠICE d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Kvapka slovnskeho života
RADIO OGULIN d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Manjine su naše bogatstvo (Minorities are our wealth)
RADIO PITOMAČA d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Etničke skupine i mi - kulturom do zajedništva (Ethnic
groups and us – towards togetherness through culture)
RADIO POSTAJA NEDELIŠĆE d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Glas Roma (The voice of Roma)
RADIO POSTAJA NOVSKA d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Naši korijeni (Our roots)
RADIO SISAK d.d.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Manjinski parlamentarac (Minority parlamentarian)
RADIO STAR TV d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Senza confini
RADIO TEREZIJA d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Gradski eter (Town on air)
RADIO TRSAT d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Etnobox
RADIO VARAŽDIN d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Manje je više (Less is more)

30,301.99
30,301.99
28,281.86
28,281.86
30,301.99
30,301.99
21,211.39
21,211.39
34,342.26
34,342.26
24,746.63
24,746.63
20,201.33
20,201.33
21,211.39
21,211.39
15,656.03
15,656.03
16,161.06
16,161.06
32,827.16
32,827.16
4,545.30
4,545.30
14,645.96
14,645.96
25,251.66
25,251.66

76

RADIO VIROVITICA d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Nacionalne manjine (National minorities)
RAPSODIJA d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Baština (Heritage)
REFUL RADIO d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Zajedno (Together)
ROSS d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Makedonska ura (Macedonian hour)
SLATINSKI INFORMATIVNI CENTAR d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Slovaci (Slovaks)
SVEUČILIŠTE U DUBROVNIKU
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Bogatstvo različitosti (Wealth of diversity)
VAL MEDIA d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Susjedi (Neighbours)
VFM d.o.o.
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Spektar (Spectrum)
ŽUPANIJSKA LIGA PROTIV RAKA
Programmes for national minorities in Croatia
Zraka sunca (A ray of sun)
Total
(172)

17,676.16
17,676.16
22,726.49
22,726.49
20,201.33
20,201.33
20,706.36
20,706.36
34,847.29
34,847.29
15,656.03
15,656.03
10,605.70
10,605.70
20,706.36
20,706.36
11,110.73
11,110.73
1,342,351.5

On 9 August 2012, the Council for Electronic Media adopted the decision based on the
implemented Public Tender no. 1/12 on the distribution of the resources of the Fund
for the Promotion of Pluralism and Diversity of Electronic Media.

Television broadcasters were allocated the following resources:

Broadcasters and categories
DUBROVACKA TELEVIZIJA d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
VIŠE O MANJEM (More on less)
KANAL RI d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
KOLAŽ (Collage)
NEZAVISNA TELEVIZIJA d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia

Allocated amount
61,484.28
61,484.28
36,433.00
36,433.00
70,065.01

77

DVA FRTALJA- NACIONALNE MANJINE U RH
(Two quarters - national minorities in Croatia)
OAR d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
MOSTOVI (Bridges)
TELEVIZIJA DALMACIJA d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
ZAJEDNO (Together)
TELEVIZIJA JADRAN d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
ĆAKULA NA JADRANU- A MI!? (Chat on the
Adriatic coast – what about us?!)
TELEVIZIJA PRIMORJA I GORSKOG KOTARA d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
PRVI MEĐU JEDNAKIMA (The first among equals)
TV ISTRA D.O.O.
National minorities in Croatia
NON SOLO CRONACA
TV NOVA d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
COMUNITA
VARAŽDINSKA TELEVIZIJA d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
SVIJET ROMA (The Roma world)
VTV d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
SUŽIVOT (Coexistence)
Z1 TELEVIZIJA d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
VESNA KLJAJIĆ UŽIVO (MO) (Vesna Kljajić live
(MO))
Total

70,065.01
69,663.21
69,663.21
67,370.21
67,370.21
60,633.18
60,633.18
56,590.97
56,590.97
29,976.96
29,976,96
95,665,69
95,665,69
87,581.27
87,581.27
86,233.86
86,233.86
35,032.51
35,032.51
756,730.15

Radio broadcasters were allocated the following resources:

Broadcasters and categories

Allocated amount

ARENA RADIO d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
VIJESTI NA TALIJANSKOM JEZIKU (News in
Italian)
CIK DR. BOŽO MILANOVIĆ d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
MICROFONO APERTO
GLAS PODRAVINE d.o.o.

13,492.92
13,492.92
23,949.93
23,949.93
17,540.80

78

National minorities in Croatia
CIVILIAN
GLAS SLAVONIJE D.D
National minorities in Croatia
D-FUNK
GRADSKI RADIO d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
UJEDINJENI U RAZLIČITOSTI (United in diversity)
HILARIS d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
ZAJEDNO (Together)
HIT RADIO d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
NAŠI LJUDI (Our people)
HRVATSKI RADIO ŽUPANJA d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
INFOKOLAŽ - NAC. MANJINE (Info-collage –
national minorities)
INFANTINFO d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
U MANJINI (In a minority)
INFORMATIVNI CENTAR BJELOVAR d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
ŽIVJETI U MANJINI (Living in a minority)
KULT RADIO d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
KAM PINDŽARAMEN
MIROSLAV KRALJEVIĆ d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
OKO STOLA (Around the table)
NETGATE d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
PERSPEKTIVA (Perspective)
NOVOSTI d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
MULTIKULTURA (Multiculture)
PLANEX RADIO d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
ETNO FM (NPL)
RADIO 052 d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
IL TRENO DA PISINO
RADIO BANSKA KOSA d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
ISTOČNI TOKOVI (Eastern flows)

17,540.80
21,926.00
21,926.00
7,212.96
7,212.96
19,227.41
19,227.41
18,552.77
18,552.77
16,107.12
16,107.12
11,263.00
11,263.00
21,926.00
21,926.00
17,540.80
17,540.80
19,902.06
19,902.06
8,095.75
8,095.75
17,540.80
17,540.80
17,878.12
17,878.12
3,960.00
3,960.00
15,516.86
15,516.86

79

RADIO BARANJA d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
BARANJSKE MANJINE (Minorities in Baranja)
RADIO CENTAR - STUDIO POREČ d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
LA PARENZANA
RADIO DARUVAR d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
ČESKE VYSILANI
RADIO DRAVA d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
ŽIVIMO ZAJEDNO (Let’s live together)
RADIO ĐAKOVO d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
ZVEČER JE NAŠA PIESEN
RADIO GRUBIŠNO POLJE d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
ČEŠKA REČ
RADIO KL-EURODOM d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
MAKEDONSKE MINUTE (Macedonian minutes)
RADIO KOPRIVNICA d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
TU OKO NAS (Here around us)
RADIO LABIN d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
SETTIMANALE ALBONESSE
RADIO NAŠICE d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
KVAPKA SLOVENSKEHO ŽIVOTA
RADIO POSTAJA DRNIŠ d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
KOD KUĆE (At home)
RADIO STAR TV d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
SENZA CONFINI (NPL)
RADIO TEREZIJA d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
G.E. NACIONALNE MANJINE (G.E. National
minorities)
ROSS d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
MAKEDONSKA URA (Macedonian hour)
S-TEL d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia

21,588.67
21,588.67
24,961.90
24,961.90
27,323.16
27,323.16
13,184.00
13,184.00
23,275.29
23,275.29
22,937.96
22,937.96
17,878.12
17,878.12
6,565.00
6,565.00
25,636.55
25,636.55
26,648.52
26,648.52
19,564.73
19,564.73
24,961.90
24,961.90
12,143.63
12,143.63
14,167.57
14,167.57
14,504.89

80

EVENT (LIPOVLJANI FESTIVAL) NP
STUDIO M d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
ROMI I ROMSKA KULTURA (The Roma and
Romani culture)
STUDIO MINSK d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
VIJESTI NA TALIJANSKOM JEZIKU (News in
Italian)
SVEUČILIŠTE U DUBROVNIKU
National minorities in Croatia
BOGATSTVO RAZLIČITOSTI (Wealth of diversity)
Total
(173)

14,504.89
9,107.72
9,107.72
16,866.15
16,866.15
18,186.00
18,186.00
611,135.06

On 5 November 2012, the Council for Electronic Media adopted the decision based on
the implemented Public Tender no. 2/12 on the distribution of the resources of the
Fund for the Promotion of Pluralism and Diversity of Electronic Media.

Television broadcasters were allocated the following resources:

Broadcasters and categories

Allocated amount

KA-VISION d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
IVER (Sliver)
MIJOR d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
GLAS MANJINA (The voice of minorities)
NEZAVISNA TELEVIZIJA d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
MANJINE U MEDIJIMA (Minorities in the Media)
OAR d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
ZVONA (Bells)
OTVORENA TELEVIZIJA ZAGREB d.d.
National minorities in Croatia
MANJE JE VIŠE (Less is more)
SLAVONSKO-BRODSKA TELEVIZIJA d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
JEDNAKI (Equals)
TELEVIZIJA SLAVONIJE I BARANJE d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
OTVORENI STUDIO - NACIONALNE MANJINE
(Open studio - national minorities)
TV PLUS d.o.o.

72,433.02
72,433.02
93,128.17
93,128.17
65,534.64
65,534.64
55,163.28
55,163.28
58,069.69
58,069.69
75,882.22
75,882.22
60,360.85
60,360.85
55,187.07

81

National minorities in Croatia
PUTEVIMA KORJENA (Tracing our roots)
VARAŽDINSKA TELEVIZIJA d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
MANJINSKI MOZAIK (Minority mosaic)
VOX d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
ZAJEDNO (NPL) (Together (NPL))
VTV d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
DAY OF NATIONAL MINORITIES OF THE VSC
Total

55,187.07
41,390.30
41,390.30
46,564.09
46,564.09
25,000.00
25,000.00
648,713.33

Radio broadcasters were allocated the following resources:

Broadcasters and categories

Allocated amount

ARTING d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
QUATTRO CIACCOLE IN FAMIGLIA
DIFUZIJA d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
SPEKTAR (Spectrum)
DOMAĆI RADIO d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
OBIČAJI NARODA (NPL) (Peoples’ customs (NPL))
DTR TV I RADIO DIFUZIJA d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
DOPO DOMENICA
E-RADIO d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
TRADICIJA
I
KULTURA
NACIONALNIH
MANJINA (Tradition and culture of national minorities)
HRVATSKI KATOLIČKI RADIO
National minorities in Croatia
SNAGA DIJALOGA (The power of dialogue)
HRVATSKI RADIO - RADIO GOSPIĆ d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
POVRATAK
I
OBNOVA
(Return
and
Reconstruction)
HRVATSKI RADIO VUKOVAR d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
MOZAIK 8 (Mosaic 8)
ILOK TON d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia

12,834.40
12,834.40
16,182.50
16,182.50
6,138.19
6,138.19
8,928.28
8,928.28
9,486.29
9,486.29
15,624.48
15,624.48
17,298.53
17,298.53
14,229.44
14,229.44
18,414.57

82

VYSIELANIE V SLOVENSKEJ REČI
INFORMATIVNI CENTAR - HRVATSKA RADIO
POSTAJA ČAZMA d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
TO SMO MI (This is us)
KRUGOVAL 93,1 MHZ d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
KONAC (Thread)
MEDIA-MIX-RADIO d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
ŽIVOT ROMA (Life of Roma)
MORSKI ZVUK d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
MAKEDONSKE JESENI (Macedonian Autumns)
MOSLAVAČKI LIST d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
MOZAIK (Mosaic)
MT ETER D.O.O.
National minorities in Croatia
RODNA GRUDA (Native soil)
NOVI RADIO - ZADAR d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
PESCAFONDO
NOVI RADIO d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
MOST (Bridge)
PRIMORSKI RADIO d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
IZ SUSJEDOVOG LONCA (From the neighbour’s
pot)
RADIO BLJESAK d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
I MI SMO TU (We are here, too)
RADIO BROD informiranje i marketing d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
MANJINSKI FORUM (Minority forum)
RADIO DARUVAR d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
ZAVIČAJNA RAZGLEDNICA (Postcard from the
homeland)
RADIO DELTA d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
BOGATSTVO RAZLIČITOSTI (Wealth of diversity)
RADIO ĐURĐEVAC d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia

18,414.57
10,602.33
10,602.33
13,671.42
13,671.42
13,392.41
13,392.41
1,674.05
1,674.05
13,113.40
13,113.40
12,555.39
12,555.39
11,160.34
11,160.34
6,696.21
6,696.21
4,185.13
4,185.13
12,276.38
12,276.38
11,718.36
11,718.36
12,276.38
12,276.38
11,439.35
11,439.35
12,276.38

83

NACIONALNE MANJINE (National minorities)
RADIO JASKA d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
MOZAIK, NPL (Mosaic, NPL)
RADIO LUDBREG d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
NACIONALNE MANJINE-ŽIVOT U ZAJEDNICI
(National minorities – community life)
RADIO NARONA d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
KORACI (Steps)
RADIO OGULIN d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
MANJINE SU NAŠE BOGATSTVO (Minorities are
our wealth)
RADIO ORAHOVICA d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
MANJINE U NAŠEM KRAJU (NPL) (Minorities in
our area (NPL))
RADIO PITOMAČA d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
ETNIČKE SKUPINE I MI - KULTUROM DO
ZAJEDNIŠTVA (Ethnic groups and us – towards
togetherness through culture)
RADIO POSTAJA NEDELIŠĆE d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
ROMSKA RIJEČ (NPL) (Romani word (NPL))
RADIO POSTAJA NOVSKA d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
NAŠI KORIJENI (Our roots)
RADIO PSUNJ d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
NACIONALNE MANJINE (National minorities)
RADIO SISAK d.o.o. (no. 103)
National minorities in Croatia
MANJINSKI
PARLAMENTARAC
(Minority
parlamentarian)
RADIO VARAŽDIN d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
MANJE JE VIŠE (Less is more)
RADIO VRBOVEC d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
PETKOM U 16 (Fridays at 16:00h)
RAPSODIJA d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
BAŠTINA (Heritage)

12,276.38
10,323.32
10,323.32
8,370.26
8,370.26
10,323.32
10,323.32
10,881.34
10,881.34
8,649.27
8,649.27
11,997.37

11,997.37
8,370.26
8,370.26
14,787.46
14,787.46
13,392.41
13,392.41
10,323.32
10,323.32
13,950.43
13,950.43
5,580.17
5,580.17
14,508.45
14,508.45
84

REFUL RADIO d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
ZAJEDNO (Together)
SLATINSKI INFORMATIVNI CENTAR d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
SLOVAKS
UDRUGA RADIO MARIJA (Zagreb)
National minorities in Croatia
HAJDEMO ZAJEDNO (Let’s go together)
VAL MEDIA d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
SUSJEDI (Neighbours)
ZAGORSKA SPORTSKA MREŽA d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
KAVANA KAJ (NPL) (Coffee shop Kaj (NPL))
ŽUPANIJSKA LIGA PROTIV RAKA - SPLIT
National minorities in Croatia
ZRAKA SUNCA (A ray of sun)
ŽUPANIJSKI RADIO ŠIBENIK d.o.o.
National minorities in Croatia
MANJINE! (Minorities!)
Total
(174)

11,160.34
11,160.34
11,997.37
11,997.37
6,970.28
6,970.28
8,091.25
8,091.25
8,649.27
8,649.27
13,671.42
13,671.42
10,323.32
10,323.32
478,494

In the period 2010 – 2012, the Council for Electronic Media allocated the resources
amounting to HRK 8,426,914.76 to TV and radio broadcasters for the programmes for
national minorities on the basis of implemented public tenders for the distribution of
the resources of the Fund for the Promotion of Pluralism and Diversity of Electronic
Media.

4.6 Article 12 – Cultural activities and institutions
Paragraph 1:
subparagraph a)
subparagraph f)
subparagraph g)
(175)

From the State Budget of the Republic of Crotia, through the Council for National
Minorities, financial support is provided for 19 different programmes of national
minorities, in particular the Italian, Czech, Slovak, Hungarian, Ruthenian, Ukrainian
and Serbian national minorities, among others. Pursuant to the Council Decision and
the established criteria, the programmes financed are those of the associations and
institutions of national minorities in the field of publicity, publishing, cultural
amateurism, cultural events, programmes arising from bilateral contracts and
agreements, as well as programmes securing preconditions for the exercise of the
cultural autonomy of national minorities.

(176)

In the past period, funding continued to be provided for members of the Italian
national minority for their publicity programme consisting in the daily newspaper
“La voce del popolo”, twice-monthly magazine "Panorama", children’s paper
85

"Arcobaleno", and literary magazine "La batana”, published by the newspaper
publishing institution "Edit" from Rijeka. In 2012, funds amounting to HRK
6,000,000 were allocated to the publicity programme from the State Budget of the
Republic of Croatia.
(177)

In the past period, funding continued to be provided for members of the Czech
national minority, for the weekly magazine "Jednota”, children's monthly “Dětský
koutek" and the annuals "Prehled" and "Češky lidovy calendar”, published by
newspaper publishing institution “Jednota" from Daruvar. Within its publishing
activity, the NPI “Jednota” printed a documentary study entitled “Kulturni domovi
češke manjine u Hrvatskoj” (Cultural homes of the Czech minority in Croatia) by a
group of authors, and the book “Daruvar” by Miroslav Sohr. The Union of Czechs
continued to print the monthly “Vijesti društva” (Society news) and bulletin “Naša
riječ” (Our word). In 2012, funds from the Croatian State Budget amounting to HRK
1,971,500 were allocated to the said publicity and publishing programmes.

(178)

In the past period, funding continued to be provided for members of the Slovak
national minority, for the information programme consisting in the publication of the
monthly “Pramen“, published by the Union of Slovaks from Našice. Within the
publishing programme, the following titles were published: monograph “15. obljetnica
Matice Slovačke Lipovljani 1996.-2011.“ (15th anniversary of Matica Slovačka
Lipovljani 1996-2011) by Dragutin Pasarić and Ivan Hudec; monograph “Doprinos
istraživanju povijesti doseljavanja Slovaka u Slavoniju“ (Contribution to the research
of Slovak immigration in Slavonia) by Josip Krajči and Ivan Hudec; “Zbornik o
povijesnim, političkim, gospodarskim i duhovnim vezama Hrvata i Slovaka“
(Collection on historica, political, economic and spiritual links of Croats and
Slovaks), book “Hrvati i Slovaci kroz povijest“ (Croats and Slovaks through history)
by Matuš Kučera and monograph “Slovačko selo Josipovac – 130 godina” (Slovak
village of Josipovac – 130 years) by Kvetoslava Kučerova. In 2012, funds from the
Croatian State Budget amounting to HRK 278,500 were allocated to said publicity and
publishing programmes.

(179)

For members of the Hungarian national minority, financing continued for the
weekly “Uj Magyar Kepes Ujsag”, monthly “Horvatoszagi Magyarsag“, children's
quarterly “Barkoca” and annual “Rovatkak”, published by the Democratic Community
of Hungarians in Croatia from Osijek, as well as for for the weekly “Horvathorszagi
Magyar Naplo”, monthly “Hagyatek” and children’s magazine “Scivarvany”,
published by the Union of Hungarian Associations from Beli Manastir. Within its
publishing programme, the Democratic Community of Hungarians in Croatia from
Osijek published the new titles “Bajkovito selo Kopačevo” (The fairytale village of
Kopačevo) by Karol Labady, and “Mađarske narodne priče” (Hungarian folktales) by
a group of authors. The Union of Hungarian Associations published the book
“Broanyja - Majka vina” (Broanyja – the mother of wine) by Karol Labady. In 2012,
funds from the Croatian State Budget amounting to HRK 1,860,000 were allocated to
said publicity and publishing programmes.

(180)

For members of the Ruthenian and Ukrainian national minorities, funding
continued to be provided for the bi-monthly magazine “Nova Dumka” and the semiannual children's magazine “Vjenčić”, published by the Union of Ruthenians and
Ukrainians in the Republic of Croatia from Vukovar, and “Vjesnik ukrajinske

86

zajednice u Hrvatskoj“ (Herald of the Ukrainian community in Croatia) published by
the Ukrainian Community from Zagreb. Within its publishing activity, the Union of
Ruthenians and Ukrainians in the Republic of Croatia published the almanac “Dumki
z Dunaju” by a group of authors, and the book “Dunavska rapsodija” (Danube
rhapsody) by Ana Harhaj. The Ukrainian Community in Croatia published the manual
“Prirodnim stazama Ukrajine” (Along the natural paths of Ukraine) by Tetyan
Kochnyev Ramač. In 2012, funds from the Croatian State Budget amounting to HRK
510,000 were allocated to the said publicity and publishing programmes.
(181)

For members of the Serbian national minority, funding continued to be provided for
the weekly “Novosti”, published by the Serbian National Council, Zagreb, bi-monthly
magazine “Prosvjeta” and children's monthly “Bijela pčela” and annual “Artefakti“,
published by the Serbian Cultural Society “Prosvjeta” Zagreb, the monthly “Identitet”,
published by the Serbian Democratic Forum, Zagreb, the magazine “Izvor“, published
by the Joint Council of Municipalities, Vukovar, and the monthly “Privrednik“,
published by the Serbian Economic Society “Privrednik“, Zagreb. Within its
publishing activity, the Serbian Cultural Society “Prosvjeta”, Zagreb, published the
following book titles in the past period: “Šematizam: Srpska pravoslavna mitropolija
karlovačka“ (Schematism: Serbian Orthodox Metropolis of Karlovac), „Teorija za
revolucionarnu politiku“ (A theory for revolutionary politics) by Rastko Močnik,
“Praške i neke prethodne pjesme“ (The Prag and some earlier poems) by Luka
Šteković, “Izabrane pjesme“ (Selected poems) by Nebojša Devetko, „Ljetopis
SKD“Prosvjeta“ (Yearbook of the SCS “Prosvjeta”), “Izabrani radovi iz kulturne
historije“ (Selected works from cultural history) by Mito Kostić, “Stvar mišljenja u
suton metafizike“ (“A matter of opinion in the dusk of metaphysics) by Veselin
Golubović, “Antroponimija Bukovice“ (Anthroponymy of bukovica) by Živko
Bjelanović, “Rukopis o Dubravama“ (A manuscript on Dubrave) by Dejan Rebić,
“Kiši li neprestano nad Kotorom“ (Does it never stop raining over Kotor) by Lidija
Vukičević. Monographs “Knjigocid” (Bookocide) by Jovan Mirić and “Srbi u
sjeverozapadnoj Hrvatskoj 1941.” (Serbs in north-western Croatia in 1941) by Đuro
Zatezalo were published by the Serbian National Council. The Serbian Democratic
Forum published the book “Ninoslav Kopač – intervjui” (Ninoslav Kopač –
interviews) by Ninoslav Kopač, while the Serbian Economic Society “Privrednik”
published the study “Srpsko privredno društvo „Privrednik (1897-1947) kroz svoje
pitomce“ (Serbian Economic Society “Privrednik” (1897-1847) through its alumni)
by Drago Roksandić. In 2012, funds from the Croatian State Budget amounting to
HRK 6,293,000 were allocated to the said publicity and publishing programmes.

(182)

Obligations under Article 12 of the Charter with regard to cultural activities and
institutions are fulfilled by the Ministry of Culture by securing significant financial
resources for various cultural activities of national minorities. In the spirit of the
Charter, special attention is paid first of all to the written and spoken word in the
languages and scripts of national minorities. Significant funds are primarily allocated
to libraries. Furthermore, the Ministry of Culture allocates substantial funds for
archives, encourages and supports the printing of books and magazines in minority
languages, promotes performing arts and the overall efforts to cultivate and preserve
other cultural features of national minorities.

87

4.6.1 Libraries
(183)








The Libraries Act (OG 105/97, 5/98 104/00 and 69/09) is the legal framework for
librarianship activities. Librarianship activities for the needs of national minorities in
the Republic of Croatia are performed by the central libraries of the national
minorities, which, among others, include:
Town Library Beli Manastir – Central Library of the Hungarians;
Community Library Daruvar – Central Library of the Czechs;
Croatian National Library Našice – Central Library of the Slovaks;
Town Library Pula – Central Library of the Italians;
Zagreb City Libraries – Central Library of the Ruthenians and Ukrainians;
Serbian Cultural Society ”Prosvjeta“ – Central Library of the Serbs

(184)

The Ministry of Culture provides funds for the salaries of employees in the central
libraries of the national minorities, for the use of books and other library inventory, for
programmes and computerisation of the central libraries of the national minorities, and
for panels, lectures and exhibitions. Special importance is given to interlibrary loan,
which makes library services accessible to minority members living outside the seat of
the central library.

(185)

By way of regular annual calls for proposals of programmes of public needs in culture,
the Ministry of Culture co-finances the acquisition of books and other library
inventory for public libraries, as well as various activities and events related to
librarianship activities, exhibitions and development programs, including workshops,
seminars and professional training of librarians. All that has a positive impact on the
supply of books in minority languages, as well as the participation of national minority
members in the aforementioned programmes and activities in the libraries.

(186)

Although the Ministry of Culture approves funding for libraries, press and book
publishing, as well as investments and computerisation of various minority
institutions, the information specified below refers to those regional or minority
languages in the Republic of Croatia which are covered by Part III of the Charter.

Table – Overview of approved funds for libraries in 2010
PROGRAMME ACTIVITY /
MINORITY
HOLDER
Library
Central Library of the
Austrians – City and
Austrians
University Library, Osijek
Central Library of the
Hungarians - Town Library
Hungarians
Beli Manastir
Central Library of the
Slovenes – Town Library
Slovenes
Karlovac
Central Library of the Czechs
Czechs
- Community Library Daruvar

PROGRAMME
Funding for salaries and
current expenses of the
central library
Funding for salaries and
current expenses of the
central library
Funding for salaries and
current expenses of the
central library
Funding for salaries and
current expenses of the
central library

AMOUNT

159,559.48

142,439.71

142,806.42

149,445.38

88

Central Library of the Italians
- Town Library Pula
Central Library of the Slovaks
– Croatian National Library
Našice
Central Library of the
Albanians –Zagreb City
Libraries, Zagreb
Central Library of the
Ruthenians and Ukrainians Zagreb City Libraries, Zagreb
Central Library of the Serbs Serbian Cultural Society
”Prosvjeta“

Italians

Slovaks

Albanians
Ruthenians
and
Ukrainians
Serbs

Funding for salaries and
current expenses of the
central library
Funding for salaries and
current expenses of the
central library
Funding for salaries and
current expenses of the
central library
Funding for salaries and
current expenses of the
central library
Funding for salaries and
current expenses of the
central library

148,434.52

157,215.06

185,430.08

190,942.94

299,241.15

Table – Overview of approved funds for libraries in 2011
PROGRAMME ACTIVITY /
HOLDER
Library
Central Library of the
Austrians – City and
University Library, Osijek
Central Library of the
Hungarians - Town Library
Beli Manastir
Central Library of the
Slovenes – Town Library
Karlovac

MINORITY

Austrians

Hungarians

Slovenes

Central Library of the Czechs
- Community Library Daruvar

Czechs

Central Library of the Italians
- Town Library Pula

Italians

Central Library of the Slovaks
– Croatian National Library
Našice
Central Library of the
Albanians –Zagreb City
Libraries, Zagreb
Central Library of the
Ruthenians and Ukrainians Zagreb City Libraries, Zagreb
Central Library of the Serbs Serbian Cultural Society
”Prosvjeta“

Slovaks

Albanians
Ruthenians
and
Ukrainians
Serbs

PROGRAMME
Funding for salaries and
current expenses of the
central library
Funding for salaries and
current expenses of the
central library
Funding for salaries and
current expenses of the
central library
Funding for salaries and
current expenses of the
central library
Funding for salaries and
current expenses of the
central library
Funding for salaries and
current expenses of the
central library
Funding for salaries and
current expenses of the
central library
Funding for salaries and
current expenses of the
central library
Funding for salaries and
current expenses of the
central library

AMOUNT

159,559.48

144,413.72

148,680.10

151,668.00

148,494.40

157,750.50

186,342.38

191,678.62

284,153.98

89

Table – Overview of approved funds for libraries in 2012
PROGRAMME ACTIVITY /
HOLDER
Library
Central Library of the
Austrians – City and
University Library, Osijek
Central Library of the
Hungarians - Town Library
Beli Manastir
Central Library of the
Slovenes – Town Library
Karlovac

MINORITY

Austrians

Hungarians

Slovenes

Central Library of the Czechs
- Community Library Daruvar

Czechs

Central Library of the Italians
- Town Library Pula

Italians

Central Library of the Slovaks
– Croatian National Library
Našice
Central Library of the
Albanians –Zagreb City
Libraries, Zagreb
Central Library of the
Ruthenians and Ukrainians Zagreb City Libraries, Zagreb
Central Library of the Serbs Serbian Cultural Society
”Prosvjeta“

Slovaks

Albanians
Ruthenians
and
Ukrainians
Serbs

PROGRAMME
Funding for salaries and
current expenses of the
central library
Funding for salaries and
current expenses of the
central library
Funding for salaries and
current expenses of the
central library
Funding for salaries and
current expenses of the
central library
Funding for salaries and
current expenses of the
central library
Funding for salaries and
current expenses of the
central library
Funding for salaries and
current expenses of the
central library
Funding for salaries and
current expenses of the
central library
Funding for salaries and
current expenses of the
central library

AMOUNT

154,825.18

143,971.76

149,989.42

151,265.60

148,065.80

156,622.48

187,210.57

191,197.01

299,400.39

Table - Overview of approved funds for newspaper and book publishing in 2010
PROGRAMME ACTIVITY /
MINORITY
HOLDER

PROGRAMME

AMOUNT

Book purchase
Ljudmila Vasiljeva:
Srednjojužnoslavenski
književni jezici u
Montenegrin Cultural Society
sinkroniji i dijakroniji
Montenegro-Montenegrina
Montenegrins
(Central East Slavic
literary languages in
synchrony and
diachrony)
Božo Milačić: Hrvatske
Montenegrins
književne teme (Croatian

3,980.00

4,240.00

90

Croatian-Italian
Cultural
Italians
Association “Dante Alighieri”

CSBH Preporod

Bosniaks

Serbian Orthodox
Parish, Dubrovnik

Church

Serbian Cultural
“Prosvjeta”

Society

Serbs

Serbs

Serbs

Serbs

Serbs

Serbs

Serbs

Serbs

Serbs

literary topics)
Francesco Carra:
Dnevnici s putovanja
1843-1848. (Travel
diaries 1843-1848)
Enes Kišević: Riječi
vracene kući (Words
brought back home)
Rade Petrović: Ruski
konzulat u Dubrovniku
od osnivanja do 1878.
godine (Russian
consulate in Dubrovnik
from its establishment to
1878)
Jovan Mirić: Kosovo i
druge teme (Kosovo and
other topics)
Vladimir Ardalić:
Bukovica,narodni život i
obicaji (Bukovica, folklife
and customs)
Branka Mraović:
Globalni novac (Global
money)
Miloš
Okuka:
Salo
debeloga
jera
libo
azbukoprotres
Miljkan Maslić: Početak
i razvoj ustanka naroda
IV. rajona Korduna
(Beginning and
development of the
national uprising in the
IV. Kordun rayon)
Paul Kussan: Kratka
povijest Treće ogulinske
narodne graničarske
pješadijske regimente
(Short history of the
Third National Border
Infantry Regiment of
Ogulin)
Mita Kostić: Kulturnoistorijska raskrsnica Srba
u XVII veku (Cultural
and historical crossroads
for Serbs in 17th century)
Nikola Vujčić: Dokle

6,000.00

4,000.00

1,800.00

12,000.00

20,000.00

7,500.00

10,000.00

7,500.00

6,000.00

12,500.00

4,000.00
91

Association for the Promotion
of Roma Education in Croatia Roma
Kali Sara
Roma

Roma

Roma

Italian Community M. Draga

Italians

Jewish Religious Community
Jews
in Croatia Bet Israel

pogled dopier (As far as
the eye can reach)
Veljko Kajtazi: Sara i
sportovi (Sara and
sports)
Veljko Kajtazi: Sarin
rođendan (Sara’s
birthday)
Veljko Kajtazi: Sara na
selu (Sara in the
countryside)
a group of authors –
participants of the World
Symposium on Romani
Language: Svjetski dan
romskoga jezika (The
World Day of the Romani
Language)
Anton Papp: Moja
sjećanja (My memories)
Shmarya Levin:
Djetinjstvo (Childhood)

1,600.00

1,600.00

1,600.00

7,450.00

6,000.00
5,500.00

Table - Overview of approved funds for newspaper and book publishing in 2011
PROGRAMME ACTIVITY /
MINORITY
HOLDER

PROGRAMME

AMOUNT

Support for book publishing
CSBH Preporod

Bosniaks

Bosniaks

Serbian Cultural
“Prosvjeta”

Society Serbs

Serbs
Serbs
Association for the Promotion
Roma
of Roma Education in Croatia
Kali Sara

Feđa Šehović: Drž se,
(b)Alija (Hang in there,
(b)Alija)
Filip Mursel Begović:
Kad zora razrjeđuje strah
(When dawn dilutes fear)
Branko Čolović:
Sakralna baština
dalmatinskih Srba
(Sacral heritage of
Dalmatia Serbs)
Drago Roksandić: U
NINu i Danasu (In NIN
and Danas)
Grigor Vitez: Izabrana
djela (Selected works)
Rajko Đurić i Veljko
Kajtazi: Povijest romske
književnosti (History of
Romani literature)

10,000.00

5,000.00

15,000.00

6,000.00
45,000.00

10,000.00

92

Goran Kalogjera:
Makedonsko XIX.
Macedonian Community in Macedonians
stoljeće (Macedonian
Croatia
19th century)

2,800.00

Table - Overview of approved funds for newspaper and book publishing in 2012
PROGRAMME ACTIVITY /
MINORITY PROGRAMME
HOLDER
Book purchase
Andrej Nikolaidis:
Odlaganje. Parezija
Algoritam d.o.o
Bosniaks
(Procrastination.
Parrhesia)
Damir Avdić: Tiket za
Bosniaks
revoluciju (Ticket for a
revolution)
Faruk Šehić: Knjiga o
Bosniaks
Uni (A book about the
Una)
Vicko Krstulović:
Memoari jugoslavenskog
Buybook d.o.o.
Bosniaks
revolucionara: I. tom
(Memoires of a Yugoslav
revolutionary: 1. volume)
Semezdin
Mehmedinović:
Fraktura d.o.o.
Bosniaks
Autoportret s torbom
(Self-portrait with a bag)
Bogdan Igor Antonyč:
Horus – Croatian-Ukrainian
Ukrainians
Most iznad vremena (A
cooperation
bridge over time)
Marija Matios: Slatka
Ukrainians
Darica (Sweet Darica)
Volodymyr Galyk: Ivan
Franko i hrvatska
Ukrainians
kulturna baština (Ivan
Franko and the Croatian
cultural heritage)
Branislav Nušić:
CSBH Preporod
Bosniaks
Ramazanske večeri
(Ramadan evenings)
Edin Urjan Kukavica:
Bosniaks
Islam na Balkanu (Islam
on the Balkans)
Ervin Jahić: Zašto tone
Bosniaks
Venecija (Why Venice is
sinking)
SCS Prosvjeta
Serbs
Milan Milišić: Mufica
Serbs
Milan Milišić: Nastrana

AMOUNT

6,320.00

13,825.00

13,825.00

12,750.00

11,200.00

2,000.00
2,000.00

2,000.00

8,000.00

2,800.00

4,600.00
5,600.00
6,400.00
93

V.B.Z., Zagreb

Bosniaks

Jewish Religious Community
Jews
in Croatia Bet Israel

vrana (Queer crow)
Hadžem Hajdarević:
Sutjeska
Josip Flavije: Protiv
Apiona / Josipov život
(Against Apion / Josip’s
life)

2,380.00

14,365.00

Support for book publishing
Association for the Promotion
of Roma Education in Croatia Roma
Kali Sara

Roma
Literary events
Town library Umag

Italians

Croatian P.E.N. Centre, Zagreb

several
minorities
several
minorities

Croatian-Israeli Society

Jews

CSBH Preporod

Bosniaks

Serbian
Cultural
“Prosvjeta”

Society

Serbs

Association for the Promotion
of Roma Education in Croatia Roma
Kali Sara

A group of athors:
Gramatika i pravopis
romskog jezika (Romani
grammar and
orthography)
Marcel Courthiade and
Veljko Kajtazi: Romske
narodne poslovice
(Romani proverbs)
Forum Tomizza 2012
Translation and the
Rights of Small EU
Languages
Neighbourhood of words
– Regional Literary
Gathering
Literary evenings and
lectures at the “Shalom”
Cultural Centre
Celebration of 20th
anniversary of Preporod
Crocodile Festival

20,000.00

15,000.00

15,000.00
14,000.00

10,000.00

10,000.00
10,000.00
8,000.00

World Day of the
Romani Language –
Symposium on the
Romani Language

10,000.00

Novi Omanut

20,000.00

romalen.com- the first
website on the Roma

10,000.00

Magazines
Cultural Society
Šalom Freiberger“

“Miroslav Jews

Media Information Centre

Roma

94

Investments and informatisation
Table - Investments of cultural institutions in 2010
PROGRAMME ACTIVITY /
HOLDER
Investment support
Matica Slovačka, Lipovljani
Matica Slovačka, Miljevci,
Nova Bukovica
Serbian
Cultural
Society
“Prosvjeta”, Zagreb
TOTAL ACTIVITIES

MINORITY

PROGRAMME

Slovaks

Setup of an ethno house
Completion of the
Croatian-Slovak Home
Setup of the Central
Library

Slovaks
Serbs

AMOUNT
40,000.00
150,000.00
300,000.00
490,000.00

Table - Investments of cultural institutions in 2011
PROGRAMME ACTIVITY /
HOLDER
Investment support
Serbian Cultural Society
“Prosvjeta”, Zagreb

MINORITY

PROGRAMME

AMOUNT

Serbs

Setup of a library

200,000.00

Table - Investments of cultural institutions in 2012
PROGRAMME ACTIVITY /
HOLDER
Investment support

MINORITY

Češka beseda, Virovitica

Czechs

Serbian Cultural Society
“Prosvjeta”, Zagreb

Serbs

PROGRAMME
Setup of the Czech
Home
Setup of library
premises

AMOUNT

150,000.00
200,000.00

4.6.2 Archives, museums and galleries
(187)

The Archival Materials and Archives Act (OG 105/97 and 64/00) is the legal
framework for archival activity, and the Museums Act (OG 142/98) for museological
activity. In carrying out archival activity, a network of 18 state archives in the
Republic of Croatia processes and preserves archival materials relating to national
minorities on a regular basis.

(188)

Archival activity includes the collection, processing, protection and use of archival
material, consulting of creators and holders of the archival material located outside of
the archives, organisation of exhibitions, lectures and similar activities intended for
the general public. Publishing activities of the archives and the activity with
educational character (professional and scientific gatherings, lectures, etc.) play a
significant role, too. All these aspects of archival activity apply equally and fully also
to the materials related to national minorities and their activities in a particular area.

95

(189)

Museological and gallery activities include primarily preservation, protection and
presentation of museum stocks and collections, including materials related to the work
and activities of national minorities. Museums also hold exhibitions, issue publications
related to their work (catalogues, collections, posters, etc.), purchase materials,
conduct archaeological and other research etc., both for the majority population and
minority members. In addition, pedagogical-educational activities and similar
programmes are organized within the System of Museums.

(190)

Although the Ministry of Culture approves funding for archival, museological and
gallery activities of various national minorities, the information specified below refers
to those regional or minority languages in the Republic of Croatia which are covered
by Part III of the Charter.

Table – Overview of approved funds for archival activities in 2010 – 2012.
PROGRAMME ACTIVITY /
HOLDER
Archival activities

MINORITY

Research and Documentation
Centre CENDO

Jews

State Archive for Međimurje

Mađari
(Hungarians)

PROGRAMME
Collection, archiving
and cataloguing of
materials on Jews
Identification of
archival material in
Hungarian

AMOUNT

55,000

15,000

Museological and gallery
activities
Serbian Cultural Society
“Prosvjeta”, Zagreb

Serbs

Exhibition of all
Tesla’s diplomas in the
Nikola Tesla Museum,
Belgrade

10,000.00

4.6.3 Performing arts, amateur culture and art, visual arts, new media and film
(191)

The Ministry of Culture uses its funds especially for the promotion of minority
associations’ activities in the field of amateur culture and art, which include festivals
and other events, acquisition and maintenance of traditional costumes and instruments,
choirs, brass orchestras, publishing, marking of anniversaries, seminars, workshops
and other programmes of cultural and artistic amateurism.

(192)

The same applies to visual and audiovisual art programmes, design and architecture,
other art activities, as well as the new media cultures, which include art production,
one-off projects, permanent programmes, events, etc.

(193)

It should be noted that, in the field of performing arts, the Theatres Act (OG 71/06)
explicitly provides for obligatory existence of the Italian drama within the Croatian
National Theatre Ivan pl. Zajc Rijeka, the resources for which, apart from those
allocated from the budget of the founder – the City of Rijeka, are secured from the
budget of the Ministry of Culture intended for the cultural activities of national
minorities.

96

Table - Overview of approved funds for performing arts, and amateur culture and art in
2010
PROGRAMME ACTIVITY /
MINORITY
HOLDER
Drama and amateur theatre
Serbian
Cultural
“Prosvjeta”

Society

Serbs

Croatian National Theatre Ivan
pl. Zajc, Rijeka
Italians
Association of the Theatre
Chaplin - Theatre of the Roma Roma
National Minority
Music, performing arts and
dance
Croatian-Israeli Society, Zagreb
Jews
Serbian
Cultural
“Prosvjeta”, Zagreb

Society

Serbs

Art Organisation “Transhistria
Istroensemble”, Pula
Romanians

PROGRAMME

AMOUNT

Serbian Culture Days –
“Falsifikator” (Forgerer)
by Goran Marković

HRK 20,000.00

Activity of the Italian
Drama

HRK 67,344.92

3rd International Festival
of the Roma Theatre

HRK 10,000.00

Music evenings at the
“Shalom” Cultural Centre
Serbian Culture Days –
concert guest performance
by the TAJJ Quartet
Promotion of the
multimedia DVD: IstroRomanian (Žejane or
Vlach) dialect (Panphonia
Istriana/Istrian Polysounds
project)

HRK 15,000.00
HRK 10,000.00

HRK 20,000.00

Table - Overview of approved funds for performing arts, and amateur culture and art in
2011
PROGRAMME ACTIVITY /
MINORITY
HOLDER
Drama and amateur theatre
Serbian
Cultural
“Prosvjeta”

Society

Serbs

Croatian National Theatre Ivan
Italians
pl. Zajc, Rijeka
Community College Daruvar
Amateur culture and art
SCS “Prosvjeta” Zagreb
Subcommittee Darda, Darda
Music, performing arts

Czechs
–
Serbs

PROGRAMME

AMOUNT

2011 Serbian Culture
Days – guest
performance of
HRK 15,000.00
“Oktagon” by the Mimart
Theatre
Activity of the Italian
HRK 62,536.49
Drama
Mask – 2011 Small
HRK 7,000.00
Theatre Fair in Daruvar
5. International Folklore
Festival of National
Minorities

HRK 8,000.00

and
97

dance
Croatian-Israeli Society, Zagreb
Serbian
Cultural
“Prosvjeta”, Zagreb

Jews

Society
Serbs

Association for the Study and
Promotion of Cultural Heritage
Jews
“Tamar”, Zagreb

Music evenings at the
HRK 10,000.00
“Shalom” Cultural Centre
Serbian Culture Days - a
concert and workshop by HRK 10,000.00
Svetlana Spajić
Sheet music collection of
synagogue chants by HRK 15,000.00
hazzan Bernard Grüner

Table - Overview of approved funds for performing arts, and amateur culture and art in
2012
PROGRAMME ACTIVITY /
MINORITY
HOLDER
Drama and amateur theatre
Serbian
Cultural
“Prosvjeta”

Society

Serbs

Croatian National Theatre Ivan
Italians
pl. Zajc, Rijeka
Community College Daruvar
Music, performing arts
dance

Czechs

AMOUNT

Serbian Culture Days –
guest performance of the
theatre play “PR ili HRK 15,000.00
potpuno rasulo” (PR or a
complete debacle)
Activity of the Italian
HRK 59,647.31
Drama
Mask – 2012 Small
HRK 10,000.00
Theatre Fair in Daruvar

and

Croatian-Israeli Society, Zagreb
Serbian
Cultural
“Prosvjeta”, Zagreb

PROGRAMME

Jews

Society

Music evenings at the
“Shalom” Cultural
HRK 10,000.00
Centre
Serbian Culture Days –
guest performance by the HRK 10,000.00
Frame Orchestra

Table - Overview of approved funds for visual arts, new media and film in 2010
PROGRAMME ACTIVITY /
HOLDER
Visual arts and monographs

MINORITY

Bejahad – Jewish Cultural
Scene, Zagreb

Jews

Croatian-Israeli Society, Zagreb

Jews

Jewish
Zagreb

Community

Zagreb, Jews

PROGRAMME
Exhibition by Vladimir
Veličković – Bejahad
2012
Exhibition programme at
Shalom Gallery
Exhibitions at Milan and
Ivo Steiner Gallery

AMOUNT

30,000.00
10,000.00
15,000.00

98

Table - Overview of approved funds for visual arts, new media and film in 2011
PROGRAMME ACTIVITY /
HOLDER
Visual arts and monographs
Bejahad – Jewish Cultural
Scene, Zagreb
Croatian-Israeli Society, Zagreb
Jewish
Zagreb

Community

MINORITY

Jews
Jews

Zagreb, Jews

PROGRAMME
Exhibitions Bejahad after
Bejahad
Exhibition programme at
Shalom Gallery
Exhibitions at Milan and
Ivo Steiner Gallery

AMOUNT

10,000.00
10,000.00
15,000.00

Table - Overview of approved funds for visual arts, new media and film in 2012
PROGRAMME ACTIVITY /
HOLDER
Visual arts and monographs
Croatian-Israeli Society, Zagreb
Jewish
Zagreb

Community

MINORITY

Jews

Zagreb, Jews

PROGRAMME
Exhibition programme at
Shalom Gallery
Exhibitions at Milan and
Ivo Steiner Gallery
0

AMOUNT

10,000.00
15,000.0

4.7 Article 13 – Economic and social life
Paragraph 1:
subparagraph a)
subparagraph b)
subparagraph c)
(194)

The Republic of Croatia reports that with regard to Article 13 of the Charter –
Economic and social life there are no new data or changes in relation to the data
submitted to the Council of Europe in Croatia’s Third and Fourth Report on the
implementation of the Charter, hence we refer to the relevant paragraphs of said
reports.

4.8 Article 14 – Transfrontier exchanges
(195)

A seminar on the analysis of the implementation of the Framework Convention for the
Protection of National Minorities took place on 20 April 2012 in Zagreb. The seminar
was organised to initiate public discussion on the implementation of the Framework
Convention for the Protection of National Minorities as an important international
document which protects national minority rights in a comprehensive way. The
seminar was attended by distinguished experts from the field of national minority
rights, representatives of state institutions, a Member of the Croatian Parliament
representing national minorities, distinguished members of national minority
associations, representatives of local and regional authorities, members of national
minority councils, and representatives of line ministries and other state bodies
involved in the implementation of the Framework Convention. One of the participants
was Prof. Dr. Rainer Hofmann, the then President of the Council of Europe’s

99

Advisory Committee on the Framework Convention for the Protection of National
Minorities.
(196)

The Office of Human and National Minority Rights coordinated the development of
the new National Strategy for the Roma for the Period from 2013 to 2020 by
harmonising the national policy with the requirements of the European Union and
adopting the EU Framework for the National Roma Integration Strategies until 2020.
The Croatian Government adopted the National Roma Inclusion Strategy for the
Period 2013-2020 at the session of 29 November 2012. The general goal of that
document is aimed at improving the position of the Roma national minority in Croatia
by reducing the multi-dimensional socio-economic gap between the Roma and nonRoma populations, with a view to achieving comprehensive inclusion of the Roma in
all segments of the society by increasing the level of general and targeted education,
enhancing the economic and health status, and improving the social position of the
Roma.

(197)

At the Meeting of the International Steering Committee of the Decade of Roma
Inclusion 2005-2015 held on 25 and 26 June 2012 in Skopje, Croatia took over the
one-year Presidency of the Decade for Roma Inclusion from 1 July 2012 to 30 June
2013. The specific objectives of the Croatian Decade Presidency priority areas through
which it intends to achieve its overall objective are: Linking the Decade of Roma
Inclusion and the EU Framework; Linking Decade Success in Education with EU
Education Policy and the status of the Romani language; Linking historical experiences of
Roma in Europe with the advancement of the tolerance and non-discrimination of Roma;
Roma Youth in Action for Tolerance and Recognition. With regard to the Presidency,
the Croatian Government adopted the Decision Establishing the Committee for the
Presidency of the Decade of Roma Inclusion 2005-2015 at the session of 5 April 2012.

(198)

The 23rd International Steering Committee Meeting of the Decade of Roma Inclusion
2005-2015 was held in Zagreb on 24 and 25 September 2012, as the first among the
activities within the one-year Croatian Presidency of the Decade of Roma Inclusion.
The meeting was attended by the representatives of 12 member countries of the
Decade as well as the representatives of the Roma civil sector of the member
countries, representatives of two observer countries - the USA and Slovenia -,
representatives of numerous international partners participating in the Decade such as
the European Commission, World Bank, Open Society Foundation, UNDP, UNICEF,
UNHCR, World Health Organisation and others, representatives of the Commission
for Monitoring the Implementation of the National Programme for the Roma, of the
Committee for the Presidency of the Decade of Roma Inclusion, and representatives of
the Roma civil sector in Croatia. The meeting included a series of discussions on
relevant topics such as the future of the Decade and the priority areas of the Croatian
Presidency, with special emphasis on the declarations of the governments of the
Decade members.
At the session of 25 May 2012, the Croatian Parliament adopted the Conclusion on the
Support to the International Initiative for Proclaiming 5 November as the World Day
of the Romani Language.

(199)

Two new courses were introduced at the Department of Indology and Far Eastern
Studies of the Faculty of Philosophy, Zagreb University: Romani Language and
Romani Literature and Culture. The courses started in November 2012.

100

4.8.1 Cultural cooperation agreements and programmes signed in the period 20092012
(200)









Although several bilateral agreements and programmes of cultural cooperation
between the Republic of Croatia and other states were signed in the specified period,
the information specified below refers to those regional or minority languages in the
Republic of Croatia which are covered by Part III of the Charter:
Macedonia
o Programme of Cultural Cooperation between the Ministry of Culture of Croatia
and the Ministry of Culture of Macedonia for the Period 2009-2011, signed in
Skopje on 19 January 2009
Bulgaria
o Programme of Cultural Cooperation between the Ministry of Culture of Croatia
and the Ministry of Culture of Bulgaria for 2011, 2012 and 2013, signed in
Zagreb on 27 April 2011
Hungary
o Programme of Cultural Cooperation between the Ministry of Culture of Croatia
and the Ministry of Education and Culture of Hungary for 2009, 2010 and 2011,
signed in Barcs on 17 September 2009
o Programme of Cultural Cooperation between the Ministry of Culture of
Croatia and the Ministry of Education and Culture of Hungary for 2012-2014,
signed in Budapest on 7 November 2011
Austria
o Programme of Cooperation between Croatia and Austria in the field of culture
and education for 2013-2015 (pursuant to Art. 13, Section 1 of the Agreement
between the Croatian Government and the Austrian Government on
Cooperation in the Field of Culture and Education), signed in Zagreb on 21
November 2012

Conclusion

5

(201)

The Republic of Croatia committed to the protection of the right to use regional or
minority languages in accordance with the provisions of the Charter, which it ensures
through the functioning of competent state administration bodies, which act under
domestic regulations. Bearing in mind that the Croatian Parliament, at its session of 17
October 1997, adopted the Act Ratifying the European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages (Official Gazette “Narodne novine“– International Agreements,
no. 18/97), and that domestic legislation regulating the right of minorities to their
language were adopted in 2000 and 2002, the Croatian Government holds that the time
has come for their full implementation.

(202)

In that sense, the Croatian Government will be implementing activities in line with the
recommendation of the Committee of Ministers from the previous evaluation report on
the establishment of equal official use of minority languages and scripts in areas in
which there is a sufficient number of national minority members, i.e. in which the
conditions envisaged by law have been met, as well as in those areas in which this is
prescribed by the statutes of local self-government units. In the part concerning the

101

implementation of said activities by state bodies, the Government intends to fully
implement the equal use of national minority languages and scripts.
(203)

Furthermore, for the purpose of fulfilling the recommendations of the Committee of
Ministers from the previous evaluation reports, and in order to strengthen the
proactive approach of the Republic of Croatia to the protection of the right to use
minority languages, it should be noted that a new Action Plan for the Implementation
of the Constitutional Act on the Rights of National Minorities was adopted in 2011,
which, among other things, envisaged the implementation of measures aimed at
protecting minority languages. The Croatian Government is determined to implement
all measures from the Action Plan in their entirety. Measures from the Action plan and
laws which partly concern the respect for and protection of minority languages are
implemented with a view to realising the right of national minorities to the free use of
their languages and scripts.

(204)

For that purpose, meetings and consultations have been held with the representatives
of local authorities, in order to raise their awareness of national minority rights,
international documents and domestic legislation from which those rights arise, first of
all in regard to the exercise of the right of minorities to their language and script.
Complete information and awareness on minority rights are most important at the
level at which they are to be exercised, namely the local self-government level. The
Croatian Government will continue working on education and application of laws
aimed at the exercise of minority rights despite the difficulties and lack of
understanding encountered in the process of the full application of the laws.

(205)

The Republic of Croatia, in accordance with its objective possibilities, provides
financial support from the State Budget resources for the activities of national
minority associations aimed at promoting the value of the protection of minority
languages. In the past period, the positive trend of significant increases in budgetary
resources for the financing of programmes aimed at protection of the rights of regional
or minority language speakers continued, despite all the problems arising from the
global economic crisis.

(206)

On the basis of the analysis of data collected from the relevant state administration
bodies, it can be stated that, in the period for which the 5th Periodical Report is
submitted, the Republic of Croatia achieved further progress in the implementation of
the programmes of protection and promotion of the right to the use of regional or
minority languages protected pursuant to the provisions of the Charter.

(207)

The Republic of Croatia is firmly dedicated to and in the coming period will continue
implementing the programmes of protection and promotion of the rights of minority
language speakers, for the purpose of implementing the principle of equality in the
society and promoting the spirit of tolerance and dialogue in accordance with the
recommendations of the Committee of Ministers contained in the evaluation report by
the Committee of Experts of the Council of Europe.

102

