Strasbourg, 14 January 2003

MIN-LANG/PR (2003) 4

EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES

Second Periodical Report
presented to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe
in accordance with Article 15 of the Charter

CROATIA

CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION .....................................................................................................................3
PART ONE ................................................................................................................................8
Recommendations of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe........................9
PART TWO .............................................................................................................................11
PART THREE..........................................................................................................................14
THE APPLICATION OF THE CHARTER ............................................................................15
Article 8 Education ..............................................................................................................15
1. Models and forms of education in the languages and scripts of national minorities...17
2. Institutions in the languages and scripts of national minorities...................................18
Article 9 Judicial Authorities ...............................................................................................22
1. Proceedings in civil matters and other proceedings ....................................................24
2. Proceedings before courts which hear administrative cases ........................................24
3. Proceedings before courts which hear criminal cases .................................................25
4. Proceedings before courts which hear probate cases...................................................25
Article 10 Administrative Authorities and Public Services .................................................25
1. An Overview of Towns and Municipalities on whose territory a minority language
and script is in equal official use .................................................................................26
2. The equal, official use of the languages and scripts of national minorities before
administrative bodies and public services ..................................................................34
3. The equal official use of languages and script of national minorities in proceedings
before administrative bodies in the first instance and legal persons vested with public
authority.......................................................................................................................35
4. The proceedings of bodies of state administration in the languages and script of
national minorities .......................................................................................................37
Article 11 Media .................................................................................................................49
1. The Right to Build and Use of Infrastructure for Broadcasting ..................................50
2. Property Relations .......................................................................................................51
3. The Aim of Programming............................................................................................52
4. The Croatian Radio and Television Act ......................................................................56
Article 12 Cultural Activities and Facilities ........................................................................61
Article 13 Economic and Social Life ...................................................................................65
Article 14 Transfrontier Cultural Exchanges.......................................................................65
Conclusion ...............................................................................................................................72

2

INTRODUCTION
1.
The Republic of Croatia came into being as an independent sovereign state in
1991. By the Constitution of the Republic as the basic legal act (Narodne novine ("Official
Gazette", No. 41/01 – consolidated text) it is defined as an integral and indivisible democratic
and social state which functions on the principle of separation of powers between the
legislative, executive and judicial powers, limited by the right to local and regional selfgovernment guaranteed by the Constitution.
The territory of the Republic of Croatia
consists of 20 counties and the City of Zagreb and 547 units of local self- government
(municipalities and towns). Executive power is divided between the Government of the
Republic of Croatia and the President of the Republic of Croatia.
Everyone has rights and freedoms, independent of his/her race, skin colour, gender,
language, religion, political or other beliefs, national or social origin, property, birth,
education, social position or other characteristics. The Republic of Croatia is a community of
free and equal citizens in which all are equal before the law.
For members of national minorities, as for all citizens of the Republic of Croatia,
economic, social, cultural and other rights, exercised subject to the conditions established by
law, are guaranteed by the Constitution.
As has been mentioned above, power is limited by the right to local and regional selfgovernment. The laws which regulate certain fields of competencies give increasing rights to
units of local and regional self- government.
The system of local and regional self- government and the powers given to local and
regional units ensure the right of local units, in accord with the local situation and needs of
the population, to regulate the way the rights of their population may be realised. Thus they
introduce into official use minority languages in situations foreseen by the law, when the
members of a minority do not make up the majority of the population and when this is not
foreseen by international agreements.
The Republic of Croatia, before becoming independent in 1991, was throughout
history part of various states within which the population moved, so that today in the territory
of Croatia there are living members of other peoples with whom Croatia or some of its parts
were previously in a common state. In the Preamble to the Constitution of the Republic of
Croatia it is stated that it is founded as the national state of the Croatian people and the state
of the members of autochthonous national minorities: Serbs, Czechs, Slovaks, Italians, Jews,
Germans, Austrians, Ukrainians, Ruthenians and others who are its citizens, and who are
guaranteed equality with citizens of Croatian nationality and the realisation of their national
rights in accord with the democratic standards of the UN and the countries of the free world.
The provisions of Article 3 of the Constitutional Act On Human Rights And
Freedoms And The Rights Of Ethnic And National Communities Or Minorities In The
Republic Of Croatia (Narodne novine no. 51/00) state: “The Republic of Croatia protects the
equality of members of national minorities: Albanians, Austrians, Bulgarians, Montenegrins,
Czechs, Hungarians, Macedonia ns, Germans, Poles, Roma, Romanians, Russians,
Ruthenians, Slovaks, Slovenes, Serbs, Italians, Turks, Ukrainians, Vlachs, Jews and other
ethnic and national communities or minorities and encourages their comprehensive
development.”

3

-

(note: members of minorities are given in alphabetical order)

According to the census taken in the Republic of Croatia in 1991, citizens declared
themselves to belong to 23 different nationalities, but most of them do not have the status of a
national minority. Members of individual nationalities immigrated into the territory of the
Republic of Croatia as economic migrants or after the world wars (Russians, Bulgarians),
whilst some of the members of autochthonous national minorities left this region (Italians,
Germans after World War II).
Apart from short periods when there were some manifestations of intolerance
regarding individual minorities as a result of the war (for example in relation to the Italians
and Germans after the World War II, when they emigrated) members of minorities realise a
significant range of rights on the territory of the Republic of Croatia.
Thus even before its independence, the Republic of Croatia protected minority rights
by its Constitution, declaring the equality of members of minorities with the ma jority
nationality and introducing the official use of minority languages.
Before independence in the Republic of Croatia in some municipalities Italian, Czech,
Hungarian, Slovak, Ruthenian and Ukrainian languages were in official use, and education
was carried out for members of minorities in their mother tongue or additional lessons were
provided in language and culture, as well as the support in the realisation of cultural
autonomy.
Regarding the protection of the rights of minorities in relation to bilateral agreements,
the Republic of Croatia accepted the Osim Agreement signed between the former state and
the Republic of Italy, which protects the position of the Italian minority, and itself initiated
the bilateral regulation of minority rights, signing separate agreements with Italy and
Hungary, and investing efforts to regulate this issue with other countries whose minorities
live in the territory of the Republic of Croatia, just as Croatian minorities live in those
countries.
The position which the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia and the Constitutional
Act on Human Rights and Freedoms and on the Rights of Ethnic and National Communities
or Minorities in the Republic of Croatia guarantee members of minorities allows for the
possibility of schooling in their own language or additional lessons in their mother tongue,
history and culture, the foundation of minority associations with a variety of goals, cultural
autonomy, the publication of newspapers, magazines and books in their minority languages,
and various forms of use of a minority language before judicial and administrative bodies.
The signing of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages gave further
support for the legal regulation and elaboration of individual minority rights guaranteed by
the Constitution and the Constitutional Act on Human Rights and Freedoms and on the
Rights of Ethnic and National Communities or Minorities in the Republic of Croatia, and
determined the direction for normative regulation of these rights.
2. With respect to the definition contained in Paragraph a) Article 1 of the European
Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, that is the use of regional or minority languages
within a given territory of a state, we point out that in the Republic of Croatia it is not
possible to precisely delineate a given territory, since members of national minorities are
present throughout the entire territory, in greater or lesser numbers.
4

Members of the Italian minority are mainly concentrated in the territory of the
Istarska County, members of the Czech minority in the territory of the Bjelovarskobilogorska County, whilst the members of the Hungarian, Slovak, Ruthenian and Ukrainian
minority are in the territory of the Osjecko-baranjska County and the Vukovarsko-srijemska
County. The Serbian minority mainly live dispersed throughout the entire territory of the
Republic of Croatia, whilst a smaller number are concentrated in parts of several counties
(Šibensko-kninska, Zadarska, Licko-senjska, Karlovacka, Sisacko- moslavacka, Vukovarskosrijemska and Osjecko-baranjska Counties).
This situation changed during the war in Croatia when members of the non-Serb
minorities together with Croats were expelled from the occupied area of the Bjelovarskobilogorska, Osjecko-baranjska and Vukovarsko-srijemska counties, and after the war when
the members of the Serb minority partially left the area which had been occupied until that
time, and settled in parts of the Osjecko-baranjska and Vukovarsko-srijemska counties which
were being administered by the UNTAES.
In April 2001 a comprehensive census was carried out of the population in the
Republic of Croatia. The census included a question about national affiliation, and thus on the
territory of the Republic of Croatia there are inhabitants now living who are members of 22
nationalities, with the proviso that there was no obligation to declare one’s national
affiliation.
The demographic structure of the country according to national structure is as follows
(according to data from the State Institute for Statistics):
NATIONAL STRUCTURE

NO. OF MEMBERS

PERCENTAGE %

ALBANIANS

15 082

0,34

AUSTRIANS

247
0.01

BOSNIACS
20 755

0.47

331

0.01

4 926

0.01

10 510

0.24

16 595

0.37

4 270

0.1

2 902

0.07

567

0.01

9 463

0.21

BULGARIANS
MONTENEGRINS
CZECHS
HUNGARIANS
MACEDONIANS
GERMANS
POLES
ROMA

5

ROMANIANS
475

0.01

906

0.02

2 337

0.05

4 712

0.11

13 173

0.3

201 631

4.54

19 636

0.44

300

0.01

1 977

0.04

RUSSIANS
RUTHENIANS
SLOVAKS
SLOVENES
SERBS
ITALIANS
TURKS
UKRAINIANS
VLACHS
12
JEWS
576

0.01

21 801

0.49

REGIONAL
AFFILIATION

9 302

0.21

UNKNOWN
NATIONALITY

17 975

OTHERS

Members of minorities are located in more significant numbers mostly on the
territories of individual counties, and accordingly, for example in the Šibensko-kninska
County there are 10 229 members of the Serb nationality, in the Osjecko-baranjska County
28 866, Licko-senjska County 6 193, Zadarska County 5 716, Karlovacka County 15 651,
Vukovarsko-srijemska County 31 644, Sisacko-moslavacka County 21 617, Požeškoslavonska County 5 616, Bjelovarsko-bilogorska 9 421. There are 14 284 members of the
Italian national minority on the territory of the Istarska County.
3. According to the population census, the list according to mother tongue, that is the
list according to languages, looks as follows according to the declaration of the number of
those who speak each language:

6

2001 CENSUS
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø

Croatian
Croatio-Serbian
Albanian
Bosniac
Bulgarian
Montenegrin
Czech
Hungarian
Macedonian
German
Polish
Roma
Russian
Ruthenian
Slovak
Slovene
Serbian
Serbo-Croat
Italian
Turkish
Ukrainian
Vlach
Jewish
other
unknown

4 265, 081
2 054
14 621
9 197
265
460
7, 178
12, 650
3, 534
3, 013
536
1 205
1 080
1 828
3 993
11 872
44 629
4 961
20 521
347
1 027
7
8
2 824
16 709

96. 12%
0. 05%
0. 33 %
0. 21 %
0 .01 %
0. 01 %
0.16 %
0. 29 %
0. 08 %
0. 07 %
0. 01 %
0. 03 %
0. 02 %
0. 04 %
0. 09 %
0. 27 %
1. 01 %
0. 11 %

(CENSUS) 1991
LANGUAGE

Croatian
Croatian-Serbian
Croatian
Serbian
Macedonian
Slovene
Albanian
Czech
Hungarian
Roma
Ruthenian
Slovak
Italian
Ukrainian
Other languages
TOTAL

NO.
POPULATION

or

OF STRUCTURE
PERCENTAGES %

3 922 725

81.99 %

466 968
207 300
5 462
19 341
12 735
10 378
19 684
7 657
2 845
5 265
26 580
1 430
11 480
4 784 265

9.76 %
4.33 %
0.11 %
0.40 %
0.27
0.22
0.41
0.16
0.06
0.11
0.56
0.03
0.24
100

Serbo-

7

IN

PART ONE
1.
The following laws are relevant to the application of the European Charter for
Regional Languages in the Republic of Croatia
– The Constitution of the Republic of Croatia, especially Articles 12 and 15
(Narodne novine, no. 41/01, consolidated text)
- The Constitutional Act on Human Rights and the Rights of Ethnic and
National Communities or Minorities in the Republic of Croatia (Narodne
novine no: 1051/00 – consolidated text) especially Articles 7 and 8.
- The Act on the Use of Languages and Scripts of National Minorities in the
Republic of Croatia (Narodne novine no. 51/00)
- The Act on Education in the Languages and Scripts of National Minorities
(Narodne novine no. 51/00).
These are the basic laws through which the obligations taken on with the Charter are
applied, and provisions on the use of languages and scripts of national minorities are also
contained in other laws and regulations regulating the use of minority languages for the field
to which they apply (examples of such provisions of laws are given in the Report).
2. and 3. The following Ministries took part in the work on this Report:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

The Ministry of Education and Sport, for the field of education
The Ministry of Culture, for the field of cultural activities,
The Ministry of Internal Affairs, for issuing documents in minority languages,
4. The Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare, for economic and social issues,
The Ministry of Maritime Affairs, Transport and Communications, for the field of the
media,
6. The Ministry of Health, for the area of the use of minority languages in public
institutions,
7. The Ministry of Justice, Administration and Local Self- government as the one
responsible for the making of the Report, for the other fields of the use of minority
languages, Ulica Republike Austrije 14-16, Zagreb.
Each of these bodies wrote the part of the Report covered by its scope of work. Upon
completion the report was sent to these bodies for their opinion with a request for comments
and suggestions. It was also sent to the Office for National Minorities of the Government of
the Republic of Croatia which was founded as a governmental expert body to care for the
realisation of the rights of national minorities, and it was asked to give its opinion on the
content.
The Office for National Minorities also implements the Program for Roma which is
aimed at improving the overall position of the Roma in the Republic of Croatia. A major
problem regarding the integration in Croatian society is the fact that most Roma do not speak
Croatian or read the Latin script, but attempts are being made to ease the situation through the
organisation of pre-school institutions, and various play groups for children, in order to create
the conditions for better education for this population group.
The Human Rights Office has also been set up to monitor the overall system of the
protection and promotion of human rights in the Republic of Croatia, and to monitor its
efficiency. It is working on the National Program for the Protection and Promotion of Human

8

Rights and monitors its implementation, considers the situation of individual human rights in
the Republic of Croatia and the compliance of domestic legislation with the provisions of the
Constitution of the Republic of Croatia, the Constitutional Act on Human Rights and
international instruments in the field of human rights.
The Act on the ratification of the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages was enacted with the agreement and opinion of the Parliamentary Committee on
Human Rights and its Minorities Sub-Committee whose members are Members of Parliament
elected from the ranks of the national minorities.
4. The manner of informing the public about the rights and obligations arising from
the Charter was through professional literature or texts dealing with an analysis of the
application of the Charter, and through the organisation of round tables on the subject of the
protection of the rights of members of national minorities, as part of which the right to the use
of minority languages and scripts was also analysed along with all other rights arising from
the articles adopted from the European Charter for Languages.

Recommendations of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
The Committee of Ministers recommended for the Republic of Croatia to take into
consideration all the comments of the Committee of Experts, and as priority issues:
To adopt and effectively apply legal acts and regulations needed for the implementation
of the existing Constitutional and basic laws which have the aim of protecting and
ensuring the use of regional or minority languages.
2. By legal means to set up the appropriate infrastructure for teaching in regional or
minority languages and teaching those languages in accordance with Croatia's
obligations under Article 8 of the Charter, and especially provide sufficient teaching
materials and training for teachers in regional or minority languages.
1.

In May 2000 the Republic of Croatia passed a packet of laws regulating the rights of
members of national minorities regarding the use of their own language and script.
First of all, as has been mentioned, the Act on the use of Languages and Scripts of
National Minorities in the Republic of Croatia was enacted and the Act on Education in the
Language and Script of National Minorities. The Constitutional Act on Amendments and
Supplements to the Constitutional Act on Human Rights and the Rights of Ethnic National
Communities or Minorities in the Republic of Croatia was also enacted, which accepted the
objections of some national minorities that they were not mentioned in the Constitution
(Slovenes, Bosniacs) and amendments were made to the provisions which prescribed
territorial autonomy for a smaller part of the Serbian minority and the suspension of the
provision on the representation of minorities in Parliament was abolished.
For now, in relation to these recommendations, we may mention the enactment of the
Act on Education in the Languages and Scripts of National Minorities, which defines in more
detail some existing institutions relating to the education of pupils at school and their
teachers. The conditions are defined for the foundation of a minority language school, who
can be a teacher in that kind of school, and its principal, how the public documents of the
school should be written, criteria for the formation of classes and all other issues related to

9

the functioning of this kind of institution, or section, where members of a national minority
are educated in their own language and script.
Funds for the work of this kind of institution are provided from the State Budget of
the Republic of Croatia, as well as from other sources of course, but from these provisions it
is clear that the Republic of Croatia also financially supports the education of national
minorities and the promotion of minority languages as a specific characteristic of the country
(a detailed presentation or the manner of implementation of these recommendations relating
to education is given under Article 8, Education).
4. Establish the necessary legal basis for the official use of regional or minority languages in
state and regional administration as well as in courts, and particularly to avoid allowing
local authorities to chose whether they will apply Articles 9 and 10 of the Charter and 5. Reexamine the administrative division carried out in 1992 to overcome barriers to the
promotion of regional or minority languages which were created by the newly established
administrative divisions.
The Republic of Croatia by legal regulations, makes it possible for units of local selfgovernment to regulate various issues, in accord with the needs of the population living in a
given territory. We believe that in this way we are on the way to overcoming the hindrances,
not only to the promotion of regional and minority languages, but also the realisation of other
minority rights (support for minority cultural institutions etc.).
As has been mentioned, power in the Republic of Croatia is limited by the right to
local and regional self- government. Units of local self- government have not been given
exclusively the right to decide whether in their territory a minority language will be spoken
officially. This is just one of the options, since it is assumed that such a unit knows best the
needs of its population. And precisely for the purpose of meeting the needs of the people to
officially use the language and script of the national minority they belong to, the units have
been given the possibility, insofar they assess that in their territory there is a need for the
introduction of a minority language, to introduce that language by their statutes. These
statutes are pieces of secondary legislation, the passing of which comes under the
competence of the local units, but we emphasise that this is not exclusively their decision, but
only one of the possibilities they may use if they feel it to be useful. (For example, a
municipality where members of a minority live wishes to introduce their language into
official use in its territory, but that obligation does not arise for it from other criteria, for the
members of the minority are in relatively small numbers there, and the obligation does not
arise from international agreements etc. Since it is a community where people are “bilingual”, in this case there is a legal possibility for introducing that language into official use
in the area). The right to local self- government is a Constitutional right in the Republic of
Croatia.
(Reply to recommendation 3: build an institutional mechanism which will encourage
the direct participation of people who speak regional or minority languages in planning,
financing and organising cultural activities, and in the field of the public media.)
With the starting point of the Constitutiona l right to local self- government which
enables units of local and regional self- government to carry out tasks in their local
competence which directly meet the needs of the people, and especially tasks relating to
education, culture, physical culture and the possibility of citizens to form various forms of
associations, created as interest groups with the aim of protecting and cultivating various
10

rights, including the right to the use of minority languages and scripts and cultural activities
in these minority languages, we believe that there are legal and other mechanisms which
promote and enable members of national minorities to organise various cultural activities in
their own language and script. In many cases, units of local self- government provide support
from their funds for the work of these cultural activities in various forms, if this kind of help
is sought by the members of the minority, whether by the provision of facilities or direct
financial help. In practice we find examples where precisely the local unit wishes to regulate
by its statute the possibilities for this kind of support. Also various cultural organisations of
members of national minorities realise their right to a certain amount from the state budget of
the Republic of Croatia for their work.
For the issue of the use of minority languages in court, we mention that this
possibility exists in laws in force which govern certain areas in the manner given in Article 9
Judicial Authorities, with the proviso that in this field, there has been no change in relation to
the use of minority languages before judicial authorities, but the situation is the same as was
mentioned in the previous report.
6. Strengthen the mechanisms for supervision of the implementation of the commitments and
in that way guarantee more comprehensive information. 7. Publicise periodic reports on the
application of the Charter to ensure that interested organisations and persons are informed
of the rights and obligations confirmed in the Charter and its implementation.
In relation to the above, the Republic of Croatia has, albeit after a long delay, prepared
a web-site which will contain the Initial Report on the Application of the Charter.
This report, or the work on it, has been carried out in a different way, that is its contents
have been made known to all the Ministries who took part in its completion, as well as the
Office for National Minorities, and the associations of members of national minorities, and
they were asked to give comments and suggestions on the content of the report.
The text of the Charter for Regional or Minority Languages itself since the time it came
into force, has been available to anyone who wishes to become acquainted with what it
contains through the official gazette of the Republic of Croatia Narodne novine. It is also
emphasised that the adopted report was sent to all minority associations.
6 and 7. As part of acquainting the public with the Periodic Report on the Application of
the European Charter for Regional and Minority Languages, the recommendations were
presented at the same time. This form of presentation was chosen since the recommendations
were sent towards the end of the period covered by this Periodic Report.

PART TWO
1. In the Republic of Croatia from the time of the submission of the Initial Report on
the Application of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, there have been
significant changes in the sense that the provisions of the Charter have been applied in the
legislation of the Republic of Croatia, in the Act on the Use of the Languages and Scripts of
National Minorities as a law, whose long procedure for enactment and adjustment to the
present situation was speeded up by the application of the Charter.

11

The text of the new Constitutional Act is in the drafting phase. The Working Group of the
Government of the Republic of Croatia is involved in the work according to the
recommendations of the Venice Commission.
At same time as the amendments to the Constitutional Act, an Act was passed on the Use
of Languages and Scripts of National Minorities in the Republic of Croatia. This Act
comprehensively regulates the introduction of minority languages and scripts in all those
regions where legal preconditions exist. The law regulates the functioning of administrative
bodies, legal entities, that is life in general (including the existence of external hallmarks) in
such a way that it is clear that members of a national minority live in a given territory, on the
basis of laws or secondary legislation (the statutes of units of local self- government).
The application of this Act is supervised by the Ministry of Justice, Administration and
Local Self- government and its provisions apply to the bodies of state administration in the
first instance when the y operate in the territory of a municipality or town where a minority
language has been introduced into equal official use, as well as the local authorities and legal
entities vested with public powers.
Article 4. of The Act on the Use of the Languages and Scripts of National Minorities
regulates when a minority language is to be introduced into equal official use.
The equal official use of languages and scripts of national minorities is realised in
accordance with the provisions of the Constitutional Act on Human rights and Freedoms and
on the Rights of Ethnic and National Communities or Minorities in the Republic of Croatia
and the Act under the following conditions:
“1.
When members of individual national minorities in the territory of a municipality or
town make up the majority of the population, in accordance with the Constitutional Act on
Human rights and Freedoms and on the Rights of Ethnic and National Communities or
Minorities in the Republic of Croatia, the Framework Convention for the Protection of
National Minorities of the Council of Europe and this Act,
2.
When stipulated by international agreements to which the Republic of Croatia is a
party,
3.
When municipalities and towns have prescribed it in their statutes, in accordance with
the Constitutional Act on Human rights and Freedoms and on the Rights of Ethnic and
National Communities or Minorities in the Republic of Croatia, the Framework Convention
for the Protection of National Minorities of the Council of Europe and this Act,
4.
When in relation to the work of its bodies, within the scope of its self- governing
competence it is prescribed as such in the statute of a county in whose territory in certain
municipalities and cities the languages and scripts of national minorities are in equal official
use.
When the conditions are met for the introduction of a minority language in the territory of
a municipality or town, then the use of two or more languages extends to the other spheres of
life in these areas from the administrative bodies to the name of the locality (how this may be
realised in practice will be dealt with below).

12

There follows the Act on Education in the Languages and Scripts of National Minorities,
which regulates the conditions for the foundation and functioning of institutions for the
education of members of minorities, and provisions on the teaching plans and programs for
education which, along with the general part, must contain a part whose content is related to
the specific characteristic of the national minority (mother tongue, literature, history,
geography and cultural creativity). Educational work in the school with teaching in the
language and script of a national minority is carried out by teachers from the national
minority who are in complete command of the language and script of the national minority,
or teachers who are not from the national minority who are in compete command of the
language and script of the national minority. In the areas where the statute of the municipality
or town mandates the official use of a minority language and script, the possibility will be
offered to pupils taught in Croatian to learn the minority language, and those who attend the
minority language school shall compulsorily learn Croatian and the Latin script. The funds
necessary for the work of these institutions are provided from the state budget, and the
application of the Act is supervised by the Ministry for Education and Sport, which as the
competent body of central state administration is obliged to offer expert assistance to the
work of these institutions (the manner in which the education of minorities is realised is
presented under Article 8). The former Act on Education in the Languages of Minorities has
been amended and brought up to date by this Act.

On the basis of Article 2, Paragraph 2 of the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages, the Charter is applied in relation to the Italian, Hungarian, Serbian, Czech,
Slovak, Ruthenian, and Ukrainian languages, namely the following provisions:
-

- from Article 8 Paragraph 1
sub-paragraph a) point iii
sub-paragraph b) point iv
sub-paragraph c) point iv
sub-paragraph d) point iv
sub-paragraph e) point ii
sub-paragraph f) point ii
sub-paragraph g)
sub-paragraph h)

-

from Article 9 Paragraph 1

-

sub-paragraph a) points ii and iv

-

sub-paragraph b) points ii and iii

-

sub-paragraph c) points ii and iii

-

sub-paragraph d
-

-

Paragraph 2

sub-paragraph a)

13

from Article 10, Paragraph 1
- sub-paragraph a) points ii and iv
- sub-paragraph b)
- sub-paragraph c)
- Paragraph 2
-

sub-paragraph a)
sub-paragraph b)
sub-paragraph c)
sub-paragraph d)
sub-paragraph g)

-

sub-paragraph a)
sub-paragraph b)

-

sub-paragraph c)

-

Paragraph 3

-

Paragraph 5

from Article 11, Paragraph 1
- sub-paragraph a) point iii
- sub-paragraph d)
- sub-paragraph e) point ii
Paragraph 2
Paragraph 3
from Article 12 Paragraph 1
- sub-paragraph a)
- sub-paragraph f)
- sub-paragraph g)
from Article 13 Paragraph 1
- sub-paragraph a)

PART THREE
As has already been mentioned in the previous points, Article 7 of the European
Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, that is its goals and principles, are realised
through: the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia, the Constitutional Act on Human Rights
and the Rights of Ethnic and National Communities or Minorities in the Republic of Croatia,
the Act on the Use of the Languages and Scripts of National Minorities in the Republic of
Croatia and the Act on Education in the Languages and Scripts of National Minorities, in the
following ways:
In the Constitutional Act (Article 6) the Republic of Croatia obliges itself to guarantee
members of national minorities:
a) full respect of the principle of non-discrimination as foreseen in international
instruments,

14

b) the right to protection from any activity which may or which could endanger their
survival,
c) the right to identity, culture, religious confession, public or private use of
language
d) protection of equal participation in public affairs such as enjoyment of political
and economic freedoms in the social sphere, access to the media and in the field of
education and cultural issues in general,
e) the right to decide which ethnic or national community or minority a person
wishes to belong to, and enjoyment of all rights related to that choice, whether
individual, or in association with other persons. This right especially relates to
cases of marriage between persons belonging to different ethnic or national
communities or minorities, with no harm to the person in question.
Education (Article 13) of members of national minorities takes place in pre-school
institutions and schools in their own languages and script, according to special programs
containing in an appropriate manner their history, culture and science as far as they wish.
Under the Act on Education in the Languages and Scripts of National Minorities (Article 2,
Paragraph 1), education in the language and script of the national minority takes place in preschool institutions, elementary and high schools and other school institutions and other forms
of education (seminars, summer and winter schools etc.) in the manner established by the
law.
Members of all national minorities in the Republic of Croatia may freely use their
own language and script in private and public life. In the same way they may freely organise
informative and publishing work in their own language and script. The Republic of Croatia
and bodies of local self- government support the realisation of these rights financially, in
accordance with their means. If they are represented in the total number of the population
with more than 8% then they have the right to representation in proportion to their share in
the total number of the population. Insofar as their share is less than 8%, they have the right
to elect at least five, and at most seven representatives in the Croatian Parliament.
With the aim of implementing the provisions mentioned on the rights of national
minorities to education, access to the media and the realisation of their proportional share in
public services and other institutions in this fields, the Government of the Republic of Croatia
has the Office for National Minorities. For the areas where the number of members of
national minorities demands, the Government of the Republic of Croatia shall set up Regional
Offices for National Minorities. The Republic of Croatia shall co-operate with and take
advice, directly or through mixed committees with governments and institutions of interested
countries for the most comprehensive realisation possible of human rights and the rights of
ethnic and national communities or minorities.

THE APPLICATION OF THE CHARTER
Article 8 Education
-

Paragraph 1
Sub-paragraph a) point iii,
Sub-paragraph b) point iv,
Sub-paragraph c) point iv,
15

-

Sub-paragraph d) point iv
Sub-paragraph e) point ii
Sub-paragraph f) point ii
Sub-paragraph g)
Sub-paragraph h)

Education in the languages and scripts of national minorities in the Republic of Croatia is
prescribed in the Act on Education in the Languages and Scripts of National Minorities which
replaced the Act of 1979 when it came into force. Members of national minorities have the
opportunity to be educated in their mother tongue from pre-school to higher education
systems of training and education.
Minority languages in which education of members of national minorities is carried out
are divided into two groups, that is the territorial or minority languages and the non-territorial
languages, according to the European Charter for Regional and Minority Languages or the
Act on its ratification.
The regional or minority languages used for teaching are:
v
v
v
v
v
v
v

Czech
Hungarian
Ruthenian
Slovak
Serbian
Italian
Ukrainian

The areas where regional or minority languages are used in teaching in the language and
script of the national minorities are:
1. Istarska County
2. Primorsko-goranska County
3. Bjelovarsko-bilogorska
4. Osjecko-baranjska County
5. Vukovarsko-srijemska County
6. Sisacko- moslavacka County
7. Licko-senjska County
8. Požeško-slavonska County

Italian
Italian and Serbian,
Czech and Slovak,
Serbian, Hungarian and Slovak
Hungarian, Ruthenian, Serbian and Slovak
Ukrainian
Serbian
Serbian

Non-regional minority languages used in teaching:
- German
- Hebrew
We also include in this group the Roma language, which is not used for teaching since the
language is no t standardised and pupils from the Roma population are included in the regular
educational system in the Croatian language.

16

1.
Models and forms of education in the languages and scripts of national
minorities
The members of national minorities realise their constitutional right to education
through three basic models and several special forms of education.
MODEL A
All lessons take place in the language and script of the national minority with
compulsory teaching of the Croatian language. As a rule this model is used in special
institutions but may also be used in Croatian language institutions in separate departments in
the languages and scripts of national minorities.
MODEL B
Teaching is carried out in the Croatian language and the language and script of the
national minority, what is known as bi- lingual teaching. The natural sciences are taught in
Croatian and the social science subjects or the national group of subjects are taught in the
language and script of the national minority. This kind of teaching takes place as a rule with
teaching in the Croatian language, but in separate class groups.
MODEL C
The cultivation of language and culture is a special teaching program which runs for
five school hours a week with a complete program of teaching in the Croatian language. The
program covers teaching in the language and literature of the national minority, history,
geography, music and art. The plan and program are verified by the Ministry of Education
and Sport, upon the proposal by experts from amongst the relevant minority.
Members of national minorities themselves propose and chose the model and
program in accord with the existing laws and their capacity to realise the program. All
models and forms of education are within the regular educational program of the Republic
of Croatia.
The application of models and forms
Model A is applied by the Czech, Hungarian, Slovak, Serbian and Italian national
minorities.
Model B is applied by the Czech, Hungarian, German, Austrian and Serbian national
minorities.
Model C is applied by the Czech, Hungarian, Ruthenian, Slovak, Serbian and
Ukrainian national minorities.
The form of teaching where the language of the national minority is taught as the
language of the environment is used in the Istarska County, for the Italian language. Forms of
winter and summer schools are used by the Ruthenian and Ukrainian national minorities and
the Roma national minority. The correspondence-consultative form has been used since 2001
by the Serbian national minority.

17

2.

Institutions in the languages and scripts of national minorities

Teaching in their languages and scripts is realized by national minorities in separate
institutions when they fulfil the conditions laid down by law. On the basis of law, this right
has been attained by the Czech, Hungarian, Serbian and Italian national minorities for the
following levels of education:
-

Pre-school and elementary school education for the Czech minority,
Pre-school, elementary school and high school education for the Hungarian and Italian
national minorities,
The Serbian national minority realise this right in pre-school education, but their right to
elementary school education in a separate institution has not yet been realised.

The other national minorities do no t realise their right to independent institutions, since
they do not fulfil the legal conditions for this, but education in their own languages and
scripts are carried out in separate classes in Croatian language institutions, which is also one
possibility. These classes and groups as a rule are formed with a smaller number of pupils
than the number prescribed for teaching in the Croatian language.
Pre-School Education
Pre-school education is carried out in all locations where the members of minorities have
submitted a request for the realisation of their rights and fulfilled the conditions for their
realisation, in accord with the valid laws and regulations. The organisation of teaching in
institutionalised pre-school education is within the competence of local self- government, and
the programs are within the competence of the Ministry of Education and Sport.
This form of education is realised by: the Czech, Hungarian, German, Austrian, Roma,
Serbian, Italian and Jewish national minorities.
Elementary Education
The obligation or right to elementary education is implemented in all locations where there is
the opportunity to realise this form of education in the minority languages, in accordance
with the laws in force.
Elementary school education is realised by the following minorities: Czech, Hungarian,
German, and Austrian, Ruthenian, Serbian, Slovak, Italian and Ukrainian. Some of these
minorities realise this education only through teaching to cultivate the language and culture,
that is model C (Ruthenian and Ukrainian and Slovak in large percentages) .
High School Education
The obligation or right to high school education is carried out in all locations where a
request has been made by the minority and where lessons may be organised in accordance
with all the valid laws on education.
Minorities who have organised high school education realise their rights by means of
all three models of education mentioned for teaching in minority languages, as follows: the
Czech, Hungarian, Serbian and Italian minorities.

18

Technical And Vocational Education
Technical and vocational education in the languages and scripts of the national
minorities is realised by the Hungarian, Serbian and Italian minorities according to models A
and B, as part of their high schools.
University And Other Forms Of Higher Education
University and other forms of higher education are in the competence of the Ministry
of Science and Technology. The Czech, Hungarian, Italian, Serbian and Ukrainian national
minorities realise this right.
Adult Education And Continuous Education
There was no request for this form of education from members of national minorities
in 2001. Members of the Roma national minority are attempting to realise this right by means
of special programs, also in the Croatian language.
History And Culture Lessons
The history and culture of the minorities are included in the program of language and
culture, or model C.
Basic Education And Further Professional Teacher Training
The Italian national minority realises basic education for teachers for pre-school and
elementary school teaching at the Pedagogic Academy in Pula, and the Serbian minority
through the Teachers’ Academy in Zagreb. Further professional training is organised
systematically through educational institutions for teachers, and members of national
minorities have additional training by means of seminars in their mother countries.
There follows a table presenting the regional or minority languages in the educational
system of the Republic of Croatia according to the number of pupils for the period from 1999
to 2001.

19

Key: CT : Croatian language teaching, LC: language and culture lessons, MLT:
teaching in the minority language
MINORITY
LANGUAGE

YEAR

TOTAL
PRE-SCHOOL
EDUCATION

CZECH

CL

ELEMENTARY
SCHOOL
CL
LC
MLT

CL

LC
LC

MLT
138
145
148
MLT

CL

LC

96
46
63
MLT

-

1999.
2000.
2001.

HIGH SCHOOL
CL

LC

MLT

LC

47
37
37
MLT

888
1099
1104

36
30
13
LC

24
63
82
MLT

887
686
881

CL

424
463
461
LC

279
454
458
MLT

CL

454
430
424
LC

277
117
299
MLT

425

154

3522

-

1639

5740

279
302
LC

3535
3100
MLT

LC

1487
1334
MLT

5719
5146

LC

418
410
MLT

-

511
704
716

-

2767
2206
2140

-

816
820
786

4094
3730
3642

1999.
2000.
2001.

435
424
454

14
16
8

1999.
2000.
2001.

80
163
167

CL

HUNGARIAN
1999.
2000.
2001.

CL

SERBIAN
1999.
2000.
2001.
CL

CL

CL

ITALIAN
1999.
2000.
2001.

SLOVAK
449
440
462

UKRAINIAN
AND
RUTHENIAN
80
163
167

GERMAN
1999.
2000.
2001.

32
25
26

61
50
54

93
75
80

ROMA
–
National minority
1999.
2000.
2001.

112
70
58

1112
1083
1370

20

30
117
200

1254
1270
1628

1999
Total 12 281
Pre-school education 1 202
Elementary school: Total 8467
Models A and B 6920
Model C 1547
Total 2539
High School: Total 2 539
Models A and B 2526
Model C 36
Higher Education

50 students

2000
Total 11 975
Pre-school education:
1 338
Elementary school Total: 8137
Models A and B:
6378
Model C:
1759
High School Total:
2 337
Models A and B:
2307
Model C:
30
Higher Education 62 students
2001
Total 11 589
Pre-school education 1 363
Elementary school Total 7967
Model C 1908
Secondary school Total 2262
Models A and B 2249
Models A and B 6059
Model C 13
Higher education: 107 students
Members of the Roma national minority have not been added to the total number of
beneficiaries in the individual numbers, as they are taught in the Croatian language and
therefore they are seen as pupils and not as those using their own language.

21

Teaching for members of national minorities in accord with the laws is naturally
carried out according to specific programs and textbooks, and the teachers are themselves
either members of the national minority or they have a good knowledge of the specific
language.
Teaching in the languages and scripts of national minorities in all models is carried
out according to existing plans and programs. After the passing of the Act on Education in
the Languages and Scripts of National Minorities, in co-operation with experts,
representatives of national minorities, work on teaching plans and programs is in progress
whose content is related to the specific nature of each national minority.
Textbooks: Some of the textbooks for members of national minorities are printed or
translated every academic year on the recommendation of the minorities, in accordance with
the financial means of the Ministry of Education and Sport. Publication and printing of
textbooks in the languages of national minorities is more expensive in relatio n to the printing
of textbooks in Croatian. The reason for this is the small print run. The difference between
the production costs and sales price is borne by the State Budget of the Republic of Croatia.
All pupils pay the same price for their textbooks. Most of the textbooks are translated from
Croatian into the language and scripts of the national minorities, and some are original
textbooks and handbooks. A small number are imported from the mother countries of the
national minority. For members of the Roma national minority, textbooks are supplied free by
the Republic of Croatia.
Staff: The Ministry of Education and Sport endeavours for teaching in all forms of
education and training in the languages and scripts of minorities to be carried out
professionally and in minority languages. The law prescribes the priority of employment of
members of national minorities, and any deviations are only permissible where there is a lack
of staff from the minority. In that case the conditions are a complete knowledge of the
language and script of the minority as well as expertise in the appropriate subject. If in this
way it is not possible to solve the problem of professional teaching staff, some minorities use
their right to employ foreigners with a work permit. In 2001, the election of school
supervisors and advisors began, for education and training in the languages and scripts of
national minorities, taken from the ranks of the members of national minorities.
We may link to the above recommendation no. 2 relating to the institutional
infrastructure for teaching in minority languages and teaching staff. There are namely, the
academies in Pula and Zagreb, as well as departments at universities, where the specific
characteristics of national minorities are studied. Naturally it is always possible to do more
and better, but for now it is as it is, and we believe that with a better financial basis we could
improve the position of the teaching infrastructure and staff in the education of members of
national minorities. With the decentralisation of education it is now amongst other things
within the competence of the local authorities.

Article 9 Judicial Authorities
-

Paragraph 1
Sub-paragraph a) points ii, and iv
Sub-paragraph b) points ii, iii
Sub-paragraph c) points ii, iii

22

-

Sub-paragraph d
Paragraph 2
Sub-paragraph a)

The work of judicial authorities in relation to the application of the European Charter for
Regional or Minority Languages according to Article 9 and its selected provisions, is carried
out as follows:
According to the Act on the Use of the Languages and Scripts of National Minorities in
the Republic of Croatia, the equal official use of minority languages is regulated in
proceedings before first instance judicial authorities. The State Attorney’s Office, and the
Public Prosecutor’s Office in the first instance, are obliged to inform the party from the
territory of the municipality or town which has introduced the language and script of a
national minority of the right to use the language and script of a national minority in the
proceedings, and enter into the minutes a statement as to which language and script the party
is to use in the proceedings. If minutes are not kept of the proceedings, the party’s statement
on which language he/she wishes to use or the request for a bi- lingual document, shall be
entered as an official note.
When the party in the proceedings chooses a language and script of a national minority
which is in equal official use, the body running the proceedings shall, in accord with the
procedural regulations, guarantee the participation of the party in the language and script used
by the national minority. Dispatches of acts in cases where the parties chose to use a minority
language and script shall be sent to the parties in the language and script of the national
minority as well as in Croatian and the Latin script. All the first instance bodies mentioned
above who have their seat in municipalities, towns and counties where alongside the Croatian
language there is a language and script of a national minority in official use, issue public
documents and print forms used for official business in two or more languages. They also in
the same way write the text in two languages on their seals, inscription plates and the
headings of acts in letters of the same size.
The bodies who run second instance proceedings use the Croatian language and Latin
script. In exceptional cases if a party is directly participating in the proceedings before a
second instance body who in the first instance used the language and script of a national
minority which is in equal official use, the proceedings are run as in the first instance.
An accused is guaranteed the right to use his/her mother tongue and to the free assistance
of an interpreter if he/she does not understand or speak the official language of the court
(established in Article 6, Paragraph 3e of the European Convention on Human Rights).
Article 7 of the Criminal Procedure Act prescribes that in criminal proceedings the
Croatian language and Latin script be used, if another language or script has not been
introduced for use in individual areas of the courts by law. We believe that it is not necessary
to regulate the use of another language or script in criminal proceedings by a separate law.
This may best be seen in the use of minority languages in court in the Istarska County, where
according to the Osim Agreement the compulsory use of Italian has been introduced to the
courts.
Briefs or evidence given to the court in writing or orally, will not be rejected by the court
merely because they are written in a minority language. At the party’s request, documents are
23

issued in minority languages and members or minorities or those who speak that language do
not incur any extra costs.
1.

Proceedings in civil matters and other proceedings

According to Article 6 of the Civil Procedure Act (Narodne novine nos.
53/91,91/92,112/99) it is prescribed that civil proceedings be run in the Croatian language
and the Latin script, if another language or script has not been introduced by law in individual
court. This obligation is fulfilled, parties in civil proceedings may use a minority language in
accordance with the conditions described in Article 102 of the Civil Procedure Act. When the
party addresses the court in person he/she may use his/her own language and script, without
incurring any extra costs as a result.
The party may present documents and evidence to the court in a minority language or
may do the same through an interpreter and translator. This right is guaranteed by Article 102
of the Civil Procedure Act.
2.

Proceedings before courts which hear administrative cases

In the Republic of Croatia the Administrative Court hears administrative cases, in
accordance with the Administrative Disputes Act. Proceedings before the Administrative
Court of the Republic of Croatia are conducted entirely in written form in accordance with
the Act mentioned. The parties in these proceedings also may use or furnish documents and
evidence in minority languages, in particular if it is a unit of local self- government who has
introduced the use of two languages in its territory and accordingly, these documents are
permitted and accepted as valid documents before the Administrative Court of the Republic
of Croatia.
We link this part of the text, relating to the realisation of the right to use minority
language and script in cases when a member of a national minority appears as a party, to
recommendation no. 4 of the Committee of Experts of the Council of Europe.
Buje Municipal Court guarantees the accused who are members of the Italian and Serbian
national minorities the use of their minority language and on request issues documents in
minority languages for which the party does not incur any extra expense. The parties are also
allowed to use the Italian or Serbian languages before the court, without incurring any
additional cost.
In the period between 1999 and 2001 criminal proceedings were run in Italian only once,
as the accused was a member of the Italian minority.
At Rovinj Municipal Court in criminal proceedings accused citizens of the Republic of
Croatia who are members of the Italian minority are guaranteed the use of their language in
court, which also applies to witnesses and victims, and the translation and interpretation costs
are regularly borne by the court.
In the same proceedings, the accused, as members of the Italian national minority, may
furnish briefs and petitions and evidence in that language, and translation and interpretation
costs are borne by the court. The decisions of this court, or judgements, rulings, orders,
summons and correspondence are sent to the accused with a translation into the minority
language. The same applies to complaints and indictments.
24

Witnesses and victims who are members of the Italian national minority are served
orders, summons and correspondence with a translation.
In civil proceedings, in ex parte, inheritance and enforcement proceedings, this court
proceeds as in criminal cases (in relation to the parties and witnesses in the proceedings). In
cases where the party or another participant in the proceedings is a member of the Italian
minority, the trial and other hearings are held in the presence of an interpreter for the Italian
language. At the parties’ request, documents are issued also in minority languages after they
have been translated by a court interpreter, and the cost of the translation is regularly borne
by the court.
3.

Proceedings before courts which hear criminal cases

During 1999 Rovinj Municipal Court received 83 criminal cases, and four cases against
accused parties who were citizens of the Republic of Croatia and members of the Italian
minority. In 2000 126 cases were received, 9 against accused who were members of the
Italian minority. In 2001 80 cases were received, one case against an accused from the Italian
minority.
4.

Proceedings before courts which hear probate cases

During 1999 306 probate cases were received, in 35 cases heirs were called who were
members of the Italian minority. In 2000 a total of 247 probate cases were received, of which
in 27 cases the heirs were members of the Italian minority. In 2001 a total of 238 probate
cases were received of which in 33 cases the heirs were members of the Italian minority.
In civil proceedingsIn 1999 a total of 432 civil cases were received and in 15 of these one party was a
member of the Italian minority. In 2000 a total of 377 civil cases were received, and in 19 of
these one party was a member of the Italian minority. In 2001 a total of 383 cases was
received and in 34 cases one of the parties was a member of the Italian minority.
According to the data from the County Courts in Osijek and Vukovar and the
Administrative Court of the Republic of Croatia, from 1999 to 2001 not one case was either
received or heard in one of the minority languages.

Article 10 Administrative Authorities and Public Services
§ Paragraph 1
Ø Sub-paragraph a) points ii and iv
Ø Sub-paragraph b)
Ø Sub-paragraph c)
§ Paragraph 2
Ø Sub-paragraph a)
Ø Sub-paragraph b)
Ø Sub-paragraph c)
Ø Sub-paragraph d)
Ø Sub-paragraph g)

25

§ Paragraph 3
Ø Sub-paragraph a)
Ø Sub-paragraph b)
Ø Sub-paragraph c)
§ Paragraph 5
As has been mentioned, the Republic of Croatia is divided into 20 counties and the
capital city, which has the status of both city and county, but the need for the realisation of
the right to use a minority language is not the same in all counties, for the simple reason that
members of minorities in some of the counties are not represented in significant numbers in
the population or simply there is no interest from the members of the national minority for the
use of a minority language before administrative bodies or bodies of public services.
There follows a presentation of the counties where individual units of local selfgovernment or cities and municipalities have regulated the use of a minority language in their
statutes. We should point out that Italian as the official language has only been introduced by
the Istarska County on a county wide level for tasks carried out by its administrative bodies.
The reasons for this in this area are historical, traditional, based on international agreements
and also the practicality of this kind of application for all members of the Italian minority in
the Republic of Croatia. This minority is one of the better organised in the realisation if their
rights in relation to their needs and specific characteristics.
Municipalities and cities regulate the question of the use of minority languages in
their territory, amongst other reasons, (or in cases when they are obliged to on the bases of
laws) as they assess the needs of their citizens. In the procedure for adjusting the statute of
local units with the Act, a situation was noticed where certain minorities did not wish to
introduce their language throughout the entire area of their local unit but only in those
settlements where they were more numerous or formed the majority.
The Ministry of Justice, Administration and Local Self- government in these
situations, showed a readiness to encourage the minority associations to seek for alternative
solutions, but the attitude was clearly expressed that they were not making maximum
demands, judging that for members of a minority it was more acceptable to ensure the use of
their minority language in the procedures which directly affected them, and they did not feel
it was necessary to seek the use of their language in signs, seals, stamps, the names of streets
etc.
1. An overview of towns and municipalities on whose territory a minority language and
script is in equal official use

Bjelovarsko-bilogorska County
On the territory of the Bjelovarska-bilogorska County, which as a unit of local, regional selfgovernment has not introduced a minority language and script into its self- governing
competence, only one unit of local self- government from its territory has done so.

The Municipality of Koncanica has prescribed the following rights for members
of the Czech national minority:
-

the official use of the Czech language and script in certain settlements
26

-

the use of bi- lingual forms and the issuance of bi- lingual public documents,
public signs are bi- lingual
education is offered in the Czech language and
the representation of members of the Czech minority in the Municipality bodies.

The Town of Daruvar also gives members of the Czech national minority the right
to the use of their own language and script. The use of the minority language is not applied
throughout the entire area.

The Istarska County
The Istarska County is the only unit of local or regional self- government which has
introduced the Italian language in the field of self- governme nt activity.
Apart from on a county level, for the Italian national minority, the Italian language has
been introduced for equal official use together with the accompanying rights in the following
units of local self- government:

The Municipality of Bale guarantees the members of the Italian national
minority the following rights at a local level:
-

-

the equal use of the Italian language and script
the foundation of cultural and other societies and informative and publishing activities
throughout the Municipality all public signs are bi- lingual
work in the sessions of the Municipal Council is carried out in two languages, bi- lingual
public documents are issued, the bodies of state administration in their work use bilingual seals and stamps,
in the work of the bodies of the Municipality bi- lingual forms are used and proceedings
are run in Italian
a certain number of officials are employed who use both Croatian and Italian languages
the organisation of teaching in schools is made possible in Italian in schools and preschool institutions,
they have the right to representation in the bodies of local self- government
they have the right to use flags and symbols.

The Town of Buje guarantees the following rights to members of the Italian national
minority at a local level:
-

the Italian language and script are in official use
it is possible to organise informative, publishing and cultural activities
the public signs in the town are bi- lingual
the work of the town’s bodies is carried out in two languages, official bi- lingual forms are
used in their work
administrative proceedings are carried out in Italian, as are proceedings before bodies of
state administration
the town administration employs an appropriate number of worker who use Croatian and
Italian languages
it is possible for members of the Italian minority to be educated in their own language and
script both in schools and pre-school institutions
proportional representation is guaranteed in local bodies

27

-

the town helps finance the Italian minority in the realisation of their rights.

The Town of Labin guarantees members of the Italian national minority the
following rights on a local level:
- the right to use their language and script
- it is possible for members of the Italian minority to be educated in elementary and high
schools and pre-school institutions
- the realisation of the equality of the Italian and Croatian languages is guaranteed:
- in proceedings before bodies of the town, by employment of a certain number of
employees who use the Italian language
- at the party’s request, bi- lingual forms, certificates and rulings are supplied
- councillors in the Town Council and members of working bodies are able to use bilingual material
- there is free use of national flags and symbols.
The Municipality of Ližnjan guarantees members of the Italian national minority the
following rights on a local level:
-

the use of their language and script
in the territory of one settlement the public signs are bi- lingual
the local bodies use bi- lingual forms, and in their work they use bi- lingual seals and
stamps,
a certain number of employees are employed who speak both languages,
it is possible to organise cultural, informative and publishing activities,
in the territory of the municipality the teaching of Italian is encouraged as the language of
a social minority,
there is free use of the flag and symbols of the Italian minority.

The Municipality of Motovun guarantees members of the Italian national minority the
following rights at a local level:
-

the use of their language and script
the use of their flag and symbols
public signs are bi- lingual
a certain number of employees are employed who speak both languages
representation in the local bodies
the seals and stamps of the local bodies are bi- lingual
the teaching of Italian is encouraged in elementary school and pre-school institutions.

The Town of Novigrad guarantees members of the Italian national minority the
following rights at a local level:
-

use of the Italian language and script on the territory of the town
use of their nationa l flags and symbols
public signs are bi- lingual
proceedings of the local bodies and bodies of state administration are run both in Italian
language and script, and in their work bi- lingual seals and stamps are used,
education in pre-school institutions, elementary and high schools also takes place in
Italian

28

-

proportional representation is guaranteed in local bodies for members of the Italian
national minority
the town financially supports the realisation of all the rights of the Italian national
minority.

The Town of Porec guarantees members of the Italian national minority the following
rights on a local level:
-

use of their own language and script
public signs in the town are bi- lingual
the work of the bodies of local self- government is bi- lingual
a certain number of employees are employed who speak both languages
education in elementary and high schools and pre-school institutions is provided in Italian
members of the Italian minority in the Town have the right to proportional representation.

The Town of Pula guarantees members of the Italian national minority the following
rights on a local level:
-

-

the use of their language and script
education of members of the Italian minority in their own language and script in preschool institutions, elementary and high schools,
the work of administrative bodies in the City is carried out in two languages and for that
purpose there are bi- lingual forms and all other written material and bi- lingual public
documents are issued
the public signs in the City are in bi- lingual written form
bodies with public authority also have bi- lingual signs
the representation of the Italian minority in the bodies of the City of Pula is guaranteed.

The Town of Rovinj guarantees the following rights to members of the Italian
national minority on a local level:
-

the use of the Italian language and script,
public signs are bi- lingual
in the work of the administrative bodies of the town bi- lingual forms, seals, and stamps
are used and bi- lingual public documents are issued,
the representation of the Italian minority in the bodies of the Town is guaranteed
education in Italian is possible in elementary and high schools and pre-school institutions,
it is possible to make use of the national flags and symbols.

The Municipality of Višnjan guarantees members of the Italian national minority
the following rights at a local level:
-

the right to use their language and script
the teaching of Italian is encouraged
in parts of the Municipality bi- lingual signs are in evidence
representation is guaranteed in the bodies of the Municipality
it is possible to make use of national flags and symbols.

29

The Municipality of Vodnjan guarantees to the members of the Italian national
minority the following rights at a local level:
-

-

the equal official use of the Italian language
all public signs in the municipality are bi- lingual,
in schools with a Croatian teaching program, Italian is taught as the language of the social
environment, and in schools with an Italian program, Croatian is taught
it is possible to organise pre-school institutions with programs in Italian
members of the Italian minority in the Municipality are guaranteed representation in the
bodies of local self- government,
when the administrative bodies deal with cases where members of the Italian national
minority are taking part as parties, the proceedings are conducted in Italian and decisions
and public documents are issued in two languages. The same applies to court and public
enterprises and institutions,
in the work of these bodies bi- lingual seals and stamps are used,
in administrative bodies a certain number of officials are employed who can speak Italian,
members of the Italian minority may freely use their national flags and symbols,
the municipality and other bodies give financial assistance for the realisation of the rights
of the Italian minority in their territory.

The Municipality of Vodnjan guarantees the members of the Montenegrin
national minority who live in its territory representation in local bodies and the realisation of
all other minority rights.

The Municipality of Grožnjan guarantees members of the Italian national minority
the following rights on a local level:
-

the Italian language is in equal official use
throughout the municipality traffic signs and other traffic markings, street names, the
names of squares, places and geographical locations are written in two languages.
The work of the Municipal Council is carried out in two languages, and bi- lingual seals
and stamps are used in their work, as well as bi- lingual forms.
In the municipality a certain number of employees are employed who can speak Italian,
There is free use of the national flags and symbols,
In accord with its financial capacity, the Municipality supports the work of cultural and
other societies, and publishing and informative activities,
Pre-school, elementary and high-school education are organised in Italian, and the
teaching of Italian is encouraged as the language of the social environment.

The Osijecko-Baranjska County
The Osijecko-baranjska county as a unit of local and regional self- government has not
introduced the use of a minority language within the scope of its self- government
competence. Municipalities and towns in its territory have done this in the following ways for
Serbian and Hungarian national minorities.
The Municipality of Darda has prescribed the following rights for members of the
Serbian and Hungarian national minorities:
-

official use of Serbian and Hungarian languages,

30

The Municipality of Erdut has prescribed the following rights for members of the
Serbian national minority:
-

the Serbian language and Cyrillic script are in equal official use,
it is possible to organise publishing and informative activities,
the education of members of the Serbian minority takes place according to a special
program in children’s kindergartens and schools.

The Municipality of Jagodnjak in its statute has prescribed the following rights for
members of the Serbian and Hungarian national minorities:
-

the official use of Serbian and Hungarian
pre-school education in Hungarian and Serbian
the use of national flags and symbols.

The Municipality of Kneževi Vinogradi has prescribed the following rights for
members of the Serbian national minority in its statute:
-

the official use of the Serbian language

The Municipality of Šodolovci has prescribed the following rights for members of the
Serbian national minority in its statute:
-

-

the official use of the Serbian language
the text on seals is written in two languages with letters of the same size
plaques and signs of representative and administrative bodies of the Municipality of
Šodolovci and legal persons with public authority and the headings of acts are written in
two languages in letters of equal size
councillors are provided with materials for the sessions of the Municipal Council in
Croatian and Serbian languages as well as the conclusions,
official notices and summons from the Municipal Council and administrative bodies are
also published in two languages,
in the Municipality of Šodolovci the following are published in Croatian and Serbian:
public documents
official forms
the right to display national flags is guaranteed
the Municipality gives financial support to informative and publishing activities and the
work of the cultural and artistic societies of the Serbian minority.

Primorsko-goranska County
The City of Rijeka guarantees the members of the Italian national minority the
following rights on a local level:
-

the right to the use of Italian language and script
it guarantees and supports educational and cultural work of members of the Italian
minority as well as members of other minorities,
there is free use of national symbols and signs,

31

-

it helps in the realisation of other rights which the Republic of Croatia guarantees to
members of national minorities.

The Town of Cres guarantees members of the Italian national minority the following
rights at a local level:
-

the right to use the Italian language and script
elective Italian classes in school, from grade IV elementary school to the end of
elementary education
financial support for educational and cultural activities of members of the Italian minority
free use of national flags and symbols

The Municipality of Mošcenicka Draga guarantees members of the Italian national
minority the following rights on a local level:
-

the right to use the Italian language and script
the possibility for equal participation in public affairs.

Vukovarsko-srijemska County
The Vukovarsko-srijemska county as a unit of local, regional self- government has not
introduced a minority language within the scope of its self- government competence. The
Municipalities of Trpinja, Markušica, Borovo and Negoslavci have prescribed in their
statutes:
The Municipality of Trpinja has prescribed the following rights for members of the Serbian
national minority:
-

-

the official use of the Serbian language and Cyrillic script
the work of local administrative bodies in the Municipality is carried out in two languages
in their work, bi- lingual forms are used and public documents are bi- lingual
administrative proceedings before bodies of the Municipality, and proceedings before
bodies of state administration are also conducted in the Serbian language and script, bilingual seals and stamps are used
education is provided in the Serbian language and Cyrillic script for members of the
Serbian national minority
it is possible to make use of national flags and symbols
the Municipality gives financial support to informative, publishing and cultural activities
organised by members of the Serbian national minority.

The Municipality of Markušica has prescribed the following rights for members of the
Serbian national minority in its statute:
-

-

the Serbian language and Cyrillic script are in equal official use
throughout the Municipality traffic signs and other traffic markings are written in the
Croatian and Serbian languages in letters of equal size, as are:
- the names of streets and squares
- the names of places and locations
the work of the Municipal Council is carried out in two languages, councillors and the
public are guaranteed provision of bi- lingual materials for sessions of the Municipal

32

-

Council, as well as the minutes and conclusions and publication of official
announcements and invitations.
In the work of the Municipality bi- lingual seals, stamps, headings, titles on inscription
plaques are used, bi- lingual forms are printed to be used for official purposes.
The population of the Municipality of Markušic are issued with bi-lingual public
documents
Proceedings before administrative bodies may be held in Serbian for members of the
Serbian minority
It is possible to display national symbols and flags, and in accordance with its financial
capacity, the Municipality gives financial support to the informative, publishing and
cultural activities of the members of the Serbian national minority

The Municipality of Borovo has prescribed the following rights for members of the Serbian
national minority:
-

the equal official use of the Serbian language and the Cyrillic script
the Municipality gives financial support to cultural and other societies who work to
preserve the Serbian culture and tradition
pre-school education is organised and carried out in the Serbian language and Cyrillic
script
flags and symbols of members of the Serbian national minority may be freely displayed in
the Municipality of Borovo.

The Municipality of Negoslavci has prescribed the following rights in its statute for the
members of the Serbian national minority:
-

the equal official use of the Serbian language and the Cyrillic script
members of the Serbian national minority realise the right to education in Serbian and the
Cyrillic script, according to a special program
they have the opportunity to found cultural and other societies with the financial support
of the Municipality
there is freedom to display flags and symbols of the Serbian national minority in the
Municipality.

According to the data from these municipalities in the Vukovarsko-srijemska County
between 1999 to 2001, not one request was made for proceedings to be held in the Serbian
language and Cyrillic script.
*Here we point out again that members of national minorities do not realise their right to
the use of their own language and script exclusively by a decision of the local authorities.
Their decision is one possibility in cases where they are not obliged to render these decisions
on the basis of laws.
The Act on the Use of the Languages and Scripts of National Minorities in the Republic
of Croatia prescribes the use of languages and scripts of national minorities in the work of
administrative bodies and public services in all those cases where a need arises or when the
local needs of the population so demand that in the work of those bodies the language and
script of a national minority is used. When a language and script of a national minority is
introduced in a municipality, town or county, for equal official use, then this relates to all
aspects of life in those units.

33

The equal official use of the language and script of a national minority as a rule is
introduced to the entire territory of the municipality or town, but it may also be introduced
only in part of the area of some municipalities or towns, when the statute can prescribe a
narrower range than the rights determined by the Act, but it may not exclude the right to the
use of one’s own language in proceedings before bodies of state administration in the first
instance, before the organisational units of central bodies of state administration acting in the
first instance, before first instance judicial authorities, the State Attorney’s Office in the first
instance, notaries public and legal persons with public authority, and who are authorised to
act in the municipality or town where a minority language or script has been introduced for
equal official use.

2.
The equal, official use of the languages and scripts of national minorities before
administrative bodies and public services
Municipalities and towns apply bi- lingualism in:
1. the work of representative and executive bodies of the municipality, town or county,
2. in proceedings before administrative bodies of the municipality, town or county, and in
proceedings before all these bodies. In their work naturally the validity is recognised of
all private legal documents drawn up in the Republic of Croatia, also when they are
written in the language and script of a national minority.
The following are guaranteed, whether in two or more languages:
1. the writing of the text of the seal and stamp in letters of equal size
2. the writing of inscription plaques of representative, executive and administrative bodies
of municipalities, towns and counties, as well as legal persons with public authority, in
letters of equal size,
3. the writing of the headings of acts in letters of equal size.
A councillor, member of the local executive body or citizen in the municipality, town and
county as in Paragraph 1 of this Article has the right to the provision, in two or more
languages, of:
1. materials for the sessions of the municipal or city council and executive body, and the
county assembly and county executive body,
2. the minutes and publication of the conclusions
3. publication of official announcements and invitations from representative, executive and
administrative bodies of the municipality, town or county, and material for the sessions of
the representative and executive bodies.

34

The municipalities, towns where a language and script of a national minority is in equal
official use, shall guarantee the right of citizens for bi- lingual or multi- lingual:
1. issuance of public documents
2. printing of form used for official purposes
In these units of local self- government, the following shall be written in two or more
languages in letters of equal size:
1. written traffic signs and other written markings in traffic,
2. the names of streets and squares,
3. the names of places and geographical locations, with a note that the statute may determine
that this right is applied to the entire territory or to part of the territory, if so demanded by
the needs of the population. Moreover, it may be prescribed that in the territory where the
language and script of a national minority are in official use, legal and physical persons
who carry out pub lic work may write titles in two or more languages.
Members of national minorities whose language and script are in equal official use, have
the same rights in first and second instance proceedings before administrative bodies of
municipalities, towns and counties as in proceedings before the bodies of state administration
in the first instance.
3. The equal official use of languages and script of national minorities in proceedings
before administrative bodies in the first instance and legal persons vested with public
authority
Bodies of state administration of first instance, organisational units of central bodies of
state administration who act in the first instance, first instance judicial authorities, the State
Attorney’s Office in the first instance, notaries public, legal persons vested with public
authority, who are authorised to act in the territory where, along with the Croatian language
and the Latin script, there is a minority language and script in equal, official use, have the
duty to inform the party from the territory of the municipality or town, who have introduced
the equal official use of the language and script of a national minority, of the right to use the
language and script of a national minority in the proceedings, and enter into the minutes a
statement on which language and script the party is to use in the proceedings. If no minutes
are kept of the proceedings, the statement by the party on the language he/she wishes to use
or the request for the issuance of bi- lingual documents shall be recorded as an official note.
The first document in the proceedings is served on the party in the Croatian language and
Latin script and in the language and script of the national minority which is in equal official
use. The language and script in which the first filing is submitted or communicated, shall be
taken to be the language and script which the party wishes to use in the proceedings.
When a party in proceedings chooses a language and script of a national minority, which
is in equal official use, the body conducting the proceedings shall, in accordance with the
procedural regulations, guarantee that the parties in the proceedings may participate in the
language and script used by the national minority. Copies of acts in cases where the parties
have chosen to use the language and script of a national minority, are delivered to the parties,
35

not only in Croatian language and script but also in the language and script which the party is
using in the proceedings.
If the participants in the proceedings have chosen to use two or more language and scripts
which are in equal official use, in the proceedings, along with the Croatian language and
Latin script, the language and script shall be used on whose use the participants in the
proceedings agree. Insofar as there is no agreement, the language and script of the national
minority shall be used in the proceedings, which is used by the majority of participants in
those proceedings, with the provision of an interpreter for the remaining participants in the
proceedings. If it is not possible in any of these ways to ensure the use of the language and
script of the national minority, which is used by the members of the national minority, the
proceedings shall be held exclusively in the Croatian language and the Latin script, with the
provision of an interpreter. The agreement between the participants on the language and
script in which the proceedings will be held, along with the Croatian language and Latin
script, shall be recorded in the minutes or entered into the file as an official note, if no
minutes are kept of the proceedings. The party and other participants in the proceedings may
present their briefs according to their own free choice in Croatian or the language and script
which they use, and which is in equal official use.
The bodies of state administration in the first instance, the organisational units of the
central bodies of state administration who act in the first instance, first instance judicial
authorities, the State Attorney’s Office in the first instance, and legal persons with public
authority, shall serve the correspondence, briefs, and copies of other acts of second instance
proceedings on the parties in the Croatian language and Latin script and in the language and
script which was in use in the first instance proceedings. These bodies, where working in a
municipality or town where two or more languages have been introduced (in Croatian and a
minority language) in their work:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

issue public documents
print forms for use for official purposes
write the text of the seal and stamps in letters of equal size
write inscription plaques
write the headings of acts in letters of equal size.

The proceedings of bodies of the second instance and communication of legal persons with
public authority.
Bodies who carry out second instance proceedings work in the Croatian language and
Latin script. In exceptional cases, if there are parties participating directly before the second
instance body who in the first instance used the language and script of a national minority
which is in equal official use, the proceedings are run as the first instance proceedings.
Legal persons vested with public authority for carrying out tasks for members of
national minorities in interpersonal, direct relationships, may use only the language and script
of the national minority.
Units of local self- government, that is towns, municipalities and counties, in the part
relating to their self- governing scope of competence, may by their statutes as pieces of
secondary le gislation introduce some of the minority languages in their territory due to the
fact that they are best acquainted with the needs of their population. As has been mentioned,
the Republic of Croatia guarantees members of national minorities the right to the use of their
36

own language and script, to the organisation of informative and publishing activities, cultural
autonomy, representation in the bodies of authority, the right to the use of their own national
symbols and flags etc. These rights belong to members of national minorities whether the
units of local self- government regulate them or not. Municipalities and towns only ease the
realisation of these rights through their statutes on a local level, or where there is a need for
the realisation of these rights.
The question of the use of languages and scripts of national minorities is also
regulated in that according to the Act on the use of the Languages and Scripts of National
Minorities in the Republic of Croatia, municipalities and towns are obliged to introduce the
minority language in their territory when members of a national minority in their area
constitute the majority of the population, in accord with the Constitutional Act on Human
Rights, or the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities of the Council
of Europe, and when that is prescribed by international agreements to which the Republic of
Croatia is a party. The legal requirement is given for units of local self- government, and they
may decide to introduce a minority language for other reasons too, if they assess that there is
a need for it amongst their population.
When units of local self- government or municipalities and towns whether from legal
obligation or by their own decision, introduce in their statute a mino rity language into equal
official use, then it is also reflected in the work of the administrative bodies of the
municipality or town and in the work of all the bodies of state administration or other legal
persons who operate in that area. The use of two or more languages is seen in these places by
means of external signs (names of bodies, streets or squares) and internal functions (the
running of proceedings in minority languages, the printing of bi- lingual forms, the issuance
of public documents. As may be seen, examples of this exist.)
4. The proceedings of bodies of state administration in the languages and script of
national minorities
In the period covered by this report the use of minority languages in proceedings
before bodies of state administration has varied since the Act on the Use of the Languages
and Scripts of National Minorities came into force in May 2000, and only after that were the
bodies of state administration obliged to apply its provisions, except in cases of the
application of bilateral international agreements.
As well as what has been said it is important to emphasise that the local units had a
time limit of 3 months to adjust their statutes, which would, according to the law, also be
binding to state bodies. The relevant regulations on the basis of which state bodies apply the
law are primarily:
- the Personal Identity Card Act
- the Personal Name Act
- the State Registries Act

37

Istria Police Department

Total no. of cases
conducted
(personal identity
cares
and
residency
certificates issued)
23 880
26 422
20 194

Year

1999.
2000.
2001.

Cases conducted
in Italian (bilingual personal
identity cards and
residency
certificates)
1 250
1 017
934

Percentage

5.23%
3.84%
4.62 %

Primorsko-goranska Police Department
Total no. of cases
conducted
(personal identity
cares
and
residency
certificates issued)
22 368
21 700
20 887

Year

1999.
2000.
2001.

Cases conducted
in Italian (bilingual personal
identity cards and
residency
certificates)
115
101
83

Percentage

0.51%
0.46%
0.39%

Decisions issued on the use of the seal with the coat -of-arms of the Republic of Croatia
containing text written in the language of a national minority (bi-lingual) for a legal
person vested with public authority, bodies of local self-government and judiciary bodies.
1999
Istarska County
Public Services
1. Business school – Buje (Croatian-Italian)
2. Italian Elementary School, Novigrad, Novigrad (Croatian- Italian)
3. People’s Open University Ante Babic Umag, Umag (Croatian-Italian)
Local self-government
1. The Municipality of Brtonigla, Brtonigla (Croatian- Italian)
Justice system
1. The State’s Attorney's Office of the Istarska County, Buje Office (Croatian-Italian)

38

Osjecko-baranjska County
Public services
1. Hungarian Cultural Centre in the Republic of Croatia, Osijek (Croatian-Hungarian)

2000
Istarska County
Public services
1. Rijeka University, Arts Faculty in Pula, Pula (Croatian-Italian)
2. Notary Public, Željko Krajina, Umag (Croatian-Italian)
Local self-government
1. The Town of Umag, Umag (Croatian-Italian)
Vukovarska-srijemska County
Public services
1. Korog Elementary School, Korog (Croatian-Hungarian)
2001
Istarska County
Public services
1. Dante Alighieri High School, Pula (Croatian-Italian)
Local self-government
1. The Town of Rovinj, Rovinj (Croatian-Italian)
2. The Municipality of Ližnjan, Ližnjan, (Croatian-Italian)
Justice System
1. The Municipal State Attorney’s Office, Pula (Croatian-Italian)
2. The Municipal State Attorney’s Office in Buje, Buje (Croatian-Italian)
Primorsko-goranska County
Public services
1. Gelsi Elementary School, Rijeka (Croatian-Italian)

39

Bjelovarsko-bilogorska County
Public services
1. Jan Amos Komenski Elementary School, Daruvar (Croatian-Czech)

Certificates issued in Croatian, Italian and International forms in towns and
municipalities in Istarska County
For the period 1999 - 2001

Year Town/municipality Birth Certificates Marriage Certificates Death certificate
Citizenship certificates
Registry office
Buje
1999

Buje 1 049
Umag 1 266
Novigrad 304

129
Total:
662
2000.

2001.

Total:

2 619

Buje 1 065
Umag 1 614
Total:

477
582

3 062
Buje 1 115
Umag 1 083
Novigrad 290
2 488

105
207
218

130

1 277

442

491
653

124
229

1 383

482

372
507
204
1 083

69
199
153
421

* the forms used by these registry offices are bi- lingual – Croatian-Italian

40

220
313

325
324
Novigrad 383
716
212
300
109
621

Data on documents issued in Croatian:
Year Municipality Buzet
Certificates
Registry office
1999 113

Birth Certificates Marriage Certificates

642

344

2 000 106

700

344

2 001 102

676

334

Total 321

2 026

1 022

Death

Data on documents issued using international forms:
Year Municipality Buzet
Certificates
Registry Office
1999 36

Birth Certificates Marriage Certificates

112

93

2 000 25

79

53

2 001 25

85

41

Total 86

276

187

41

Death

Data on documents issued on international forms
B. Vienna
Year Town of Labin
Birth Certificates Marriage
Death Certificates
Registry Office

Certificates

1999

358

240

225

2 000

355

183

181

2 001

317

134

171

Total

1030

557

577

Paris

Year Town Labin
Certificates
Registry office

Birth Certificates

Marriage Certificates

1999 3

17

6

2 000 4

38

4

2 001 5

29

1

Total 12

84

11

Year Municipality Potpican
Death Certificates
Registry office

Vienna
Birth Certificates

Marriage

1999

29

66

42

2 000

27

65

39

2 001

29

66

33

Total

85

197

114

42

Death

Certificates

Paris
Year Municipality Potpican
Death Certificates
Registry office

Birth

Certificates

Marriage

Certificates

1999

6

-

-

2 000

10

2

-

2 001

6

2

-

Total

22

4

-

International Forms

Year Town of Pazin
Death Certificates
Registry office

Birth Certificates

Marriage

1999 100

231

157

2 000 108

253

118

2 001 103

266

147

Total 311

750

422

Certificates

International Forms
Year Town of Porec
Death Certificates
Registry office

Birth Certificates

Marriage

1999 114

357

158

2 000 130

279

174

2 001 170

241

165

Total 414

877

497

43

Certificates

Croatian language forms

Year Town of Porec
Death Certificates
Registry office

Birth Certificates

Marriage

1999 427

1 638

899

2 000 390

1 239

994

2 001 403

1 115

1 017

Total 1 220

3 992

2 910

Certificates

Data on documents issued from Rovinj Registry office on Croatian language forms
Year Town of Rovinj

Registry office

Birth Certificates

:

Marriage Certificates

Death certificates

1999
643

643

321

2 000

724

835

267

2 001

725

606

300

Total

2 029

2 084

888

Data on documents issued on Croatian-Italian forms
Year Town of Rovinj
Registry Office
Birth Certificates:
Marriage Certificates :

Death Certificates

1999

92

126

57

2000

100

159

45

2 001

75

75

38

Total

267

360

140

44

Data on documents issued on international forms

Year

Town of Rovinj
Registry office
Birth Certificates Marriage Certificates

Death Certificates

1999

158

135

129

2 000

176

128

111

2 001

154

113

129

Total

488

376

369

Istarska County State Administration Office
Croatian Forms
1999
Town/Municipality Birth Certificates

Marriage Certificates

Pula

13 080

2 419

1 523

Barban

160

79

39

Krnica

133

46

28

Sveti Vincenat

139

78

40

Vodnjan

215

119

91

Fažana

147

44

27

45

Death Certificates

Istarska County State Administration Office
Croatian Forms
2000
Town/Municipality Birth Certificates

Marriage Certificates

Pula

18 953

2 563

1 565

Barban

130

86

29

Krnica

108

60

27

Sveti Vincenat

96

75

24

Vodnjan

240

150

60

Fažana

121

83

35

Death Certificates

Istarska County State Administration Office
Croatian Forms
2001
Town/Municipality Birth Certificates

Marriage Certificates

Pula

12 490

2 024

1 835

Barban

139

58

34

Krnica

73

26

16

Sveti Vincenat

111

50

27

Vodnjan

142

60

21

Fažana

74

41

18

46

Death Certificates

Istarska County State Administration Office
1999
Town/Municipality Birth Certificates

Marriage Certificates

Pula

1 073

344

528

Barban

29

7

9

Krnica

31

10

13

Sveti Vincenat

22

17

13

Vodnjan

54

15

10

Fažana

4

2

3

Death Certificates

Istarska County State Administration Office
International Forms
2000
Town/Municipality Birth Certificates Marriage Certificates Death Certificates
Pula

1 057

310

504

Barban

24

13

10

Krnica

17

14

8

Sveti Vincenat

19

9

7

Vodnjan

49

25

13

Fažana

6

7

2

47

Istarska County State Administration Office
International Forms
2001
Town/Municipality Birth Certificates

Marriage Certificates

Death Certificates

Pula

1 103

267

478

Barban

32

12

9

Krnica

31

10

3

Sveti Vincenat

28

9

7

Vodnjan

34

17

8

Fažana

3

2

2

48

Apart from the data on the number of documents issued from state registry offices in
Croatian or Italian or on international forms, we also present data on the number of
administrative and non-administrative cases by Municipalities: Buje, Bale, Grožnjan and the
towns Rovinj and Novigrad, since in these units of local self- government these proceedings
were conducted in two languages (Croatian and Italian), or only in Italian as the minority
language.
Year
1999

2000

2001

Buje
750
cases
conducted
bi- lingually
713
cases
conducted
bi- lingually
700
cases
conducted
bi- lingually

Novigrad
1 023
cases
conducted
bi- lingually
7
cases
conducted
bi- lingually
7
cases
conducted
bi- lingually

Rovinj
1 157
cases
conducted
bi- lingually
1 254
cases
conducted
bi- lingually
4 190
cases
conducted
bi- lingually

Bale
4
cases
conducted
in Italian
1
case
conducted
in Italian
2
cases
conducted
in Italian

Grožnjan
507
cases
conducted
bi- lingually
479
cases
conducted
bi- lingually
564
cases
conducted
bi- lingually

In the town of Umag between 1999 and 2001, 8250 cases were conducted bi- lingually

Article 11 Media
Paragraph 1
Ø sub-paragraph a), point iii,
Ø sub-paragraph d)
Ø sub-paragraph e), point ii
• Paragraph 2
• Paragraph 3

In relation to the previous report, changes occurred in the 1999-2000 period since the
Telecommunications Act was passed (Narodne novine nos.: 76/99, 128/99 68/01 and 109/01)
and the new Croatian Radio and Television Act (Narodne novine no. 17/01), which brought
progress to the area of the public media in relation to the protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms. A very significant change in this period was also the adoption of the
Act ratifying the European Convention on Tranfrontier Television, the Protocol on
Amendments to the European Convention on Transfrontier Television, by which the Republic
of Croatia confirmed its commitment to the principles of the free flow of information and
ideas and independent television companies. This international agreement is primarily based
on the freedom of expression and information, as one of the vital principles of a democratic
society and one of the basic conditions for its progress.

49

As has been mentioned, the area of the media is regulated by the mentioned
Telecommunications Act and the Croatian Radio and Television Act. We present the legal
provisions which regulate the manner of distribution, production and broadcasting of radio
and television programmes or regulate other issues related to the area of the public media.

The Telecommunications Act

The Radio and Television Council
The Radio and Television Council is responsible for giving concessions for carrying
out activities of radio and television. The Council is independent in carrying out the tasks
within in competence. It consists of nine members, who are appointed from public,
educational, cultural and professional and religious workers. Members of the Radio and
Television Council are appointed by the Croatian Parliament at the suggestion of the
Government of the Republic of Croatia for a period of 5 years, and they may be re-elected.
For the initial composition of the Council three members are appointed for 3 years, 3 for 4
years and 3 for 5 years. Members of the Council must be citizens of the Repub lic of Croatia
with their residence in the Republic of Croatia. They must possess professional knowledge,
ability and experience in the work of radio or television or publishing or cultural or similar
work.
Members of the Council may not be owners, share- holders, members of boards of
directors or supervising boards or members of managing boards or other similar managing
bodies. Moreover, they may not be owners, shareholders, members of boards of directors or
principals or other managers of the work of lega l persons to whom the provisions of the Act
apply, in relation to radio and television. A member of the Council may not be a member of
the Croatian Parliament, a functionary in executive or judicial power, nor a functionary in a
parliamentary political party designated by separate regulations. He/she may not be employed
either under contract or in any other relation in any legal person or any service with any
connection to radio or television. In the following circumstances persons may not be
members of the Council, or shall be relieved of their function on the Council:
1. If it is assessed that they are incapable of carrying out the work of the Council in a regular
manner
2. If any of the circumstances mentioned arises which is incompatible with the function of a
member of the Council
The Council renders decisions by a majority vote of all the members of the Council.
1.

The Right to Build and Use of Infrastructure for Broadcasting

Anyone who broadcasts radio or television programmes must have independently
available the necessary capital and most of the necessary infrastructure, buildings,
installations and equipment and business premises including independent use on the basis of
a lease and have the concession from the Council and a concluded contract on a concession
with the Institute. The area of concessions for broadcasting may be on a state or regional
level of two to five neighbouring counties, and on a local level, that is a town or county. In
exceptional circumstances a regional concession for radio and television may be given for

50

another limited area in accordance with the regulations on the use of radio frequencies, from
the aspect of the distribution of radio frequencies, if no interference is caused to the work of
radio stations whose work is organised on a domestic and international basis. A fee is paid for
the concession to the Budget of the Republic of Croatia.
The Institute shall determine a frequency plan and with the agreement of the Council and
in the appropriate manner and form, publicise it together with the plan for the awarding of
concessions for radio and television, and changes to that plan. The Council gathers offers
publicly and publishes a public tender for the award of concessions for carrying out the
activities of radio and television, on a technical basis, given by the Institute in accord with the
regulations on the use of radio frequency ranges and the award of radio frequencies. An offer
or an application submitted for the public tender for awarding concessions for carrying out
the activities of radio and television must contain the most detailed programme scheme in
accordance with the conditions published. A concession for radio and television may be given
to a legal person who offered in its bid convincing evidence that it is able to realize
programme-related, technical, technological, spatial, financial and human resources
conditions for the carrying out of activities of radio and television. Also, it has to be likely
that the domestic program offered will satisfy public interest in the best possible way. A
decision to award concession must contain the criteria and conditions which were the basis
for its rendering.
Concessions are awarded for the period which may not exceed 10 years, depending on the
level of the concession, and according to the Regulation. Based on the decision of the
Council to award concession, the Institute concludes a concession agreement, if it is
established by a technical inspection that the legal person concerned has met the conditions
required. A concession agreement for radio and television must also contain the programme
scheme offered, which becomes the condition for the realization of the concession. The
concession may be renewed upon the concessionary's request before its expiry, if the activity
has been carried out in accordance with laws and regulations and with the concession
agreement.
2.

Property Relations

A radio and television concessionary may be a company in which one member, a legal
or a physical person, may have up to 1/3 of the share of concessionary's capital, in such a
manner that one physical person may not participate with more than 1/3 in concessionary's
capital. If some of the members of the company are family members among which, according
to a separate law which regulates marriage and family matters, there exists obligation to pay
support allowance, then they all together may not have more than 1/3 of the concessionary's
capital. One legal or physical person may have a share in the capital of only one
concessionary at the state or regional levels, but on different not neighbouring concession
areas. The concession area of radio and television is the area on which the concessionary's
transmitters broadcast electromagnetic field of prescribed force, in accordance with the
Regulation on the Use of Radio Frequency Spectrum and Awarding Radio Frequencies.
The holder of the concession must have its seat in the Republic of Croatia. Members
of the holder’s company must be Croatian citizens and have their permanent residency in the
Repub lic of Croatia, apart from foreigners and Croatian citizens who have their permanent
residence abroad and have a certain amount of capital available. Also, the holder may only
hold one concession for radio or television on a state or regional level, or at the most two

51

concessions, one for radio and one for television on a local level, but in different, not
neighbouring concession areas. The Institute must be given data on the capital available and
the share of foreign capital may be no more than 1/3 of the basic capital of the company. In
exceptional cases, if the area covered by the concession has a population of up to 5000
people, the concession holder may have only one member, and if the area has a population
between 5000 and 10,000 people, each member of the concession holding company may have
no more than a ½ share in the capital of the concession holder. The area of the concession of
radio and television on a state or regional level must cover no less than 60% of the population
of the Republic of Croatia or 70% of the population of a certain region.
Political parties, bodies of state administration and advertising companies may not be
concession holders or members of concession holders for radio and television. In exceptional
cases, a legal person who is concession holder for a non-profit making radio or television
station need not be a company.
For each two concessions for profitable radio and each two concession for profitable
television, one concession may be granted for a non-profit making radio or one concession
for a non-profit making television station at an appropriate level and in the appropriate
concession area if there is a technical basis for this. The concession holder for a no-profit
making radio or television station may broadcast advertising lasting no more than 5 minutes
in one hour of programming and 7% of the total daily programme broadcast on a state or
regional level, and ten minutes in one hour of programming and 15% of the total daily
programme broadcast at a local level. The concession holder of a non-profit making radio or
television company may not broadcast telesales nor sponsored programmes. If the concession
holder of a non-profit making radio or television company makes a profit in its work, that
profit may be used exclusively for the work and development of the work of the concession
holder.
3.

The Aim of Programming
The programme of the radio and television concession holders should:
1. respect human dignity and fundamental human rights, and contribute to respect for
other people’s opinions and beliefs,
2. contribute to the free formation of the opinion of comprehensively and objectively
informed listeners and viewers, and their education and entertainment,
3. promote the Croatian cultural heritage and encourage listeners and viewer to take part
in cultural life,
4. promote international understanding and a feeling in public for justice, defend
democratic freedoms, serve to protect the environment, fight for gender equality and
publication of the truth,
5. promote understanding for me mbers of national minorities.

The overall programme may not unilaterally serve the interests of one party or world-view.

52

a) Programming conditions
The concession holder for radio and television should satisfy the following conditions:
1. events must be portrayed faithfully and with a variety of approaches and opinions
represented appropriately,
2. the news must be truthful and correctly present the facts and events, it must be
unbiased and professionally correct, and must promote the freedom of the formation
of opinion,
3. opinions and comments must be easily recognisable as opinions or commentaries, and
it must be clear whose opinion or commentary is being presented.
Furthermore, the concession holder has the obligation to promote impartiality in its
programming, respecting differences in opinion on political or economic issues or in relation
to current public policies.
The programming independence of concession holders.
State bodies and their representatives, union and various interest groups may not
influence concession holders for radio or television regarding programming. No provision of
the law may be interpreted in such a way that it gives the right to censor or limit the right to
the freedom of speech or expression of opinion.
b) Special programming conditions
Programmes are not permitted which harm the defence, state security and Constitutional
order. The programming of concession holders for radio or television may not be biased and
may not show pornography, they may not emphasise violence or cause racial, religious or
national hatred, they may not abuse the listeners’ or viewers’ gullibility. Concession holders
for radio and television may not broadcast programmes which may have a detrimental effect
on the physical, spiritual or moral development of children and young people up to 18 years
of age. The programming of the concession holder for radio or television may not contain
editing techniques using sound or pictures which in a very short duration or in any other way
may transmit a message or influence the opinion or listeners or viewers without them being
aware of it or not completely aware. It must without charge, for the protection of the public
interests, immediately and without delay, broadcast warnings and other announcements of the
Ministry of the Interior or other competent bodies of the state administration. If the
concession holder for radio and television on a regional or local level takes for itself alone the
right to broadcast programmes on events which are of interest for the entire population of the
Republic of Croatia or for the population of other regions of other concession holders, it must
cede the right it has leased to other interested concession holders for radio and television or
Croatian Radio Television, under equal conditions with remuneration for the actual costs.
Programming criteria
A concession holder for radio on a state or regional level and on the level of a county and
the City of Zagreb must broadcast at least 12 hours of programmes a day, and a concession
holder for radio on the level lower than the county level, must broadcast at least 6 hours of
programmes a day.

53

The concession holder for radio and television must keep a record of all the programmes
broadcast and must keep recordings of the entire programme broadcast for at least one month
after broadcasting and if there is any complaint or dispute, the recording of the programme
relating to these disputes must be kept until the dispute is resolved. The concession holder for
radio and television on a local level must devote at least 20% of the total programming
weekly to the announcement of local news and announcements about local events in the
concession area. On a state and regional level at least one informative programme must be
broadcast daily.
During election campaigns the concession holder for radio and television must make
available to all political parities the opportunity for commercial political promotion under
equal conditions in accordance with the electoral regulations and directions of the competent
bodies, who oversee and conduct the elections.
Provisions on the use of languages
The concession holder for radio and television must broadcast programmes in standard
Croatian. If so provided in the programming schedule, programmes may also be broadcast in
the languages of the national minorities. Informative programmes and service information
may also be broadcast for the needs of foreign visitors in languages appropriate to the ratio of
foreign visitors in the concession area. This does not of course relate to films and music, the
broadcasting of religious, theatrical and musical events and educational programmes for
students of foreign languages.
Advertising and Telemarketing
Advertising and telemarketing must be fair and honourable, and may not be misleading
nor against the buyers’ interests. These messages aimed at children, or where children take
part, may not harm their interests and must take into account the sensitivity of children.
Telemarketing may not encourage minors to buy or hire goods or services. Those who order
advertising may not influence the content or production of the programming in any way
which would decrease the independence of the concession holder and its responsibility
relating to the programme.
The duration of advertising may not exceed 12 minutes in one hour of programming and
15% of the total daily duration of the programmes broadcast on a state or regional level, and
18 minutes in one hour of programming and 25% of the total daily programming broadcast
on a local level. Advertising and telemarketing must be clearly recognisable as such and
clearly separated from other parts of the content of the programme by visual or acoustic
means. In principle advertisements should be broadcast in groups. Messages and
telemarketing which influence the subconscious are not permitted.
Advertising and telemarketing may not, whether visually or audibly, be reminiscent of
people who regularly read the news or head up current events programmes, the weather
forecast, sport and the like. Ad vertising and telemarketing should be inserted between
programmes in such a way as not to harm the integrity and value of the programme nor the
rights of those who hold copyright. In programmes that consist of independent parts, or
sporting or similarly organised events and presentations which include breaks, advertising
and telemarketing may be inserted only in the parts or breaks.

54

Advertising and telemarketing may not be inserted into religious services. It is not
permitted to advertise tobacco products, and messages and telemarketing for alcoholic drinks
of all kinds must be in accordance with the following guidelines:
- they must not be aimed mainly at minors and no one in the advertisement or
telemarketing linked to enjoyment of alcohol may not look like a minor,
- drinking alcohol must not be linked to physical activity or driving a car
- it must not be claimed that alcohol has any kind of therapeutic effect or stimulating or
calming effect or that it may solve personal problems,
- excessive use of alcohol must not be encouraged nor abstinence or sobriety shown in a
negative sense
- the alcoholic content of a drink may not be excessively emphasised.
Advertising and telemarketing are not permitted for medicines or medical treatment
which are only available with a doctor’s prescription. These advertisements for all other
medicines and medical treatment must be clearly recognisable as such, honest, truthful and
subject to examination, and must fulfil the demands of the protection of individuals from
harmful consequences.
Sponsored programs
When a programme is broadcast which is sponsored whether in its entirety or in part, it
must be clearly denoted as such at the beginning and/or the end of the programme. The
content and schedule of the sponsored programme may not under any circumstances be
influenced by the sponsor in any way that influences the responsibility and editorial
independence of the concession holder in relation to the programme. During the course of the
sponsored programme which promotes a product or service, a sign must be continuously
displayed to show that it is a sponsored programme. The sponsor may not be a physical or
legal person whose basic activity is the production or sales of products or offering services
whose promotion or telemarketing is forbidden.
Respecting the provisions of Article 11, Paragraph 1 of the European Convention “the
principle of the independence and autonomy of the media” in the Telecommunications Act
the following are prescribed: the aim of the programme, the conditions of the programme,
special programming independence of concession holders, such that the freedom of speech
and expression o opinions is not limited in any way. Moreover, the provisions of Article 80 of
the Telecommunications Act directly prescribe that state bodies and their representatives, and
unions and various interest groups may not influence the concession holders for radio and
television regarding the creation of the programme.
Regarding the provisions on the use of languages, the same Act prescribes the obligation
of the concession holder to broadcast radio and television programmes in standard Croatian,
with the exception of broadcasting in dialects of the Croatian language and the languages of
national minorities if that is foreseen in the programme schedule.
We point out that radio and television work may only be carried out by companies whose
owners are at least three legal or physical persons.
In the Republic of Croatia today there are 126 companies who carry out activities of the
radio and 14 companies who carry out activities of television, and we consider that this is the
best evidence of the direct inclusion of the influence of a large number of legal and physical

55

persons in the creation of radio and television programmes on a state, regional and local
level.
4.

The Croatian Radio and Television Act
Article 5, Paragraphs 1 and 2, Sub-paragraph 5.

Croatian Radio Television must in its programming satisfy the public interest on a state
and local level, and take into consideration the equal representation of informative, cultural,
educational and entertainment content. In the realisation of the programming principles, the
CRT shall in particular: produce and/or broadcast specific programmes aimed at informing
members of national minorities in the Republic of Croatia. Also, it has the obligation to
respect and promote pluralism of political, religious, world- view and other ideas, and enable
the public to be acquainted with these ideas. CRT may not in its programming, support the
point of view or interests of individual political parties, nor any other individual political,
religious point of view or similar attitude or interest. The use of the Croatian language is not
obligatory in programmes aimed at informing members of national minoritie s or ethnic
communities. In its work, CRT promotes the public interest, and takes care of the interests of
the public and is responsible to it.
In the Croatian Radio and Television Act mentioned, the programming principles and
obligations are prescribed, the content of the programmes, the public and independent nature
of the concession holder, such that in no way are the freedom of speech and expression of
opinion limited. In (Article 14, Paragraph 12, and 2, Sub-paragraphs 1 and 2) it states that
CRT is independent in its work, which is particularly clear in the right to independently carry
out the work for which it was founded, and the right, independently, in accordance with the
law, to decide on the content of its programmes. Also in accordance with Article 11,
Paragraph 1, Point iii of the European Charter for Regional and Minority Languages,
according to which it is necessary “to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer
programmes in the regional or minority languages;” in the provisions of Article 2, Paragraph
5 of the Act the obligation of CRT is established to produce and/or broadcast programmes
aimed at informing members of national minorities in the Republic of Croatia.
Croatian Television and Croatian Radio produce and broadcast programmes aimed at
informing members of national minorities. The main programme on Croatian Television is
Prizma and on Croatian Radio a weekly programme lasting 60 minutes on the First
Programme.
There follows below an overview of programmes and items:

56

THE ORGANISATION OF “PRIZMA” IN TERMS OF NUMBER AND LENGTH OF
ITEMS ON EACH MINORITY
(for 1999)

B. TITLE OF MINORITY

NO. OF ITEMS

ALBANIANS
AUSTRIANS
MONTENEGRINS
CZECHS

19
7
12
44

89.45
18.45
36.15
130.35

HUNGARIANS
MACEDONIANS
BOSNIACS
GERMANS
ROMA
RUTHENIANS
SLOVAKS
SLOVENES
SERBS
ITALIANS
UKRAINIANS

39
32
13
9
15
15
22
21
46
67
15

123.50
98.30
60.20
62.45
57.45
51.05
70.05
78.25
129.45
189.35
49.05

JEWS

33

103.15

9

24.00

12

24.45

PARLIAMENTGOVERNMENT
MINORITIES’
ASSEMBLY

EVENTS INVOLVING
SEVERAL MINORITIES

15

MINUTES

41.50

To these items should be added 47 studio interviews with members of minorities. A total of
50 programmes of 55 minutes each were broadcast.

57

THE ORGANISATION OF “PRIZMA” IN TERMS OF NUMBER AND LENGTH OF
ITEMS ON EACH MINORITY
(for 2000)
TITLE OF MINORITY

NUMBER OF ITEMS

MINUTES

ALBANIANS

19

68

AUSTRIANS
MONTENEGRINS

23
22

82
72

CZECHS
HUNGARIANS

65
68

22
226

MACEDONIANS
BOSNIACS
GERMANS
ROMA
RUTHENIANS
SLOVAKS
SLOVENES
SERBS
ITALIANS
UKRAINIANS
JEWS

27
37
20
46
20
31
33
68
80
33
57

76
129
63
173
74
104
117
245
260
128
189

7
3

25
13

31

117

19

72

17

91

BULGARIANS
RUSSIANS

PARLIAMENT–
GOVERNMENT
MINORITIES
ASSEMBLY
EVENTS INVOLVING
SEVERAL MINORITIES

To these items should be added 65 studio interviews with members of minorities. A total of
43 programmes were broadcast of 55 min. each.

58

THE ORGANISATION OF “PRIZMA” ACCORDING TO NUMBER AND LENGTH OF
ITEMS ON EACH MINORITY
(for 2001)
TITLE OF MINORITY
ALBANIANS
AUSTRIANS
MONTENEGRINS
CZECHS
HUNGARIANS
MACEDONIANS
-BOSNIACS
GERMANS
ROMA
RUTHENIANS
SLOVAKS
SLOVENES
SERBS
ITALIANS
UKRAINIANS
JEWS
POLES
BULGARIANS
RUSSIANS
GOVERNMENTPARLIAMENT
MINORITY COUNCIL
EVENTS WITH SEVERAL
MINORITIES INVOLVED

NO. OF ITEMS

MINUTES

13
11
13
68
61
34
19
30
60
9
16
33
70
81
24
57
1
7
1

52
56
58
239
201
124
104
97
246
30
65
104
290
312
88
250
4
21
4

12
16

51
85

21

65

To these items should be added 48 studio discussion with members of minorities. A total of
51 programmes were broadcast of 55 minutes each.
CROATIAN RADIO (HR)
Programmes for national minorities in the Republic of Croatia are broadcast:
a) in Informative and Educational Programmes and occasionally in other programmes where
various events are covered by news and reporting;
b) in specialised programmes in series for national minorities on First Channel (Prvi
program) of Croatian Television once a week, lasting c. 60 minutes;
c) in specialised programmes of the regional stations Radio Pula, Radio Rijeka, Radio
Osijek and in the summer Radio Split.
Topical events relating to minority issues are covered in the informative programmes of
Croatian Television in major and minor information programmes, and in specialised
programmes such as Vecernji program or Dnevni ritam. Also within the religious

59

programming, events are covered relating to religious events of individual minorities (e.g.
Jewish holidays).
On the First Channel of Croatian Radio every Saturday between 16.03 and 16.58 the
“Programme for national minorities in the Republic of Croatia” is broadcast. This
programme is made by journalists in Zagreb and co-workers from Vukovar and Daruvar and
colleagues from the Italian and Hungarian programmes of Raido Pula, Radio Rijeka and
Radio Osijek. The programme is bi- lingual but the priority is given to national- mother
tongues, and it is conducted in Croatian. The programme deals with news from culture, care
of the national heritage, scientific and research projects are monitored, the activities of
national minority associations, the work of state and local bodies, educational issues (bilingual teaching in schools and kindergartens), publishing, folklore and national heritage and
the links of national minorities with the native country of their mother tongues.
The Italian language department of Radio Rijeka broadcasts every day short news
bulletins at 10.00, 12.00, 14.00 and at 16.00 the main informative programme which lasts up
to 15 minutes. In these programmes the most important news and information for the Italian
minority in that area is broadcast and important events outside of Croatia for that minority are
also reported – in Slovenia and Italy. This department frequently works with colleagues from
Radio Pula, Radio Koper etc.
On Radio Pula, the Italian language department broadcasts a short news bulletin at 10.00
and 14.05, when members of that minority can hear news from this country and the world,
and other items about the work of the Italian minority’s institutions. From 16.30 to 17.00 a
central programme is broadcast which goes into more detail about issues relating to the
Italian minority and sporting events. Once a month there is a programme about amateur
Italian minority choirs and musical groups.
On Radio Osijek a Hungarian programme is broadcast daily at 18.30 and 19.00. As well
as reports on current events, there are items on the life of the Hungarian minority in Slavonia
and Baranja and news from Hungary.
In 2002 Croatian Radio plans to refresh its “Programme for national minorities in the
Republic of Croatia” so that it will include more items about political and social events
related to minority issues.
TELEVISION STATIONS WHICH BROADCAST PROGRAMMES IN THE
LANGUAGES OF THE NATIONAL MINORITIES
NO.

1.

2.

Concession
holding
Seat
company
Televizija
Slavonije
i Osijek
Baranje d.o.o.
Nezavisna
Istarska
televizija d.d.

Pazin

Concession
Area
Osijeckobaranjska
County
Istarska
County

60

Duration
of
programme
30 minutes 2x a
month+repeats
2 x a month
45
minutes
once a week tri lingual
programme

National
minority
language
Hungarian

Croatian
Italian
Slovene

RADIO STATIONS WHICH BROADCAST IN THE LANGUAGES OF
NATIONAL MINORITIES

No.

Concession
Seat
holding
company
Radio Našice Našice
d.o.o.

1.
2.

Eter d.o.o.

3.

Banska
d.o.o.

Osijek

Concession
Area

Duration
programme

Našice Town

15
to
min/week
30
min
monthly

City of Osijek

of National
minority
language
30 Slovak
2x Various
minority
languages

Beli Manastir
Kosa Beli
Manasti
r

Radio Daruvar Daruvar
d.o.o.
4.

Radi postaja
Novska d.o.o.
Novska

5.

Stereo d.o.o.

Mirkovc
i

Rapsodija
d.o.o.

Borovo

6.
7.

2 hours weekly
8 hours/day

30 min/MonSat.
1 hour every
other Sunday
1 hour every
other Sunday
1 hour monthly
Novska Town 2 to 3 times a
year
Vinkovci
More than 12
Town
hours a week
11 hours a
Borovo
week
Municipality
Daruvar
Town

Roma
Serbian

Czech
Hungarian

Czech
Roma
Ruthenian
Serbian
Serbian

Article 12 Cultural Activities and Facilities
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø

Paragraph 1
Sub-paragraph a)
Sub-paragraph f)
Sub-paragraph g)

In the field of cultural activities and institutions and in terms of the legal regulations which
govern these areas, there have been some changes in relation to the situation in the previous
report. In the field of culture, the Act on Amendments and Supplements to the Libraries Act
has been enacted ( Narodne novine no. 104/00), the Act on Amendments and Supplements to
the Theatres Act (Narodne novine 127/00), the Cultural Councils Act (Narodne novine 96/01)
the Act on the Management of Public Institutions in Culture (Narodne novine 96/01). These
Acts implemented the decentralisation of financing and decis ion making in the field of
culture, decentralisation in the field of founders’ rights and de- monopolisation in creating
cultural policy, since the conditions have been created for decisions to be made on lower,
local and regional levels and to participate in establishing cultural politics.

61

With the passing of the Cultural Councils Act it has been made possible for
representatives of cultural institutions and other institutions through cultural councils to
participate in decision making about plans for cultural activities and to give their opinions
and proposals regarding the financing of cultural programmes. This Act also makes it
possible to bring to bear the influence of cultural workers and artists on important decisions
for culture and art, which is seen through proposals for goals for cultural policies and
measures to realise them, participation in decision making relating to the establishment of
cultural policies and giving expert suggestions and opinions on a wide range of issues,
especially relating to the issue of finance.
The Cultural Councils Act does not give special rights to representatives of regional
or minorities languages, but they are equal with other citizens and institutions in the Republic
of Croatia, and are free to put forward the ir own candidates for the cultural councils, through
which they can influence the creation of cultural policies.
As part of the library system in the Republic of Croatia, almost every library in its
collection has books available in the languages of national minorities.
In publishing, by means of a contest run by the Ministry of Culture for financial
support and the purchase of books, which ran during 1999-2000 and 2001, proposals were
also received and accepted for financial support and the purchase of books published by
national minorities, which are given for the need of the libraries in the Republic of Croatia
(financial support must be sought from the Ministry on the basis of a programme) as follows:
Books Purchased:
1999
Udruga Romi za Rome Hrvatske (Roma Association for Roma Croatia)
Bajro Bajric: Tamo je sunce/Odri si kham
Matica Hrvatska
Miroslav Kvapil: Ceško hrvatske književne veze (Czech-Croat Literary Connections)
Društvo hrvatskih književnika (Croatian Writers’ Association)
Vulic Petrovic: Govor hrvatskoga groba u Slovackoj (The Speech of Croatian Graves in
Slovakia)
2000
Institut društvenih znanosti Ivo Pilar (The Ivo Pilar Institute of Social Sciences)
Gradišcanski Hrvati u Madarskoj i Slovackoj (Gradiška Croats in Hungary and Slo vakia)
2001
Društvo hrvatsko-slovackog prijateljstva (The Croatian-Slovak Friendly Society)
Graditelji mostova hrvatsko-slovackog prijateljstva (Bridge builders of Croatian-Slovak
Friendship)

62

Support for books published:
1999
Matica slovacka - Zagreb
Kvetoslava Kucerova: Slovaci u Hrvatskoj (Slovaks in Croatia)
4,500.00 KN
Ivan Hudec: Bajke i mitovi starih Slovena (Ancient Slovene Fairy Tales and Myths)
10,000.00 KN
Srpsko kulturno društvo “Prosvjeta”
(Serbian Cultural Society, Prosvjeta)
Zbornik o Vladanu Desnici (Vladan Desnica Collection)
15,600.00 KN
2000
Naklada MD
Istvan Lukacs: Antologija madarske kratke price (Anthology of Hungarian Short Stories)
25,000.00 KN
2001
Savez udruženja Roma Hrvatske
(Union of Roma Associations of Croatia)
Musical collection „Ðelem, Ðelem”

22,000,00 KN

Udruga Roma Zagreba
(Roma Association, Zagreb)
Roma-Croatian and Croatian-Roma
Dictionary with Grammar

25,000.00 KN

Union of Germans and Austrians of Croatia,
Osijek Branch
Lujo Pleln: Die Esekerische Sprachart/Osjecki govor (The Osijek Dialect)
10,000.00 KN
The Ministry of Culture as part of its programme of financing magazines and
newsletters has financed national minority magazines as follows:
1999
NOVI OMANUT
“Miroslav šalom Freiberger” Cultural Society

20,000.00 KN

RUNDSCHAU, Croatian-German Society

40,000,00 KN

63

2000 and 2001
NOVI OMANUT
“Miroslav šalom Freiberger”

Cultural Society

40,000.00 KN

In the Republic of Croatia there are ten central libraries for minorities which are all
supported by finances from the State Budget. The financing of the central libraries of national
minorities from the State Budget through the Ministry of Culture began in April 2000 when,
by a decision of the Government of the Republic of Croatia, the realisation of this programme
was transferred to this Ministry.
During 2000 and 2001 the Ministry of Culture financed the programmes of the central
libraries of the national minorities in the amount of 40,000.00 kunas, and provided the funds
for the salaries of one employee to work in the central library as follows:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

“Ivan Goran Kovacic”, City library, central library for Slovenes,
“Petar Preradovic” People‘s Library, Bjelovar, central library for Czechs,
Pula City Library and Reading Room, central library for Italians,
Zagreb City Library, Zagreb, central library for Ruthenians and Ukrainians,
Beli Manastir Town University, central library for Hungarians,
Croatian Library and Reading Room, Našice, central library for Slovaks,
”Bogdan Ogrizovic” Library and Reading Room, Zagreb, central library for Albanians,
Osijek City and University Library, central library for Austrians and Germans.

The Serbian Cultural Society “Prosveta”, Zagreb, which acts as the central library for
Serbs, was provided with funds in the amount of 80,000.00 kunas and the means to pay two
workers.
In 2001 funds were supplied for the Jewish community in Zagreb for the work of the
central library for Jews in the amount of 20,000.00 kunas, and the funds to pay for one
worker in the library.
Radio stations in the Republic of Croatia, as especially local ones, pay a great deal of
attention to national minorities and broadcast a series of informative and other programmes in
the languages of the national minorities.
1.

Implementation of Point f)

Point f) was implemented during 2000 as part of the regular reporting of programmes,
parts of the programmes of national minorities were financed as follows:
Ilok Town Library and Reading Room, Ilok Town Museum
An Exhibition of Publications by National Minorities
The Jewish Community in Zagreb
Exhibitions in the Milan and Ivo Steiner Gallery
Našice Slovaks Society
Ethnographic Exhibition
“ Slovaks in the Republic of Croatia”

20,000.00 KN

15,000.00 KN
64

The Ministry of Culture encourages direct involvement by representatives of those
who use minority languages in planning a wide range of cultural activities. Moreover,
through the Office for National Minorities of the Government of the Republic of Croatia it
supports minority cultural activities such as visits by amateur ensembles, participation in
exhibitions, competitions etc. For example in the Istarska County, the International Cultural
Centre of Croatian Musical Youth in Grožnjan publishes all written texts (posters,
programme notes, announcements) in Croatian and Italian.
2.

Point g)

Point g) is implemented through the provision of publishing in minority languages through
the existing large publishing houses of some national minorities, such as “Edit” Rijeka,
“Jednota” Daruvar, “Prosvjeta” Zagreb etc. who are supported by funds from the Republic of
Croatia, as well as the counties, towns and municipalities.
In accordance with the provisions of these laws and regulations, members of national
minorities may, in order to realise their cultural autonomy, and as an expression of their
national and cultural identity, not only found institutions of various kinds to carry out cultural
activities for those who are interested, but also take part on equal terms in establishing
cultural policies and in the implementation of cultural policy measures for the advancement
of cultural activities on a local level and wider.

Article 13 Economic and Social Life
The provisions of the European Charter for Regional and Minority Languages are not
being applied for the simple reason that in practice no need has aris en as yet. The Labour Act
which regulates the field of work and labour relations does not contain provisions on the use
of minority languages in any form.
The provisions of Article 13, Sub-Paragraph a) by which “with regard to economic
and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole country, to eliminate form their
legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without justifiable reasons the use of regional
or minority languages in documents relating to economic or social life, particularly contracts
of employment, and n technical document such as instructions for the use of products or
installations”, are applied in that there are no legal regulations in the field of labour or social
rights which in any way forbid the use of minority languages.
Technical documents and instructions on the characteristics of certain products
usually include instructions in several languages, e.g. English, German, Hungarian and
Slovene.

Article 14 Transfrontier Cultural Exchanges
Transfrontier cultural exchanges are carried out by signing agreements on cooperation between cities and municipalities of the Republic of Croatia with the same units in
other countries. In this way a variety of cultures and customs meet. From 1999 to 2001

65

several agreeme nts of this nature were signed, and official records are kept of this, so that
these agreements are made according to a particular procedure, as a rule based on an
agreement between the two sides.
Krapinsko-zagorska County
1. The Municipalities of Kumrovec and Descartes (France) 2000
2. The Town of Zabok and the Municipality of Puconci (Republic of Slovenia)

Karlovacka County
1. The Towns of Ogulin and Dombovar (Hungary) 2000
Varaždinska County
1. The Towns of Varaždin and Trnava (Slovakia) 2000
2. The Towns of Varaždinske Toplice and Piestany (Slovakia) 2000
Koprivnicko-križevacka County
1. Koprivnicko-križevacka County joined the Euro-regional co-operation
Danube-Drava-Sava 2000
Bjelovarsko-bilogorska County
1. The Towns of Grubišno Polje and Sellye (Hungary) 2000
Primorsko-goranska County
1. Primorsko-goranska County and the Autonomous Region Friuli - Venezia Giulia
(Italy) 2000
2. Primorsko-goranska County and Pest County (Hungary) 2000

66

Licko-senjska County
1. Licko-senjska County and Kotar Wielun (Poland) 2001
Osijecko-baranjska County
1. Osjecko-baranjska County and Autonomous Region of Friulian and Julian March
(Italy) 2000
2. Osjecko-baranjska County and Lombardy region (Italy) 2001
3. The Towns of Našice and Zlate Moravice (Slovakia) 2000
4. The Cities of Osijek and Pecs (Hungary) 2000
5. The City of Osijek and the XIII District of the City of Budapest (Hungary)

Šibensko-kninska County
1. The Cities of Šibenik and San Benedetto (Italy) 2000

Vukovarsko-srijemska County
1. The Town of Županja and the Municipality of Wilamowice (Poland) 2001

Splitsko-dalmatinska County
1. The Towns of Omiš and Nepomuk (Czech Republic) 2000

Istarska County
1. Istarska County and Somogy County (Hungary)
2. Istarska County and the Autonomous Region of Friulian and Julian March
(Italy) 1999
3. Istarska County and Carinthia Land (Austria) 1999

Dubrovacko-neretvanska County
1. Dubrovacko-neretvanska County and Autonomous Region Friuli - Venezia Giulia
(Italy) 2001
2. The Cit ies of Dubrovnik and Ragusa (Italy) 2000
3. The Municipalities of Blato and Szydlowo (Poland) - signed

67

The City of Zagreb
1. The Cities of Zagreb and Vienna (Austria) 2001
2. The Cities of Zagreb and Moscow (Russian Federation) 2001
3. The Cities of Zagreb and Ljubljana (Republic of Slovenia) 2001
4. The Cities of Zagreb and Dayton (USA) 2000
5. The Cities of Zagreb and Sarajevo (B&H) 2001
6. The Cities of Zagreb and Budapest (Hungary) 2001

Note:
- information about agreements was requested on 6.11.2000.
- ten counties (Zagrebacka, Krapinsko-zagorska, Sisacko- moslavacka, Bjelovarskobilogorska, Primorsko- goranska, Viroviticko-podravska, Šibensko-kninska, Splitskodalmatinska, Dubrovacko-neretvanska, Medimurska County) and the City of Zagreb did not
supply the data requested about agreements signed after 1999.
- a total of about 30 agreements have been signed.
-

On 11 April 2001 the new Local and Regional Self- government Act (Narodne novine,
33/2001) came into force by which the agreement of the central body of state
administration competent for local self- government is no longer required for concluding
agreements, but there is only supervision of their legality.

Agreements of co-operation between towns and counties with units of local self- government
of other countries.

Sisacko-moslavacka County
1. The Towns of Sisak and Heidenheim (Germany)
2. The Towns of Sisak and Remchingen (Germany)
3. The Towns of Sisak and Mo and Rana (Norway)
4. The Towns of Sisak and Bitola (Macedonia)
5. The Towns of Sisak and Celje (Slovenia)
6. The Towns of Sisak has signed an agreement on opening an Embassy of Local Democracy
with several towns
7. The Towns of Kutina and the Longarone Region (Italy) 1992.
8. The Town of Kutina and the Main-Kinzig Region (Germany) 1992.
9. The Municipality of Lipovljani and the Town of Mogliano Veneto (Italy)
Karlovacka County
1. The Towns of Karlovac and Alessandria (Italy) 1986.
2. The Town of Karlovac and Kansas City (USA) 1993.
3. The Towns of Slunj and Castel San Giovanni (Italy) 1997.
4. The Towns of Slunj and Grude (B&H) 1996.
5. The Towns of Ozalj and Metlika (Slovenia) 1982.
6. The Municipalities of Rakovica and Preganciol (Italy)

68

Varaždinska County
1. Varaždinska County and Burgenland (Austria) 1995.
2. Varaždinska County and Zala County (Hungary) 1995.
3. Varaždinska County and Voronesh District (Russian Federation) 1996.
4. The Town of Varaždin and the Municipality of Montale (Italy) 1987.
5. The Town of Varaždin and Kumanovo 1972.
6. The Municipalities of Sveti Ilija and Devinska Nova Vas (Slovakia) 1997.

Koprivnicko-križevacka County
1. Koprivnicko-križevacka County and Somogy County (Hungary) 1997.
2. The Towns of Koprivnica and Kaposvar (Hungary) 1995.
3. The Municipalities of Molve and Somogyudvarhely (Hungary) 1997.
4. the Municipalities of Ferdinandovac and Vizvar (Hungary)

Primorsko-goranska County
1. The Cities of Rijeka and Csepel (Hungary) 1997.
2. The Towns of Cres and Motta di Livenza (Italy) 1996.
3. The Towns of Crikvenica and Harkany (Hungary) 1996.
4. The Towns of Crikvenica and Verbania (Italy) 1997.
5. The Towns of Mali Lošinj and Thiene (Italy) 1995.
6. The Towns of Rab and San Marino (The Republic of San Marino) 1968.
7. The Towns of Rab and Konigsbrunn (Germany) 1996.
8. The Towns of Opatija and Castel San Tietro Terme (Italy) 1994.
9. The Town of Opatija and the Municpality of Ilirska Bistrica (Slovenia) 1987.
10. The Towns of Opatija and Balatonfureda (Hungary) 1996.
11. The Towns of Opatija and Carmagnola (Italy) 1997.
12. The Towns of Novi Vinodolski and Fonyod (Hungary)
13. The Municpality of Lovran, Matulji Mošcenicka Draga with
the Town of Castel San Pietro Terme (Italy) 1994.
14. The Town of Kastav and the Municipality of Negrar (Italy) 1998.
15. The Towns of Delnice and Cabar with the Municipalities of Loška Dolina,
Loški Potok and Osilnica (Slovenia) 1998.
16. The Municipality of Omišalj and the Town of Taglio di Po (Italy) 1994.
17. The Municipalities of Malinska-Dubašnica and Pinkovac - Guttenbach (Austria) 1997.

Viroviticko-podravska County
1. Viroviticko-podravska County and Somogy County (Hungary)
2. The Towns of Virovitica and Traunreutom (Germany)
3. The Towns of Virovitica and Barcsa (Hungary)
4. The Towns of Slatina and Sigetvarom (Hungary)
5. The Municipalities of Gradina and Brloboš, Novo Selo, Martinci, Troratomaši (Hungary)

69

6. The Municipalities of Sopje i Sellye (Hungary)
Brodsko-posavska County
1. The Municipality of Gundinci and the Croatian National Self- governing Village of Semlja
(Hungary) 1998.

Zadarska County
1. The City of Zadar and Reggio nell Emilia (Italy) 1974.
2. The City of Zadar and Dundee (Scotland, UK) 1983.
3. The City of Zadar and Romans-sur-Isere (France) 1985.
4. The City of Zadar and Furstenfeldebruck (Germany) 1989.
5. The City of Zadar and Szekesfervar (Hungary) 1997.
6. The Town of Pag and Carbonera (Italy) 1993.
7. The Town of Pag and Zane (Italy) 1995.
8. The Municipality of Jasenice and Greve in Chianti (Italy) 1995.
9. The Municipality of Sv. Filip i Jakov and Poggibonsi - Sienna (Italy) 1994.
10. The Municipality of Škabrnja and Paliano (Italy) 1994.
11. The Municipality of Škabrnja and Ravno (B&H) 1993.
Osijecko-baranjska County
1. Osjecko-baranjska County and Vincenza Province (Italy) 1995.
2. Osjecko-baranjska County and Baranja County (Hungary) 1996.
3. Osjecko-baranjska County and Baranja County (Hungary) 1998.
4. Osjecko-baranjska County and Tuzlansko-podrinski Canton (B&H) 1998.

Vukovarsko-srijemska County
1. Vukovarsko-srijemska County and Hercegovacko-neretvanska County
(B&H) 1998.
2. The Town of Vinkovci and Camponogare (Italy) 1996.
3. The Towns of Vinkovci and Široki Brijeg (B&H)
4. The Towns of Vinkovci and Bugojno (B&H)
5. The Towns of Vinkovci and Ohrid (Makedonija)
6. The Towns of Vinkovci and Emendingen (Germany)
7. The Municipality of Otok and Comune di Fiesso d Artico, Venice County
(Italy) 1997.
8. The Municipality of Tordinci and Comune di Pieve Vergonte (Italy)

Splitsko-dalmatinska County
1. Splitsko-dalmatinska County and Ascoli Piceno Province (Italy) 1996.
2. The Towns of Kaštel and Hradec Kralove (Czech Republic)
3. The Towns of Kaštel and Lindar (Germany)

70

4. The Towns of Kaštel and Bardejov (Slovakia)
5. The Towns of Kaštel and Pszczyna (Poland)
6. The Towns of Kaštel and Kiseljak (B&H)
7. The Towns of Kaštel and Peterborough (Great Britain)
8. The City of Split and Ancona (Italy)
9. The City of Split and Antofagasta (Chile)
10. The City of Split and Bet Shemesh (Israel)
11. The City of Split and Cockburn (Australia)
12. The City of Split and Dover (England)
13. The City of Split and Gladsaxe-Copenhagen (Denmark)
14. The City of Split and Los Angeles (USA)
15. The City of Split and Mostar (B&H)
16. The City of Split and Odessa (Ukraine)
17. The City of Split and Ostrava (Czech Republic)
18. The City of Split and Štip (Macedonia)
19. The City of Split and Trondheim (Norway)
20. The City of Split and Velenje (Slovenia)
21. The City of Split and Wilmersdorf-Berlin (Germany)
Istarska County
1. Istarska County and the Toscana Region (Italy) 1994.
2. Istarska County and the Veneto Region (Italy) 1995.
3. Istarska County and the Liguria Region (Italy)
4. Istarska County and Somogy (Hungary)
5. Istarska County and Catalunya (Spain)
6. Istarska County and Wallonia
7. Istarska County and Franche-Comte (France)
8. Istarska County and Jura (Czech Republic)
Medimurska County
1. Medimurska County and the County of Zala (Hungary)
2. The Municipality of Gorican and the Municipality of Serdehel - Totszerdehely (Hungary)
1995.
3. The Municipality of Donji Vidovec and the Municipality of Fityhaz (Hungary) 1995.
4. The Municipality of Donja Dubrava and the Municipality of Murakerestur (Hungary)
1996.
5. The Municipality of Donja Dubrava and the Municipality of Belezna (Hungary) 1996.
6. The Municipality of Kotoriba and the Municipality of Murakerestur (Hungary) 1995.
7. The Municipality of Kotoriba and the Municipality of Molnari (Hungary) 1995.
8. The Municipality of Sveta Marija and the Municipality of Sumarton - Totszentmarton
(Hungary) 1998.

71

Conclusion
The Government of the Republic of Croatia, in the process of adjusting its standards
to those arising from the documents of the Council of Europe, is taking steps to realise the
recommendations of the Committee of Ministers, although it is aware that due to the overall
complexity of the situation in society, primarily in an economic sense, the appropriate results
have not been achieved. Through the work of line ministries and the Government Office for
National Minorities, efforts are being made to offer minority associations support in their
attempt to affirm minority rights as fully as possible.
The complex economic and social situation has to a certain extent slowed down the
trend of affirmation of minority rights, which was to be expected. The results of the 2001
census also indicate this, when there was a decrease in the number of members of some
national minorities. However, since there were no significant changes in the number of
people who stated that their mother tongue was one of the minority languages, it is thought
that this is a phenomenon which demands measures to encourage members of national
minorities to preserve their identity and complete cultural heritage.
The existing legislation offers a wide range of opportunities for the affirmation of
minority rights, but it is necessary to realise all the conditions for their application, primarily
on the level of local self- government as the environment where the majority of minority
rights are realised.
The Government of the Republic of Croatia directly or through line ministries is
investing a great deal of effort in the realisation of permanent co-operation with legitimate
representatives of national minorities and removing barriers to the full affirmation of minority
rights. To this end work continues on the creation of legal preconditions to improve the
position of national minorities.
The enactment of the laws mentioned is a continuation of the practice of the
realisation of minority rights and a broader institutionalisation of the protection of the rights
ensured, especially because new norma tive preconditions were established. This is especially
true in the field of education and use of minority languages as official languages of individual
local community, for the realisation of a significant amount of the rights guaranteed by the
Charter. These laws were only passed at the end of May 2000 and therefore they could not
find their full expression in this Report, which relates to the period 1999-2001, in view of the
time limits prescribed for applying them.
The Government of the Republic of Croatia is still working on creating the necessary
conditions for the promotion and protection of minority rights. It should be pointed out that
laws are being prepared to completely regulate the position of national minorities. Thus the
Government has proposed the adoption of a new Constitutional Act on the rights of national
minorities, which should make it possible for national minorities to have a significant
influence in regulating their overall position at all levels, and thus also regarding the
realisation of the rights guaranteed by the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages.

72

