Strasbourg, 18 January 2011

MIN-LANG/PR (2011) 1

EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES

Third periodical report
presented to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe
in accordance with Article 15 of the Charter

CYPRUS

EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL OR
MINORITY LANGUAGES

THIRD PERIODICAL REPORT
BY THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS

OFFICE OF THE
LAW COMMISSIONER

Nicosia,
18 January 2011

2

Introduction
The Third Periodical Report on the Application of the European Charter for Regional
or Minority Languages (hereinafter the “present Report”) was prepared in accordance
with the Revised Outline for Three-Yearly Periodical Reports [MIN-LANG (2009) 8]. It
addresses the issues raised by the Committee of Experts and the recommendations
made by the Committee of Ministers in the Second Evaluation Report on the
Application of the Charter in Cyprus [ECRML (2009) 5], as well as the “Questions
submitted to the Government of Cyprus requesting information to be included in its Third
Periodical Report” [MIN-LANG (2010) 3].
The present Report has been prepared by the Law Commissioner of Cyprus who,
pursuant to a Decision of the Council of Ministers, is entrusted with ensuring
compliance by the Republic of Cyprus with its reporting obligations under international
human rights instruments.
The present Report is based on information and data provided by the Ministry of
Education and Culture, competent authority for the implementation of the Charter, the
Ministry of Interior, competent authority for the protection of national minorities1, and
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Information was also obtained from the
Representatives of the Armenian and Maronite Religious Groups and their respective
Offices. The present Report has been communicated to the Representatives of the
Armenian, Maronite and Latin Religious Groups.
The numbering appearing in the headings/paragraphs relates to the documents
mentioned in the first paragraph above.
Part I
Please provide updated information, if any new data exists, about the number and
geographic distribution of speakers of regional or minority languages and the general
demographic situation.
On 27 May 2009, the Members of the Committee of Experts for the Codification of Cypriot
Maronite Arabic (CMA) submitted to the Ministry of Education and Culture (MOEC) their
proposal for an action-plan for the codification and revitalisation of CMA. The plan was
divided into five thematic units covering the following:
•

A general description and a pre-assessment of the current state of play of CMA;

•

An action plan for the revitalisation of CMA;

1

For the Republic of Cyprus, the term “national minorities” within the meaning of the Framework Convention
is understood to designate only those national minority-groups which had a traditional presence on the island
at the time of the establishment of the Republic of Cyprus in 1960 and hold the Cypriot citizenship; thus,
“religious groups,” as defined in Art. 2 (3) of the Constitution, are treated as national minorities for the
purposes of the Framework Convention.

3

•

Financing suggestions;

•

The mandate of the Coordination Committee;

•

A proposal for the adoption of an alphabetical codification of CMA.

According to the proposed action plan, data will be collected regarding: the number of
speakers of CMA, the percentage of the speakers in relation to the total number of individuals
within the Community, the distribution of CMA in the field of communication and the
qualitative and quantitative assessment of the codified linguistic data.
Additionally, official data regarding the number of speakers of CMA will be available in the
2011 population census. The Statistical Service has introduced a self-identification element to
be applied in conducting the survey.
Please provide information about any changes in the general policies, legislation or
practice of your state in respect of regional or minority languages. Please also indicate any
developments which are expected to occur during the next monitoring cycle, such as
envisaged political or budgetary changes, policy plans or any other elements that may have
a direct or indirect effect on the situation of the regional or minority languages in your
State.
As stated in the Second Periodical Report of Cyprus, the Government has initiated an
educational reform programme by encouraging dialogue between all stakeholders (political
parties, teacher unions, parents associations, associations of students, the Representatives of
the Religious Groups and the competent authorities) with the aim of modernising the
educational system of Cyprus. In particular, the representatives of the Maronites and the
Armenians have been involved in the process of modernisation, restructuring and upgrading
of the national curriculum, from pre-primary to upper secondary general and technical
vocational education, which is an ongoing process.
This initiative was launched in January 2005 and was based on a report which had identified
weaknesses and shortcomings in the existing educational system. A new core curriculum has
been designed and is expected to be applied in all state schools by September 2012. Both
Representatives were informed of the aims, objectives and the philosophy of the new national
curriculum, which will be gradually implemented during the following year. As part of the
process, issues regarding religion, language, history and culture of the minority groups were
addressed and discussed and decisions were taken for further action.
Please, give a detailed account of the legal and /or practical measures that your State has
taken to implement each one of the recommendations of the Committee of Ministers.
Education in all state schools in Cyprus is focused on promoting the acceptance of difference,
of tolerance and respect for other cultures. In order to raise awareness to the principles of
non-discrimination and equality the MOEC has, for three consecutive academic years
(September 2008-September 2010), issued circulars, emphasizing the: “Enhancement of

4

mutual respect and understanding among the different cultures on the island and of nurturing
peaceful coexistence”2.
Teachers of all levels of education, students and parents received information and were
encouraged to participate in planned events (conferences, seminars, plays, book clubs, etc)
related to the objective and to promote special activities that include the development of
cross-curriculum approaches in order to highlight cooperation and mutual understanding.
Moreover, the European Year for Intercultural Dialogue, which was one of the priority goals
of the academic year 2007-2008, continues to provide a framework for activities for the
implementation of the recommendations of the Committee of Ministers3.
Practical measures, such as informing and alerting all stakeholders to the possibilities and
options of human-rights education and training, have been set up by the MOEC. For
example, in state schools, during the past few years, this issue was promoted in an
interdisciplinary manner through a variety of subjects and classes, such as Literature, History,
Civics and Geography. The framework for human-rights education and training was
developed on the following overarching priorities, which address all aspects of the
educational system, with emphasis on multidisciplinary approaches and experiential learning
such as:
Raising public awareness for human-rights education and democratic procedures;
Educating stakeholders in the related areas;
Differentiating teachers’ and students’ attitudes;
Strengthening of human-rights education in the educational system at all levels;
Clarifying the role and strengthening the role of mass media in promoting human
rights;
Promoting the active involvement of NGOs in the implementation of the goals of
human rights education at different levels.
A number of governmental, semi-governmental institutions and NGOs were involved and
offered their expertise by using the following methods and activities:
Participatory teaching and active learning methods;
Projects, group work and simulations;
Use of drama, role playing, case studies;
School visits and excursions;
Use of research techniques in the school and the community;
Debates on human rights with the participation of the students, parents and teachers;
Developing school, class and family charters of rights-making comparisons with the
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child;
Preparation of educational material;
2

http://www.schools.ac.cy/dde/circular/daya/Doc7387.pdf and
http://www.moec.gov.cy/stoxoi/stoxoi2009/stoxos1.html(Greek)
3
http://www.moec.gov.cy/stoxoi/stoxoi2008/stoxos2.html(Greek)

5

Essay and drawing competitions.
In order to achieve the parallel overall objective of social inclusion, the MOEC focuses its
efforts on ensuring compatibility of programmes run by local authorities and NGOS with
specific social-inclusion objectives and policies of the MOEC, leading to a more decisive and
substantial contribution of local authorities and the voluntary sector towards meeting the
needs of the modern society.
One example of this effort is the project discussed with the Armenian Community, relating to
the establishment and operation of a pilot “Open School” programme at the NAREG School
in Nicosia.
For its design and development, the Armenian Community, the Armenian School-Board, the
Parents Association and the MOEC will cooperate closely in order to secure sufficient
funding and to develop programmes that address the educational and other needs of the
students and which will benefit the Community as a whole. The programme’s aim is to
enhance the youngsters´ computer skills, to provide extra tutoring to students in need, as well
as to promote hobbies and sports, making full use of school infrastructure.
In parallel, the MOEC supports the Maronite Community by subsidising a large percentage of
the budget for the creation of the CMA summer language-camp, for children of 8 years of age
and above, which takes place annually in August since 2008, at the occupied village of
Kormakitis. The MOEC also subsidises the production of a CD with children’s songs in
CMA and covers the costs for transportation, accommodation and fees for the Lebanese
folkloric dance instructor who visits the camp every year in order to teach the pupils
traditional dances4.
Pursuant to Decision No. 62.425 of the Council of Ministers, dated 1/8/2005, the MOEC
appointed in September 2008 the Committee of Experts for the Codification of CMA5. The
Committee of Experts has submitted to the MOEC its proposal as mentioned above. The
MOEC Expert Group is currently looking into financing options and is examining possible
cooperation between different departments for the implementation of the proposed action
plan.
A detailed account relating to each of the Recommendations of the Committee of Ministers is
given in Part III below.

4

The MOEC facilitates the organisation of the specific project, but does not subsidize the entire operation. In
2008, at the request of the Representative, the grant by the MOEC was increased from 5000 to 8000 euro, due
to the fact that the camp was attended by more children than originally planned. In 2009 the amount of 8000
euro was granted again. In 2010, though the budget was calculated on the assumption that 180 students
would be attending the camp, the final number of attendees, according to an assessment contacted by an
independent expert, was 120, including the adult escorts.
5

Detailed information was provided in the Second Periodical Report of Cyprus.

6

Chapter 1 - Background information:
1.3 Presentation of the regional or minority language situation in Cyprus: up-date
13. Please provide information on the results of the survey on the number of speakers of
CMA
According to the information provided by the Committee of Experts for the Codification of
CMA regarding the number of speakers of CMA, approximately 900 persons, all originating
from the village of Kormakitis, speak the CMA language at different levels.
Official data regarding the number of speakers of CMA will be available upon the completion
of the 2011 population census. The Statistical Service, in charge of the census, has introduced
self-identification elements in the design and development of the procedure to be applied in
conducting the survey.
15. Please provide more detailed information on the use of Kurbetcha
Data will be available upon completion of the 2011 population census. Specific items
regarding collection of data concerning the use of Kurbetcha have been included by the
Statistical Service in designing and developing tools for the purposes of the 2011 population
census.
1.5 Particular issue concerning the Turkish Language
As stated both in the First and Second Periodical Reports of Cyprus, Turkish is an official
language of Cyprus by virtue of Article 3 of the Constitution of the Republic of Cyprus. This
is also reflected in the Official Languages of the Republic Laws, 1988 to 2002. Therefore,
being an official language, Turkish falls outside the scope of the Charter.
Chapter 2 The Committee of Experts’ evaluation on the application of the Charter
2.1 Preliminary Issues
27. The Committee of Experts encouraged the Cypriot authorities to comment on the
implementation of the Charter with regard to CMA in their next periodical report
As previously stated, the MOEC is willing to pursue and intensify its efforts to meet the
needs of all members of the national minorities and to ensure that their rights, especially in
areas highlighted by the Report of the Committee of Experts.
As stated above, the Committee of Experts for the Codification of CMA submitted for
approval to the MOEC its proposed action plan for the codification of the CMA language.
The plan is currently being assessed by the Group of Experts of the MOEC that will also
address the issue of funding its implementation.

7

Part II
Please indicate what measures your State has taken to apply Article 7 of the Charter to the
regional or minority languages as defined in paragraph a of Article 1 of the Charter,
focusing in particular on the following aspects:
•

•

Please provide information, for each regional or minority language on new
developments that have occurred since the last monitoring round concerning the
provisions of Article 7;
Please give a detailed account of the legal and /or practical measures that your
State has taken to implement the encouragements and box recommendations of the
Committee of Experts given in the previous evaluation report(s)

Article 7
Paragraph 1
In respect of regional or minority languages, within the territories in which such
languages are used and according to the situation of each language, the Parties shall base
their policies, legislation and practice on the following objectives and principles:
a) the recognition of the regional languages as an expression of cultural wealth;
31. During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed of considerations
to draw up a new constitution for Cyprus in the framework of a comprehensive solution to
the Cyprus question. The Parliamentary Representative of the Armenian community
demanded that any new constitution should recognise the minority groups as national
minorities or communities in accordance with international legal instruments, and not as
religious groups as is the case at present
The Government stresses that the interests and rights of the Religious Groups in Cyprus will
continue to be guaranteed and safeguarded and their Representatives’ opinions will be
considered in any final arrangement for the settlement of the Cyprus problem on the agreed
basis endorsed by the United Nations Security Council of a bizonal, bicommunal federation.

c. The need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in order to
safeguard them:
Armenian
Paragraph 1c
36. What steps have been taken to make the funding procedure more transparent and to
find a satisfactory solution to the allocation process of funds in co-operation with the
speakers?

8

The MOEC has a structured funding policy based on the following main strategy pillars:
1. Enrichment of cultural institutions,
2. Protection and promotion of Cyprus´ cultural heritage and contemporary culture and
their incorporation in everyday life,
3. Enhancement of the relationship between culture and education,
4. Support and promotion of contemporary Cypriot artistic literary creation,
5. Promotion and dissemination of contemporary Cypriot artistic and literary creation
abroad.
The request of the Representatives of the Religious Groups, both to be informed whenever a
member of their Community submits an application for subsidisation and to have the final
word on the amount awarded, cannot be satisfied. According to the opinion of the AttorneyGeneral this information is considered classified under the personal data protection law.
Moreover, this would not be consistent with the principle of good governance, as it would
entail bypassing the procedures of the funding policy of the MOEC. The MOEC informs each
applicant in writing of its decision.
In addition, ad hoc funding is available on the basis of assessment by the MOEC of both the
needs of the community and the proposed action.
CMA :
43. What steps have been taken to allocate adequate funds to further the protection and
promotion of CMA?
Further to what has been stated in relation to paragraph 27 above, the proposed measures
include the following:
1. A general description and a pre-assessment methodology of the current state of play for
CMA, such as:
• The preservation of CMA from generation to generation,
• The absolute number of CMA speakers based on official assessments / evaluations,
• The percentage of CMA speakers in relation to the total number of community
members,
• Distribution of CMA in the files of communication,
• Correspondence of CMA to new forms and ways of communication,
• Suggestions on the training methodology for CMA instruction and the production of
instructional material,
• The linguistic approaches of the members of the community as regards to CMA,
• Qualitative and quantitative assessment of the codified data on CMA available at
present,
• The necessity for the development of an action plan for the realization of the
codification,
• Description for budget allocation.
9

2. The proposed action plan for the codification and revitalisation of CMA:
• Budget justification,
• Special provisions in
the budget (budget analysis for the codification, budget
analysis for developing instructional methodology and material and budget analysis
for the revitalisation).
3. Funding resources.
4. The mandate of the Committee of Experts and the Coordination Committee of CMA.
5. The final proposal for the adoption of a codification alphabet.
While the implementation of the aforementioned project is pending, the MOEC, in order to
support the efforts of the Community to keep its language alive, continues to fund afternoon
classes of CMA at the St. Maronas Primary School, as well as the production of the unofficial,
instructional material which was developed by teachers of CMA. Free transport is offered to
all students of secondary education by the Ministry of Communications and Works. The
students attending St. Maronas Primary School travel for free. Furthermore, as mentioned in
Part I, the MOEC continues to financially assist the organisation of the annual summer
language-camp for CMA since its commencement in 2008.
The Committee of Experts encourages the Cypriot authorities to allocate adequate funds to
further the protection and promotion of CMA (comment in the box)
The proposed action plan for the codification and revitalisation of CMA contains a separate
provision regarding the allocation of funds such as:
1. Budget justification,
2. Special provisions in the budget,
3. Budget analysis for the codification of CMA,
4. Budget analysis for developing an instructional methodology and instructional
material on CMA,
5. Budget analysis for the revitalisation of CMA
The Committee of Experts for the Codification of CMA has developed a roadmap for all the
proposed actions which have to be concluded within two fiscal years. The Ministries with
competence on the specific issues will cooperate closely with the Committee of Experts for
the Codification of CMA, several Cypriot NGOs and the representatives of the Maronite
Community in a joint effort to promote all necessary actions for the codification and
revitalisation of CMA.
Armenian:
Paragraph 1d
44. The Committee of Experts has been informed of the plans to develop a more structured
and regular co-operation as part of the implementation of the Agreement on Cooperation
in the fields of culture, education and science between Cyprus and Armenia.
10

The Agreement on Cooperation in the Fields of Culture, Education and Science between the
Government of the Republic of Cyprus and the Government of the Republic of Armenia,
which entered into force in August 1999, provides a useful framework for such cooperation.
The MOEC held close consultations with the Community and its Representative in order to
proceed with the exchange of experts regarding the in-service training of the teachers of the
NAREG Schools in the Armenian language. However, the Armenian Community, through
their Representative, expressed reservations since Armenian spoken in Armenia differs from
the variant spoken by the Armenians of the Diaspora. In close cooperation with the
directorship of NAREG, it was jointly decided to appoint an expert of their choice, from
Armenia, in order to address the significant language problems.
In the field of culture the Department of Cultural Services of the MOEC financially supports
the efforts of the Community to teach the young Armenians traditional dances and offers
yearly subsidies for the transportation, accommodation and fees of Armenian folkloric dance
instructors. Additionally, within the framework of the “Kypria” Cultural Festival, the
Department subsidises the participation of Armenian dance groups. The Government is
committed to facilitating such cultural events, within the constraints of the annual budget of
the MOEC, by co-financing them.
As stated in the Second Periodical Report of Cyprus there is no specific allocation of funds
for minority languages in the MOEC budget. The Cultural Services of the MOEC fund the
organisation of proposed cultural events related to the promotion of Cyprus based on certain
defined, non ethnic, criteria.
The University of Cyprus, in cooperation with the competent authorities of the Republic of
Armenia is promoting the establishment of a Chair of Armenian History and Civilisation.
Further information is provided in relation to paragraph 87 below.
46. The Committee of Experts encouraged the authorities to allocate funds and promote
Armenian language and culture in public and private life, including the media, through a
more satisfactory arrangement in co-operation with the speakers
It is a common practice for the MOEC to hold several individual meetings with the
Representatives of the relevant Religious Groups in order to address issues related to the
specific needs of each Group in areas within the competence of the MOEC. On April 2008 a
new policy was agreed upon between the Representatives of the Religious Groups and the
MOEC, pursuant to which the Representatives will be in direct contact with the competent
Directorates of Education of the MOEC in order to resolve administrative and practical
problems.
The University of Cyprus offers PhD grants to students wishing to continue their studies in
areas related to the culture, history or language of the national minorities. Moreover, special
arrangements are made for the acceptance and facilitation of students from such groups at all
11

state universities of Cyprus, the state-funded institutions of higher education, as well as the
adult-education centers.
Armenian cultural events are subsidised by the MOEC on an annual basis and Armenian
institutions are also eligible for receiving financial assistance based on the structured policy
referred to in relation to paragraph 36 above.
49. Have any documents been published in Armenian by the local or central authorities,
other than the three statutes and three regulations mentioned?
The Department of Cultural Services of the MOEC has provided financial assistance for the
publication of an Armenian newsletter.
CMA:
55. The Committee of Experts encouraged the authorities to assist the Maronites in
establishing such a Culture and Youth Centre
Since 2007 there has been no development concerning the establishment of a Maronite
Cultural Center and the minutes of the meeting of the Committee on Cultural Issues of 2007
have been quoted in the Second Periodical Report of Cyprus.
56. Have there been any developments regarding the premises to be used for the cultural
needs of the Maronite community?
See comments in relation to paragraph 55 above.
Armenian:
61. What steps have been taken to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of
television programmes in Armenian?
The Cyprus Broadcasting Corporation (CyBC) is examining the feasibility of broadcasting
television programmes in Armenian.
CMA:
61. What steps have been taken to encourage and /or facilitate the broadcasting of
television programmes in CMA?
CyBC is examining the feasibility of broadcasting television programmes in CMA.
Paragraph 1f:
Armenian:
64. The Committee of Experts encouraged the authorities to take appropriate steps in order
to ensure that secondary education in Armenian will continue to be available.
12

The Council of Ministers with Decision No. 63.718, dated 3/5/2006, approved the
establishment of an upper secondary school for Cypriot Armenian students, within the
premises of the primary Armenian School NAREG in Nicosia, which began to operate
immediately. Nevertheless, the majority of the students previously attending the Melkonian
Secondary School enrolled at the American Academy, a private educational institution in
Nicosia. The curriculum followed at the American Academy was modified in order to
accommodate the needs of the students transferred from the Melkonian Secondary School.
Until their graduation all classes were offered in Armenian, except English classes. Some of
the teaching personnel, previously employed at the Melkonian Secondary School, are now
employed by the American Academy. The Government subsidises the students’ tuition fees
as well as instructional material, including books.
Furthermore, the Council of Ministers with Decision No. 63.847, dated 3/5/2006, approved
the provision for free of charge afternoon lessons in the history, the language and the culture
of the Maronites, the Armenians and the Latins at the state-funded educational institutions
which operate in all areas under the effective control of the Government. The MOEC held
consultations with the Representatives of the Religious Groups who indicated that this
decision was extremely difficult to implement, as attendance would not be obligatory for the
members of the Religious Groups; therefore, the MOEC has asked the interested parties to
propose alternative solutions.
The Representatives responded, mainly, by asking for books to be written about the history
and culture of their respective Group. The MOEC Directorate for Secondary Education has
been appointed as the coordinator for this action. Currently, all recommendations submitted
are being evaluated and the MOEC will proceed with the implementation of the specific
projects.
67. Please provide detailed information on the actual number of classes taught in
Armenian at the different levels of education at the NAREG schools and whether they are
taught as an integral part of the curriculum.
At the primary level of education at the NAREG Schools (functioning in Lefkosia, Lemesos
and Larnaka) all instructional subjects are taught in the Armenian Language except the
courses in English Language and the courses in Greek Language (these courses are taught as
a second language). The Armenian Language is taught six to ten periods per week (each
period with a duration of 35 minutes).
In the case of secondary education the school follows the current curriculum approved by the
MOEC. Armenian Language and Literature, Armenian History and Religion are taught as a
part of a special additional curriculum (total of six instructional periods per week, with a
duration of 45 minutes each).
71. Please provide information on whether the plans to integrate the library of the MEI
into the University Library have been implemented.
13

The MOEC held intensive consultations with the Representative of the Armenian Religious
Group and the Representative of the Board of the Armenian General Benevolence Union
(AGBU) in Cyprus, in order to proceed with the integration of the Library of the MEI into the
national network of public libraries. However, the AGBU which is the owner of the Library
strongly opposes to the implementation of the project.
72. The MEI had also offered a three-year teacher-training course in the past. Its closure
has a negative impact on the Armenian teaching staff.
See comments in relation to paragraph 76 below.
73. Please, provide further information on new developments concerning the MEI.
There are no further developments concerning the MEI since its owner, the AGBU, remains
on its position regarding the closure of the school.
76. What steps have been taken to arrange teacher training in Armenian?
The MOEC is fully aware of the necessity to offer teachers the opportunity to further develop
their learning and teaching-skills. In this context it is prepared to start, during the present
academic year, through the Cyprus Pedagogical Institute, organizing in-service training
seminars and conferences for teachers who will teach pupils of ethnic minority backgrounds.
In-service training for the teachers of the Armenian language, especially designed and
implemented for the educators working at the NAREG Schools, are presently being arranged
by the Cyprus Pedagogical Institute. The Institute will announce a call for proposals in order
to ensure that the most qualified academics/teachers (including Armenians of the Diaspora)
will be engaged in the process of implementation of the training session. The MOEC will
fund the entire project.
CMA:
77. The Committee of Experts encouraged the authorities to provide for the teaching of
CMA at primary-school level and otherwise where appropriate and in particular to arrange
for the training of teachers and the production of teaching material.
The informal teaching of CMA (since the proposed action plan for the codification and
revitalisation of the language is in early stage) is currently under examination by the Division
of Primary Education which is drafting a new policy in collaboration with the representatives
of the Maronite Community. Regarding the training of teachers, as well as the publication of
teaching material, specific suggestions are included in the proposed action plan. The MOEC
emphasizes its commitment to support the relevant efforts of the Maronite Community,
which it encourages to take initiatives towards the realization of this project and to also
submit proposals.

14

Unofficial instructional material is currently used for the teaching of CMA during this present
period of voluntary provision at the St. Maronas Primary School. The material was developed
by Maronite teachers who have little or no experience in creating curriculums and syllabuses.
However, in order for the MOEC to officially adopt it, it has to be assessed by an
independent expert. The MOEC has asked the representatives of the Community to designate
an academic expert in order to conduct the assessment. Their response is still awaited.
78. The Committee of Experts encourages the Cypriot authorities to consider increasing
the number of hours of CMA.
Since the inclusion of CMA into the national curriculum is an ambitious task which requires
special qualifications, knowledge and experience, the MOEC has asked the representatives of
the Community to designate experts.
The MOEC will fully support, financially and
materially this task, including the training of teachers, the setting up of the curriculum and the
publication of the teaching-material that is necessary for the instruction of CMA, as well as
the history, culture and religion of the Maronite Community.
Pending its codification, CMA, will continue to be offered as an elective extracurricular
subject twice a week during the afternoon schedule at the St. Maronas Primary School.
79. The Committee of Experts encourages the Cypriot authorities to consider the possibility
of offering CMA classes at other schools, provided there is a sufficient number of pupils
who wish to learn the language.
Up to the present, there has been no request for the introduction of CMA language classes at
other schools. The MOEC will examine such a request if, and when, it is submitted.
80. The Committee of Experts encourages the authorities to consider the possibility of
offering CMA Classes at pre-school and secondary school level.
See comments in relation to paragraph 79 above.
83. The Committee of Experts urges the authorities to provide for the teaching of CMA at
primary school level and in particular to arrange for the training of teachers and the
production of teaching material (comment in the box).
The MOEC is willing to help and support any effort for the development of instructional
material and the training of teachers jointly with the Maronite Community.
See comments in relation to paragraph 77 above.
Paragraph 1g.
85. CMA could be offered at the adult education centers.

15

In keeping with the decision of the Council of Ministers referred to in relation to paragraph
64 above, the MOEC is willing to include the teaching of CMA at the Adult Education
Centers, subject to there being a sufficient number of interested students.
Paragraph 1 h
87. Please provide information on the situation of the planned Armenian language and
culture courses at the University of Cyprus and whether the lecturing post for these
courses will also carry out research or study of the Armenian language.
The University of Cyprus Language Centre, in cooperation with the Armenian Community,
has launched a project /course for learning the Armenian Language. The project is divided
into two parts, of a duration of 75 teaching hours each, leading to A1 level of CERF. The first
part commenced in January 2011.
Paragraph 1i
92. The Committee of Experts asks for information in any exchange relating to the
language or to what extent such an exchange would currently be desirable for CMA
speakers.
As stated in the Second Periodical Report, the Government of Cyprus and the Government of
the Lebanese Republic have signed a bilateral agreement on cultural, educational and
scientific cooperation which provides for the exchange of teachers, scientists, specialists as
well as scientific delegations in the abovementioned fields between the two countries.
The MOEC is committed to promoting and strengthening this project. However, it should be
noted that the Maronite language spoken in Lebanon differs from the variant spoken by the
Maronite Community in Cyprus (Cypriot Maronite Arabic - CMA) and, therefore, the benefit
from an exchange programme for teachers is questionable.
93. Please provide information on whether the government supports the umbrella
organisation for cross-border co-operation in the field of sports and culture and give more
details about the co-operation.
All Cypriot athletes, regardless of their ethnic background, can participate in the competitions
organised by the IOC or the corresponding international, European, Commonwealth and
Mediterranean Federations, under the Cyprus flag. The Cypriot Delegations participate in
most games/tournaments organized by several Federations, with very good results.
For information regarding cultural exchanges see above in the present Report as well as the
First and Second Periodical Reports of Cyprus.
95-96. Please report on whether there is any exchange, under the bilateral agreement of
2003 between the Government of Cyprus and the Government of the Lebanese Republic
relating to the languages (or the Maronites) and to what extent such an exchange would be
desirable for CMA speakers.
16

See comments in relation to paragraph 92 above.
Paragraph 3
100. Please provide information on the outcome of the awareness-raising activities carried
out by the sub-group of the CMA revitalisation group.
See comments in Part I as well as to answers in relation to paragraphs 27, 43, 61 above.
Part III
For each regional or minority language chosen at the moment of ratification as follows
from paragraph 2 of Article 2 of the Charter, please, indicate how the undertakings have
been implemented (see Appendix), focusing in particular on the following aspects:
•

Please, provide information on new developments that have occurred since the last
monitoring round.

With reference to the most recent evaluation report of the Committee of Experts
concerning the implementation of the Charter in your State:
•

•

•

For undertakings for which the Committee of Experts did not have sufficient
information to properly evaluate the implementation, please provide detailed
information;
For undertakings which the Committee of Experts considered were not fulfilled,
please indicate what steps your State has taken, for each regional or minority
language, to implement these undertakings;
For the encouragements and box recommendations of the Committee of Experts,
please, give a detailed account of the legal/and or practical measures that your State
has taken.

The Government is committed to adopting and implementing the recommendations of the
Committee of Experts.
Chapter 3: Findings and proposals for recommendations
3.1. Conclusions of the Committee of Experts on how the Cypriot authorities have reacted
to the recommendations of the Committee of Ministers
Recommendation 1:
“[…] apply Part II protection to CMA as a regional or minority language in Cyprus within
the meaning of the Charter and strengthen in particular the teaching of CMA at primary
school level.”
110. “The actual stage of implementation of CMA class is not clear. No teaching material
or teacher training is available, although it seems that through the codification of the
language and with the support of the team of experts, these shortcomings could be
addressed”.
17

See comments in relation to paragraphs 13, 77 above.

Recommendation 2:
“[…]take measures to ensure that teaching in, and of ,Armenian at secondary level
remains available”
112. “[…] While secondary education is no longer available at the Melkonian Secondary
School, the Cypriot authorities have continued their efforts to maintain the site of the
school by a preservation order. This could enable potential investors to reopen the
Melkonian School.”
See comments provided in relation to paragraphs 64 and 67.
Recommendation 3:
“[…] adopt a structured policy for the protection and promotion of the Armenian and
CMA languages.”
113. “The official appointment of the team of experts on CMA and the adoption of an
action plan are important steps towards the protection and promotion of the language,
but need to be grounded in a structured language policy”.
See comments in relation to paragraphs 13, 43 CMA (comment in the box) and 77 above.
“With regard to the Armenian language, no steps have been taken to adopt a language
policy”
The measures already adopted or proposed, as described in preceding relevant paragraphs,
constitute part of the broader comprehensive policy in this matter.
3.2. Findings of the Committee of Experts on the basis of the results of the second
monitoring round
C. The Committee of Experts finds that in order to guarantee a long-term success and
sustainability of the team of experts and effective implementation of its work it is vital that
sufficient financial resources are allocated to the work of the team and the activities and
measures they plan to carry out.
See comments in relation to paragraphs 13, 43 CMA (comment in the box) and 77 above.
F. Teacher training in Armenian is still not available in Cyprus. The future establishment
of Armenian studies at the University of Cyprus could remedy this shortcoming.
See comments in relation to paragraphs 64, 67 and 71 above.
Office of the Law Commissioner

Nicosia, 18 January 2011

18

