Strasbourg, 11 March 2014

MIN-LANG (2014) PR 4

EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES

Fourth periodical report
presented to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe
in accordance with Article 15 of the Charter

DENMARK

Sagsnr.: 053.89K.391

Denmark’s fourth report
under the Council of
Europe’s Charter for
Regional or Minority Languages

March 2014

2

Sagsnr.: 053.89K.391

Introduction
On 8 September 2000, Denmark ratified the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
of 5 November 1992 (the Language Charter), which subsequently entered into force for Denmark
on 1 January 2001. In connection with its ratification, Denmark identified German as a minority
language in the sense of the Language Charter and declared that the Language Charter should apply
to German with respect to the German minority in South Jutland.
As part of the monitoring mechanisms of the Language Charter, Denmark hereby submits its fourth
state report. In Denmark’s view, the monitoring process of the Language Charter is a significant
tool in a continuous dialogue with the Council of Europe, and the Danish government welcomes
this opportunity to continue the constructive cooperation.
The report has been prepared on the basis of contributions received from a number of ministries and
other autorities comprised by the provisions of the Framework Convention. The ministries and authorities include Statistics Denmark, The Ministry of Business and Growth Denmark, The Ministry
of Justice, The Ministry of Culture Denmark, The Ministry of Children, Gender Equality, Integration and Social Affairs, The Ministry of Health, The Ministry of Economic Affairs and the Interior,
The Ministry of Education, Ministry of Transport, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark as well
as the municipalities of Tønder, Haderslev, Aabenraa and Sønderborg.
The German minority has had an opportunity to review the report and has assisted in providing
factual information.
To the extent possible, the report has been prepared in accordance with the outline for state report
adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 6 May 2009 and the questions of the Committee of Experts for Denmark, in connection with the preparation of the report. Thus, the individuel provisions
of the Language Charter are not commented on to the extent the Committee of Experts indicates
that Denmark complies with the provisions, unless new developments have been seen in the area.
Part 1
Please provide updated information, if any new data exists, about the number and geographic distribution of speakers of regional or minority languages, and the general demographic situation.
The latest population figures for Denmark (1.10.2013) is 5.62 million and of these 93 per cent are
Danish nationals.
It has not been possible for Statistics Denmark to provide new statistical data on National Minorities. The source of Statistics Denmark’s demographic information is the Central Population Register
which includes information on the persons place of birth and citizenship, while information on
ethnicity, race or religion, in appliance to Act on Processing of Personal Data, can not be registered.
None of the existing data can be used for identifying National Minorities. Language information is
not included in any of the sources from Statistics Denmark. According to the minority itself, the
figure is about 12.000-15.000.
Please provide information about any changes in the general policies, legislation or practice of
your state in respect of regional or minority languages. Please also indicate any developments

3

Sagsnr.: 053.89K.391

which are expected to occur during the next monitoring cycle, such as envisaged political or budgetary changes, policy plans or any other elements that may have a direct or indirect effect on the
situation of the regional or minority languages in your State.
Since the last report, there has been a restructuring of the state administration, see act no 647 of
12.06.2013 on change in regional state administration as well as law on childrens’s provision, law
on the formation and dissolution of marriage and other laws influenced by the administratonal
change.
1 July 2013 the five regional state administrations have been merged into a single entity called
’State Administration’ (Statsforvaltningen) with a total of nine local branches around the country.
State Administration must resolve many of the same tasks formerly solved by the five regional state
administrations. However, some tasks will be carried out by other authorities in the future.
Due to the restruction, State Administration has been headquartered in Aabenraa. In addition there
are local offices in Aarhus, Ringkøbing, Aalborg, Odense, Nykoebing, Ringsted, Copenhagen and
Ronne, and a new infocenter has also been placed in the latter.
So far citizens have generally been refered to the state administration in their own region, when
meetings were held. With the establishment of a single State Administration, citizens now have the
opportunity to avail of a department of their choice with respect to the matters undertaken locally.
Thereby the State Administration has become more accessible to a number of citizens, by making
possible the use of a department near their work instead of a department near their residence.
All citizens will - unless they signify the wish for another - generally have their case and be invited
to meetings in the department closest to their residence.
A central unit for booking meetings and family law triage unit for all written family matters has
been established. The unit is placed in the State Administration in Aabenraa.
The State Administration is in its recruitment of employees in the local branch in Aabenraa aware
of whether they speak German. There is also always a German-speaking employee, who can attend
to personal inquiries. All meetings can be conducted in German by German-speaking staff – that is
without an interpreter.
The infocenter on the island of Bornholm has in its handbook included a section on the servicing of
the German minority, which ensures that you can get in touch with a German-speaking employee.
In relation to the German minority the State Administration offers translation of correspondence.
The State Administration has also stated that the relevant section of its website will be updated as
soon as possible and the possibilities for translation of the website into German will be identified as
soon as possible.
There are no statistics on the number of inquiries to the State Administration, derived from the
German minority. However, it is not a question of daily inquiries.

4

Sagsnr.: 053.89K.391

Please give a detailed account of the legal and/or practical measures that your State has taken
to implement each one of the recommendations of the Committee of Ministers, jf. ECRML
(2011)1.
- increase the level of radio broadcasting in German and provide TV broadcasts in German in
South Jutland, in close cooperation with the German-speakers;
The Radio and Television Broadcasting Act do not contain any rules that prevent minority groups
from broadcastning radio and television programs, and the licence and support systems are based on
objective, transparent and non-discriminatory criteria. Furthermore the versatility must be facilitated
by the issuance of licenses and support to local radio and –television providing a diversity of groups
an opportunity to get licenses, including the national minorities.
There has in 2013 and 2014 been established a pool for education of 2 million DKK (about 265.000
euros) for local radio and -television. One purpose of the pool is to meet minority groups’ need for
access to local radio and -television by facilitating this access.
In addition the Danish nationwide public service providers, DR and TV 2/DANMARK A / S, and
the eight regional TV 2 enterprises, including TV SYD, all have public service obligations concerning coverage of societal issues in Denmark and have a duty to ensure a wide range of programs
and services to the entire population through television, radio, internet and other relevant platforms.
DR and the eight regional TV 2 companies’ public service obligations, including TV SYD’s, are
proclaimed in the Public Service contracts entered with the Minister of Culture, while TV2 DANMARK A / S's public service obligations are proclaimed in their authorization to provide public
service broadcasting.

- ensure that the reduction of subsidies for private schools and cuts of the transport allowances will
not jeopardize the continued functioning of the German-language schools at the current level;
A joint study undertaken by the Danish and the Schleswig Holstein government in 2010 showed
that the pupils in the German minority schools received funding corresponding to 98 pct. of the
average cost per pupil in the Danish public schools. Acknowleding that the minority schools perform the same role for members of the German minority as the public schools for the majority, the
Danish government tooks steps to ensure that the funding per pupil was raised, so that it now corresponds to 100 pct. of the average cost per pupil in the public schools.
From 2011, the annual appropriation for transportation allowance for students in independent
schools has been reduced. The appropriation for transportation allowance for students in the German minority schools was maintained unchanged. The aim was to maintain the mobility for these
students.
Reference is made to article 8.

- clarify the issue of the traditional presence of the Romani language spoken by Sinti and possibly
other indigenous groups in Denmark.

5

Sagsnr.: 053.89K.391

In Denmark, the Roma do not have status of a national minority. The main reason is the lack of continous historical presence of persons with a Roma background in Denmark. Only temporary habitations can be evidenced in the historical records.
Reference is made to part I below.

The Committee of Experts requests for additional information regarding:
The Committee of Experts encourages the Danish authorities to take a more proactive and structured approach in applying Denmark’s undertakings ensuring from the Charter.
In connection with the ratification, Denmark identified German as a minority language in the sense
of the Language Charter and declared that the Language Charter should apply to German with respect to the German Minority in South Jylland.
German is spoken by approx 12.000-15.000 persons who are members of the German minority in
South Jutland.
As mentioned in Denmark’s previous reports, solutions for the German language has been found
long before Denmark’s ratification of the Language Charter, which complied with its principles of
protection of regional or minority languages. Current Danish legislation and administrative practice
were and are thus in keeping with the principles of the Language Charter so Denmark has not
amended legislation or taken special measures to implement these principles.
The Danish Government finds that knowledge of the German minority in Denmark and German as
a minority language is generally sound, one reason being the historic context, described in previous
reports, of which the minority forms part and which still occupies much of the Danish population.
In connection with the transfer of responsibility for Minorities from the Ministry of Economic Affairs and the Interior to the Ministry of Education in 2011, a separate page with information on the
Framework Convention and the monitoring periods was set up on the ministry’s website. Denmark's
state reports, the Advisory Committee's reports and the Committee of Ministers’ resolutions for all
periods are posted on the website www.uvm.dk.
The documents on the website are available in Danish and English. The Danish language is spoken
and understood by the vast majority of the members of the German minority. On request, the Ministry of Education sends copies of the Danish State Reports, the Advisory Committee's reports and
the Committee of Ministers’ resolutions.
The website of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Education contains basic information about the Council of Europe Framework Convention and the Language Charter.
The Danish Contact Committee for the German minority, which consists of members from each of
the political parties that are represented in the Danish parliament and members of the German minority, has issues regarding the Language Charter on the agenda at a regular basis.

6

Sagsnr.: 053.89K.391

Thus, at its meeting on 29 April 2011 the Contact Committee had a discussion concerning the results of the 3rd monitoring cycle including the recommendations of the Committee of Ministers after
these were made public. The issue of Denmark’s compliance with the recommendations regarding
the use of media received specific attention.
Furthermore, the issue has been addressed in the special working group that has been established in
accordance with the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. The working group is
an informal forum with participants from a range of ministries and from the German minority. The
working group has been established to facilitate regular discussion and evaluation of the precautions
that are mentioned in chapter III of the charter, particularly in regard to education. The working
group can also take on other issues, for instance matters concerning the Framework Convention.
Thus, this is a forum which can take on a broad range of issues, and it is entitled to discuss practically all matters concerning the German minority. The latest meeting of the working group was held
in December 2011.
Besides the meetings in the above mentioned fora, the Ministry of Education in its capacity as secretariatet for the Contact Committee is in a continuous dialogue with the German minority’s secretariat in Copenhagen, and regular meetings are held with representatives of the German minority.
This ensures a continuous discussion of matters that the German minority deem important,
including issues concerning the Framework convention and the Language Charter.
During a special joint session between the Danish Contact Committee for the German minority and
the Schleswig Holstein Committee for the German minority in North Schleswig, where the president of the Schleswig Holsten Landtag and the Danish Minister of Education both participated, a
host of issues concerning the German minority were discussed. Amongst these were the two nations’ views on Danish-German cooperation regarding national minorities.
It is also worth mentioning that in August 2013 the Danish Contact Committee for the German minority held its 50th session. This was celebrated with an event held at Christiansborg where the
chairman of the Danish Parliament and members of the German minority were among the guests.
In general the relationship between the Danish authorities and the German minority is informal and
based on mutual trust.
With regard to the efforts of the four municipalities in South Jutland reference is made to the review
of the articles below.

The Danish authorities may wish to investigate, in close colsultation with the German-speakers,
whether additional obligations under the Charter could be accepted in the aforementioned fields
[art. 10, 2, art. 11, 1 a, art, 11, 1 b. i and c.i].
The Danish government has taken the comments of the Committee of Experts into account. Reference is made to the comments above and to the arcticles below.

7

Sagsnr.: 053.89K.391

The Committee of Experts encourages the Danish authorities to extend reseach on this matter [Romani language], through a scientific study to clarify the issue
In connection with its ratification, Denmark identified German as a minority language in the sense
of the Language Charter and declared that the Language Charter should apply to German with respect to the German minority in South Jutland.
In Denmark, the Roma do not have status of a national minority. The main reason is the lack of continuous historical presence in Denmark of persons with a Roma background. Only temporary habitation can be evidenced in the historical records.
There is no indication that a further scientific work of the Roma language will disclose new facts of
relevance.

Part II
Please indicate what measures your State has taken to apply Article 7 of the Charter to the regional
or minority languages as defined in paragraph a of Article 1 of the Charter, focusing in particular
on the following aspects:
- Please provide information, for each regional or minority language, on new developements that
have occured since the last monitoring round concerning the provisions of Article 7;
- Please give a detailed account of the legal and/or practical measures that your State has taken to
implement the encouragement and box recommendations of the Committee of Experts given in the
previous evalutation reports.

The Committee of Experts encourages the Danish authorities to pursue the dialogue with the representatives of the German-speakers with a view to further improving the presence of the German
language in public life.
At their meetings the Danish Contact Committee for the German minority discuss issues with a
view to promoting minority matters, including the use of the German language in the public sphere.
Concering the use of the German language in the State Administration it should be noted, that the
cooperation and communication between the State Administration and the German minority is based on custom, but also on an understanding of the minority's interest in preserving their native
language, German. The intentions and purpose of The Language Charter and Charter for Regional
or Minority Language are seen as an integrated part of the State Administration’s work.
The State Administration believes that there is good contact and good cooperation between the
German minority and the State Administration in solving the tasks of the State Administration. The
State Administration has also stated that the branch office in Aabenraa has signs in German.
Concerning toprographical indications and other bilingual signs it should be noted that since the last
public consultation the Danish Road Directorate has not been informed about any other requests
regarding bilingual sign boards besides by Knivsberg, which is why the Danish Road Directorate
has not yet made decisions regarding such requests.

8

Sagsnr.: 053.89K.391

Concerning the application regarding Knivsbjerg it should be noted that the application was rejected
due to failure to meet the application requirements. An attraction can not by itself apply for a tourist
information sign. The attractions shown on the signs are based on recommendations by the Danish
Nature Agency, the Danish Agency for Culture and VisitDenmark. The selections from these agencies are based on an overall assessment analyzing the significance of the attractions for Danish people in general and for foreign tourists.
The basis for the selection of the attractions is as follows:
The attraction must either be a World Heritage Monument, a national park or an attraction with national interest. Knivsbjerg is not included in any of the three above mentioned categories.
It may be mentioned that in the context of the public school reform it has been decided to bring
forward the start of the German classes from 7 to 5 grade, which is expected to lead to the strengthening of students’ mastery of German language and knowledge of German culture, including
German as a minority language.
Furthermore, Denmark has funded a project initiated jointly by the German minority in Denmark
and the Danish minority in Germany which amongst other things aims to widen our understanding
of the pedagogy used in the minority schools. A P.hd scholarship has been set up at the University
of Southern Denmark and runs until 2014.
The municipalities in South Jutland
The municipality of Tønder is situated in the border region, thus Tønder Municipality has special
obligations towards the German minority. For the municipality in Tønder it is natural and common
for the staff to use German in communicating with German speaking parties. The German language
is thus promoted not only as a minority language, but as a language of communication in a more
general way. In the Citizen Service Center the staff understands and speaks German. This is also the
case for most part of the administrative staff.
A central aspect of the strategic master plan for the development of Tønder Municipality is the
vicinity to Germany which implicates cross-border cooperation. In 2011 two associations were
established with the purpose of promoting cross-border cooperation, one of them with political representation – among others by the mayor of Tønder Municipality. The other forum is administrative. The Kommunaldirektør (town clerk) is a member of both. In both associations the language of
oral and written communication is German.
These associations have been the cornerstones of the conference Vestdialog where politicians and
business men from both sides of the border meet to discuss common challenges and prospects. On
this occasion simultaneous translation in both German and Danish was offered. The conference was
held in 2012 for the first time, and will be repeated in 2014.
Another strategic choice is the employment of a business adviser who connects businesses from
both sides of the border. The mother tongue of the adviser is German and, in addition, she speaks
Danish fluently. She is an example of an employee who, being bilingual and bicultural, makes a
most valuable contribution to the strengthening of Danish-German cooperation and, thus, the German language in Denmark.

9

Sagsnr.: 053.89K.391

In 2012 Tønder Municipality launched a new home page. It was a clear strategy that specific parts
of the new home page would be in the German language out of consideration for the German minority. Today, almost all information on the home page, not only specific parts of it, is found in Danish as well as in German. Quote from the strategy paper:
Tønder Municipality is situated in the border region, thus Tønder Municipality has special
obligations towards the German minority. Specific parts of the home page, therefore, will be
in German. Furthermore, relevant pages will be in English out of consideration for foreign
visitors who look for information about Tønder Municipality and this part of Denmark.
At the same time, an electronic information board which offers information in German was placed
in the entrance to the town hall. Likewise, there are signboards in German in the Citizen Service
Center.
Tønder municipality has initiated and planned many activities in schools and day care centers to
promote the German language, for example during joint activities between children / students, institutions and schools on each side of the border. In addition, several schools have chosen to teach
German before 5 grade and to offer German courses at extra high level both in primary and secondary school.
The municipality of Haderslev has a good and strong relationship with the German-speaking part of
the population residing in the municipality, including cooperation with the German school, German
kindergarten and the German library, the German rowing club, etc. The municipality has also stated
that there is quite a bit of German students at UC Syddanmark, many of which are enrolled at the
teacher education, and that the students receive Danish language courses at the Language Centre in
Haderslev.
In cooperation with the German minority the Haderslev Municipality has prepared a German language version of Haderslev website. The German section of the website is constantly expanding in
accordance with the development of the existing Danish website and on a par with the English section of the website.
Signposts offering directions to the German institutions (library, schools, kindergartens and clubs)
are written in the German language. There are a few other information signs in the municipality in
German.
The public servants of Haderslev Kommune can provide services in the German language. Haderslev Kommune has focus on the ability to speak German as a part of the service towards the public.
Haderslev Kommune provides German education for employees on a regular basis.
Within the framework of the German-Danish cooperation in Region South Jutland Schleswig’ a
collaboration on administrative matters, such as transportation, commuting issues and a strong and
very present cooperation on cultural cooperation across the border (the Cultural Region), has been
established.
Sønderborg Municipality considers it a natural service that citizens who present themselves in German are also served in German, both in written and in spoken settings. Within the municipality's
Citizen Service, the personnel speak both languages; and if the person dealing with the referral in an
additional department is not bilingual, bilingual personnel will be brought in. Generally speaking,

10

Sagsnr.: 053.89K.391

there are many bilingual workers, of which a growing proportion are German - either Germans who
have immigrated to Denmark, or from the German minority.
The municipality have translated certain relevant bits of information into German. For example,
information about elections, marriage, options for moving, as well as sections of the municipality's
website, are translated into German. The municipality has just launched a new website, however, in
which the German sections are still under development. These German sections are expected to be
live at the beginning of December 2013. The Citizen Service updates the German information on an
ongoing basis, according to demand. As the municipality, in addition to its German minority, also
has many visiting German students at the town's university, and would like to provide them with a
good experience in Sønderborg, a considerable focus has been put on updating information.
The municipality of Aabenraa considers it obvious that citizens inquiring in German are serviced in
German. This counts for verbal as well as written inquiries. The staff at the municipality’s citizen
service is biliqual. Bilinqual staff is called upon when needed in other parts of the administration. In
general, there are a vast amount of bilinqual employees and it is further worth mentioning that the
municipality organize internal courses in the German language in order to enhance the language
skills among employees.
The municipality translates relevant written information as well as some parts of the website into
German. The municipality launches a new website within the next half year and the German part of
the website will be updated as part of this. Moreover, the website of Frøslevlejren has been fully
translated into German. Finally, the flyers ”Åbent atelier” (”Open studio”) has been translated into
German.
The municipality of Aabenraa will, in collaboration with the three other municipalities in the region
of South Jutland, look in to the possibilities for supporting a project from Bund Deutscher
Nordschleswiger on enhancing the German language. The project will be directed at Danish kindergartens and public schools.
Additionally, it should be mentioned that the German school museum has received operating subsidies from Aabenraa Municipality (DKK 20.000) and that the German minority library and Danish
majority libraries have been working together on a literature festival.
Moreover the municipality has conducted a pilot project on the teaching of German from 5 grade in
one of the municipality’s public schools. The project has produced positive results, but is currently
not continued due to school unifications.
The region of South Jutland-Schleswig has of March 2013 conducted a survey of the teaching of
German in the public schools in the four municipalities in the southern region of Jutland. The survey was conducted among 20 school leaders and 43 teachers of German language. The results showed that 90 per cent of the students choose German as second foreign language. The number of
schools that offer early German teaching has been reduced. According to the schools this is a result
of the unification of schools as well as lack of financing for additional lessons. In addition to this, it
is worth mentioning that some schools offer optional early teaching in German or lessons in school
clubs. Finally, it should be mentioned that teachers see the student’s academic standards as having
decreased within the last 15 years. The reason for this is, amongst others, that English is the dominating language in tv, internet and other media.

11

Sagsnr.: 053.89K.391

In the region of South Jutland-Schleswig, the Region Office has conducted language activities in
collaboration with schools and kindergartens in South Jutland as well as with the German minority,
the high school Østersøen, CUV (Center for Adult Education), CFU (Center for Teaching Material)
and the teacher education programme in Haderslev. Furthermore, The Region Office conducts an
annual German-Danish teacher conference in collaboration with CFU and IQSH (Institute for
School Quality in Schleswig-Holstein). The purpose of the conference is to exchange teaching experience and form projects across the Danish-German border.
Moreover the Region Office has functioned as secretary for three Interreg projects. The purpose is
to support language- and culture projects in the region. The current Interreg project ”Cultural Dialoque” receives part of its funding from the school sector. Thus the school administration of Aabenraa has given 10.000 DKK each year from 2011 to 2013. The 30.000 DKK that Aabenraa Municipality paid has been multiplied through the interG project. From mid-2011 until autumn 2013, was
paid 228.089 DKK was paid to Danish-German school projects in Aabenraa municipality. Examples of school projects is Danish / German poetry slam and 'run, solve and learn', where school
groups across borders solve puzzles on Denmark and Germany through geocaching.
In 2009 the 'Professor dr. ABC ' won the European Language price for the promotion of neighboring language learning. In the fall of 2011 the Region Office organized a ‘Prof. dr. ABC competition’. Eight kindergartens won the competition and were visited by Prof. dr. ABC in the first half of
2012. Close links between some of the kindergartens have been created and they continue to visit
each other.
Finally it is worth mentioning that the Region Office has produced dictionaries for children and
adults as well as a song book for children, containing both Danish and German songs.
A number of changes has been made in relation to cross border cooperation. The municipality cooperates with the region of Southern Jutland-Schlswig. The collaboration is between four municipalities of the Southern Region of Jutland, the local authorities of Schleswig-Flensburg and Nord Friesland, Stadt Flensburg as well as the German minority and Danish minority. In 2011 the cooperation between the two minorities were enhanced as the minorities in the new collaborative agreement
was assigned a seat in the board and in underlying commities. This gave them a right to vote on
equal terms with the official parts of the board with the exception of the adoption of the annual
budget. The budget is adopted by the municipalities and the local authorities of SchleswigFlensburg and Nord Friesland as they are sole funders of the collaboration. Formerly, the minorities
were only assigned status as an observer and did not have a right to vote.
Furthermore a German/Danish cultural agreement, with the German minority in the steering commitee, has been made. The agreement has cross border projects as it’s focal point. The projects
include intercultural competences, strengthens the Danish-German culture space in Southern Jutland-Schleswig and enhance the promotion of talent amongst children and young people in the region. Language is not a goal in itself but the two languages are involved in some way in all projects
and is thus expected to provide positive side effects. The cultural agreement was ratified on 10 april
2013
All projects contribute to enhancing the understanding of the German language amongst the people
of Southern Jutland.

12

Sagsnr.: 053.89K.391

The Committee of Experts requests the Danish authorities to provide, in the next periodical report,
specific information on these aspects and other measures to promote awareness of and understanding for German as a minority language ind Denmark.
See above concerning the public school reform. Reference is made to third State report page 14-15
and 28-29 and below under article 8.
The Committee of Experts .. encourages the Danish authorities to consider the possibility of
including a provision concerning the proportional and balanced reporting about the German minority in the new public service contracts between the Danish state and public broadcasters.
The Danish national public service providers, DR and TV 2/DANMARK A / S, and the eight regional TV 2 stations, including TV SYD, already have public service obligations relating to coverage
of societal issues in Denmark.
DR is according to the public service remit, and TV 2 due to the their licence to engage in public
service programming, committed to offering a broad coverage of societal issues in Denmark and
reflect the diversity of culture, philosophy of life and living conditions in different parts of the
country and ensure a broad spectrum of programs and services to the entire population via television, radio, internet and other relevant platforms.
In addition the regional TV 2 enterprises, including TV SYD, are according to the public service
remits committed to in their scheduling to emphasize the regional affiliation. Thus the scheduling
must reflect the diversity of culture, philosophy of life and living conditions in the region. Additionally TV SYD should pay attention to the conditions of the German / Danish border area, including
the Danish minority and their conditions.

The Committee of Experts encourages the Danish authorities to convene regular meetings of the
working group [on the Charter and Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities]
The latest meeting of the special working group was held in december 2011. Denmark will ensure
that a meeting is convened within the next monitoring cycle.

Part III
For each regional or minority language chosen at the moment of ratification, as follows from paragraph 2 of Article 2 of the Charter, please indicate how the undertakings have been implemented
With at view to facilitating the reading of the report, separate questions of the Committee of Experts
about Denmark’s use of Articles 8 – 14 of the Language Charter have been reproduced where such
questions appear from the report of the Committee of Experts.

13

Sagsnr.: 053.89K.391

In accordance with Article 3 (1) of the Language Charter, Denmark has identified German as a minority language to which the provisions identified in Article 2(2) of the Language Charter apply
following the entry into force of the Language Charter in Denmark.
Article 8 – Education
The Committee of Experts encourages the Danish authorities to ensure that the reduciton of subsidies for pirvat schools and cuts of the transport allowances will not jeopardize the continued funtioning of the German-language schools at the current level.
Denmark has taken measures to ensure that the German minority and it’s schools will not be adversely affected by budgetary measures elsewhere in the private school system. For this reason there
has been a separate budget line in the yearly budgets since 2009. Reference is made to section I.
In November 2013 the Danish government has decided to grant an extraordinary grant of DKK 3
million in 2014, which should contribute to the improvement of building standards among the German minority schools.
In 2014 the government will initiate an anlysis with recommendations on how the German minority
can ensure timely education institutions for the children. This will also help to increase the visibility
of minorities in the local area.
From 2011, the annual appropriation for transportation allowance for students in independent
schools has been reduced. The appropriation for transportation allowance for students in the German minority schools was maintained unchanged. The aim was to maintain the mobility for these
students.
30 May 2012 Aabenraa municipality signed an agreement on municipal subsidies to the German
school clubs under Deutscher Schul-und Sprachverein für Nordschleswig (DSSV). The agreement
equates the German school clubs with the Danish school clubs.
Sønderborg municipality supports the German pre-school programs and school clubs with municipality financial support, so that parents’ fee for children in these programs and clubs is the same as
the parents’ fee in arrangements for the majority population.

The Committee of Experts requests the Danish authorities to provide spe cific information on the
teaching of German within technical and vocational education in the next periodical report.
The Ministry of Education is not informed by the German Minority that the level of teaching of the
German language is considered unsatisfactory.
According to “Grænseforeningen” (The Border Association) The German Minority perceive themselves as German from North Schleswig, i.e. as Danish citizens with German identity and strong
roots in the South Jutland region. This is parallel to the Danish Minority in South Schleswig, which
see themselves as German citizens with Danish sentiment. The German Minority does not only
speak German, but also to a great extent the dialect of South Jutland (Danish).

14

Sagsnr.: 053.89K.391

The minorities at both sides of the border have several kindergarten and primary schools and also
colleges in their own languages.
The technical and vocational education in Denmark (VET) is based upon a dual system changing
between theory (school education) and practice in enterprise. The dual training principle ensures
that the trainees acquire theoretical, practical, general and personal skills which are in demand on
the labour market. The VET-schools are under the obligation to ensure that the teachers in the
school have the necessary qualifications and the pupils are given lessons according to his or her
needs. However, during the enterprise periods the pupil has to speak and understand Danish because
the VET-education is targeted at the labour market in Denmark.
On request to the Department of Border Region Studies the Ministry of Education has received informations about the level of teaching of the German language in the region of South Jutland.
It follows from these informations that the amount of pupils belonging to the German Minority who
choose the German language in college, has dropped 31 per cent during the last 10 years. It is important to note that it is the students’ right to decide individually in which languages, they want to
be educated.
The consequence is a general decline in the use of German in the education system, including the
VET-schools. This is, however, not the same as saying that the German language is not respected as
an official minority language.
The Ministry is not aware of any problems related to this development in choice of language.
In 2013 the German Minister of Education and Research Minister and the Danish Minister of Education signed a joint declaration to facilitate the comparison of qualifications between Germany and
Denmark, to increase mobility between countries and to prevent youth unemployment (see
http://uvm.dk/~/UVMDK/Content/News/Int/2013/Nov/~/media/UVM/Filer/Aktuelt/PDF13/131120%20Joint%20Declarat
ion%20about%20general%20comparability%20of%20VET.ashx).

In practice, the mobility between the Danish and German border is working well, although the vocational and training educations systems are not completely identical. But a mental and linguistic
barrier may occur. The area around the border includes, on the German side, residents of SchleswigHolstein, and, on the Danish side, residents of Jutland and Lolland- Falster.
Therefore, it is important to support mobility. The Joint Declaration is the result of the "Final Report" of February 2006 with the subtitle "The Danish-German working group to improve the crossborder mobility ", which was presented to the Danish and the German governments. The report listed six issues that border commuters between Denmark and Germany face, including the need for
mutual recognition of diplomas, certificates, etc. In November 2010, the issue was discussed at the
regular meeting of Labour Forum between South Region and Schleswig-Holstein.
It is expected that the declaration will further support efforts to improve the crossborder mobility

15

Sagsnr.: 053.89K.391
The Committee of Experts … requests the Danish Authorities to provide more specific information
in the next periodical report on the extent to which the teaching of the history and the culture which
is reflected by the German language in Denmark is ensured in practice.
The Danish primary school has broad goals for what students should learn by teaching, and thus not
exhaustive descriptions of the topics to be discussed in class. The current curriculum does not describe any specific topics for the teaching of the history and culture which is reflected in the German language. There is, however, set binding targets for pupils' awareness of culture and stereotypes of various cultural groups, and to participate in a democratic debate on social and cultural problem positions and suggest courses of action in relation to this. In the work with these objectives it
is the individual school and teacher who chooses which cultural groups to involve in the teaching,
including Roma history and culture prevailing conditions.
Furthermore, the current curriculum also contains a number of targets for students to learn how to
relate to culture and cultural meetings and other aspects of intercultural competence. This applies,
for example, in language subjects, social studies and Christian studies.
In the context of the public school reform, a new national knowledge center for historical or cultural
dissemination will be established to develop and provide an overview of dissemination of history in
Denmark. The aim is to give children, young people and teachers a common platform to enhance
the professional quality of the dissemination of the history and cultural heritage. 40.000.000 DKK
has been allocated to the center in the years 2014-17 as part of the school reform. The center is also
expected to receive voluntary contribution from relevant partners. After 2017 the center is expected
to be self-financing.
It may be mentioned that in the context of the public school reform it has been decided to bring
forward the start of the German classes from 7 to 5 grade, which is expected to lead to the strengthening of students’ mastery of German and knowledge of German culture.
The Danish upper secondary education must have an educational perspective with an emphasis on
development of the students’ personal authority. Students should therefore learn to relate with reflection and responsibility for their environment. The aim is that the teaching and daily life must be
based on intellectual freedom, equality and democracy.
It is stated in the curriculum for the subject social studies at A-and B-level that the core substance of
the topic "Sociology" includes "cultural patterns". The Ministry's guidance for teachers states:
"The cultural patterns describe values, norms and symbols in different groupings. Concepts such as
subculture, ethnicity/nationality and mono-/multicultural community are relevant, and culture and
integration (pluralistic integration, assimilation and segregation) should also be included. It may
also be appropriate to aggregate different cultures (cultural meeting and cultural conflict). The teaching of social differentiation and cultural patterns should be empirically based. It can be in the
form of actual field studies or by the use of surveys".
Normally major ethnic (or national) minorities are included.
The Danish government can inform that the recently implemented reform of the teacher education
states that the object of education is inter alia to enable students through training to acquire the
knowledge and skills needed to be able to act as a professional educational and instructional compe-

16

Sagsnr.: 053.89K.391

tent teacher in Danish schools under the public school purposes.
The fields of competence of teachers due professionalism include the following:
Pedagogy and teacher professionalism, including Student Learning and Development, Teaching
Knowledge, Pedagogy and Education of bilingual students.
Article 9 – Juridical authorities
The Committee of Experts encourages the Danish authorities to clarify these issues. The Committee
of Experts also encourages the Danish authorities to report in the next periodical report about the
practical or organisational measures taken to improve the implementation of the undertakings chosen in practice.
Documents and briefs that are submitted during litigation in the Court of Sønderborg are translated
without cost for parties belonging to the German minority in Denmark.
With regard to the centralization of the land registration system it can be stated that the Land Registration Court which is in charge of registration for the whole country, has introduced a procedure
whereby documents in German, submitted by members of the German minority, as appropriate, will
be translated into Danish of the Land Registration Court without the costs for the person who has
filed a document for registration.
Article 11 – Media
The Committee of Experts urges the Danish authorities to take measures in order to ensure that the
level of radio broadcasting in German is substantially increased.
The Committee of Experts urges the Danish authorities to take measures, in close co-operation with
the speakers, to increase the level of radio broadcasting in German
The Committee of Experts .. encourages the Danish authorities to continue the support of this project[the cross-border television project involving AAbenraa Lokal TV]and to support also other
activities aimed at broadcasting TV programmes in German in South Jutland.
The Committee of Experts urges the Danish authorities to find ways to provide TV broadcasts in
German in South Jutland, in close co-operation with the German-speakers.
The Committee of Experts … encourages the Danish authorities to take measures to encourage
and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual works in German.
The Committee of Experts .. encourages the Danish authorities to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions in German
The Committee of Experts requests the Danish authorities to inform about [the application of this
provision to media staff other than journalists] in the next periodical report.

17

Sagsnr.: 053.89K.391

The Committee of Experts encourages the Danish authorities to provide information on the extent
to which the reception of radio and TV broadcasting from German is possible in South Jytland and
on the potential costs for the listeners and viewers.
There has in 2013 and 2014 been established a pool for education of 2 million DKK (about 265.000
euros) for local radio and -television. One purpose of the pool is to meet minority groups’ need for
access to local radio and -television by facilitating this acces.
The Radio and Television Broadcasting Act do not contain any rules that prevent minority groups
from broadcastning radio and television programs, and authorization and support systems are based
on objective, transparent and non-discriminatory criteria. Furthermore the versatility must be facilitated by the issuance of licenses to lokal radio and –television providing a diversity of groups an
opportunity to get licenses and support, including the national minorities.
In addition the so-called overspill gives the citizen of southern Jutland an opportunity, at no cost, to
receive German channels with ordinary antenna devices. Furthermore the Danish national public
service providers, DR and TV 2/DANMARK A / S, and the eight regional TV 2 enterprises,
including TV SYD, have a duty to ensure a wide range of programs and services to the entire population through television, radio, internet and other relevant platforms.
For further details please look at the comments under titles 1 and 2.

Article 12 Cultural activities and facilities
The Committee of Experts … encourages the Danish authorities to facilitate the running of this museum [the German museum in Sønderborg]at a professional level.
Government support for independent museums in Denmark is granted under the Museum Act in the
form of so-called state recognition. The rules for state recognition means that museums must meet a
number of requirements, including a level of non-government operating grants and research level
expertise in their field. The Danish Museum Act is geared to state-subsidized museums that have a
certain size (the minimum requirement is an overall annual operating base of 3 million. Dkr.; 2
million Dkr. from non-governmental contributors, typically municipalities, the State then as the
minimum grants a subsidy of 1 million dkr.). It would not be workable if these grants principles
were waived in individual cases. Smaller museums that want to consolidate and professionalize
their operations are referred to seek to become part of existing state-recognized museums, which
frequently have multiple small museums operating in one organizational setting.
The Committee of Experts … encourages the Danish authorities to make appropriate provision for
the language and culture of the German-speakers in South Jytland in pursuing their cultural policy
abroad and inform the Committee of Experts in the next periodical report about the measures taken.
It is a hallmark of the Danish cultural cooperation with foreign countries that the majority of the
Danish resources and competencies are placed in decentralized arts-funding agencies, who operate
by the arm's-length principle, and in cultural institutions with their own local contacts - and not in a

18

Sagsnr.: 053.89K.391

central body, as it is the case in some other countries. This form of organization provides an opportunity to share knowledge and collaborate with a large international network.
In addition to this the International Culture Panel, which is an inter-ministerial cooperation between
the Ministry of Culture, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Business and Growth, seeks
to bring together a group of prominent Danish cultural institutions with international perspectives in
their work, so as to give a part of the cultural exchange with foreign countries a common focus. In
the International Culture Panel’s new strategic action plan for 2014-16, Coherence, Synergy and
Cooperation, the panel members have amongst other themes chosen to focus on the theme of dialogue, democracy and participation. In this particular area, Denmark has a distinct story to tell other
countries, for example in relation to the exemplary democratic clarification of the Danish/German
minority position. The Action Plan's focus on dialogue, democracy and participation is formulated
broadly, so that cultural exchange initiative executed under this theme, can address anyone of the
countless facets that lie therein. For example the relationship between majority and minority
including - but not limited to - the recognized minorities. In the new action plan the International
Culture Panel’s members have also chosen to place high quality as the guiding principle for any
cultural initiative or project.
A close cooperation between Danish institutions working with Denmark's international cultural exchange at home and abroad is a prerequisite for the success of individual projects and initiatives. In
addition, the Danish Representations abroad are central partners. The Danish Agency for Culture
co-ordinates the international cultural cooperation within the framework of the Ministry of Culture.
The international cultural exchange covers all of the arts, culture and the culture-conservation sector
and it is the artistic quality, originality and relevance that are the main criteria for all projects and
funding applications that Denmark choose to support, whether they are national or international
activities.
The opportunities to apply for funding are independent of the applicant’s ethnic, religious, linguistic
or other background.

Article 13 Economic and social life
The Committee of Experts asks the Danish authorities to provide information in the next periodical
report on how information concerning the possibility to use German in relations with the Germanspeakers was disseminated to the German-speaking [hospital]staff.
The Committee of Experts maintains.. that a more systematic human resources policy is needed on
the side of the authorities in order to ensure that the German-speaking staff are actually available
in social care facilities, including hospitals.
The Committe of Experts urges the Danish authorities to strengthen their efforts to ensure that
German can actually be used in social care facilities, in particular with regard to social care for
the elderly.

Concerning the municipalities in South Jutland reference is made to article 7.

19

Sagsnr.: 053.89K.391
Basically the description of the healthcare system’s offers to the German minority is the same as in
the third Danish report, see page 27 – 28, with a few minor initiatives.
The new initiatives are as follows:
In the somatic healthcare system there are new initiatives in relation to the reception on the on-call
GP’s telephone:
 When contacting the on-call GP’s telephone, the initial telephone reception is in Danish, English and German. It is indicated in this initial reception how to act. Besides this pamphlets in the
same languages are designed and distributed to camping areas, owners of holiday homes etc.
On the webpage of Hospital Soenderjylland additional information is available in German regarding:
 The Danish approval of the Framework Convention and the fact that patients belonging to the
German minority as far as possible will be accommodated if they wish to communicate in German
 Information and contact data regarding emergency care
 Information on patient’s rights
The cooperation and communication between the State Administration and the German minority is
based on custom, but also on an understanding of the minority's interest in preserving their native
language, German. The intentions and purpose of The Language Charter and Charter for Regional
or Minority Language are seen as an integrated part of the State Administration’s work.
Sønderborg municipality notes that the care centers and home care in the municipality have not encountered problems in relation to accommodate the German minority. It is still common among
employees in Sønderborg to speak and understand German. As citizens of the German minority
understand Danish, though they speak German. Additionally, there are some Germans who work in
Sønderborg, who also mastered both languages.
In view of the Expert Committee’s recommendation, The Ministry of Children, Gender Equality,
Integration and Social Affairs has raised the Committee’s concern in dialogue with KL (the Local
Government Association in Denmark). As a result KL has contacted the relevant municipalities. It
has also been agreed by the Ministry and KL, that the relevant municipalities will receive a letter
from the Ministry informing them about the Expert Committee's routine follow-up in 2011 and specifically the Committee’s recommendation about the need to raise awareness about the use of the
German language within the social sector, especially when it comes to care for the elderly.

20

