Strasbourg, 2 March 2011

ECRML (2011) 1

EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES

APPLICATION OF THE CHARTER IN DENMARK

3rd monitoring cycle

A.

Report of the Committee of Experts on the Charter

B.

Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers of the
Council of Europe on the application of the Charter by
Denmark

The European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages provides for a control
mechanism to evaluate how the Charter is applied in a State Party with a view to,
where necessary, making Recommendations for improvements in its legislation,
policy and practices. The central element of this procedure is the Committee of
Experts, established in accordance with Article 17 of the Charter. Its principal
purpose is to examine the real situation of the regional or minority languages in
the State, to report to the Committee of Ministers on its evaluation of compliance
by a Party with its undertakings, and, where appropriate, to encourage the Party
to gradually reach a higher level of commitment.
To facilitate this task, the Committee of Ministers has adopted, in accordance with
Article 15.1, an outline for the periodical reports that a Party is required to submit
to the Secretary General. The report shall be made public by the government
concerned. This outline requires the State to give an account of the concrete
application of the Charter, the general policy for the languages protected under its
Part II and in more precise terms all measures that have been taken in application
of the provisions chosen for each language protected under Part III of the Charter.
The Committee’s first task is therefore to examine the information contained in the
periodical report for all the relevant regional or minority languages on the territory
of the State concerned.
The Committee’s role is to evaluate the existing legal acts, regulations and real
practice applied in each State for its regional or minority languages. It has
established its working methods accordingly. The Committee gathers information
from the respective authorities and from independent sources within the State,
with a view to obtaining a just and fair overview of the real language situation.
After a preliminary examination of a periodical report, the Committee submits, if
necessary, a number of questions to the Party concerned on matters it considers
unclear or insufficiently developed in the report itself. This written procedure is
usually followed up by an “on-the-spot" visit of a delegation of the Committee to
the respective State. During this visit the delegation meets bodies and
associations whose work is closely related to the use of the relevant languages,
and consults the authorities on matters that have been brought to its attention.
Having concluded this process, the Committee of Experts adopts its own report.
This report is submitted to the Committee of Ministers, together with suggestions
for recommendations that the latter may decide to address to the State Party.

2

CONTENTS

A.

Report of the Committee of Experts on the application of the Charter in
Denmark .................................................................................................................4
Chapter 1

Background information ..........................................................................4

1.1.

The Charter’s ratification by Denmark........................................................4

1.2.

The work of the Committee of Experts.......................................................4

1.3.

Presentation of the regional or minority language situation in
Denmark: up-date.......................................................................................5

1.4.

General issues arising in the evaluation of the application of the
Charter in Denmark ....................................................................................5

Chapter 2

Conclusions of the Committee of Experts on how the Danish
authorities reacted to the recommendations of the Committee
of Ministers................................................................................................7

Chapter 3

The Committee of Experts' evaluation in respect of Part II and
Part III of the Charter ................................................................................8

3.1.

Evaluation in respect of Part II of the Charter ............................................8

3.2.

Evaluation in respect of Part III of the Charter .........................................12

Chapter 4

Findings of the Committee of Experts in the third monitoring
cycle .........................................................................................................20

Appendix I: Instrument of Ratification................................................................................22
Appendix II: Comments by the Danish authorities............................................................24

B.

Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of
Europe on the application of the Charter by Denmark......................................26

3

A.

Report of the Committee of Experts on the application of the Charter in
Denmark

adopted by the Committee of Experts on 28 September 2010
and presented to the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
in accordance with Article 16 of the Charter

Chapter 1

1.1.

Background information

The Charter’s ratification by Denmark

1.
Denmark signed the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages (hereafter referred
to as the Charter) on 5 November 1992. On 24 November 1999, the Danish Minister for Foreign
Affairs presented a proposal for a parliamentary resolution on Denmark’s ratification of the Charter
(motion for resolution No. B 50). On 29 May 2000, the Danish Parliament (the Folketing) gave its
approval for ratification. The instrument of ratification was deposited with the Council of Europe on 8
September 2000. The Charter entered into force in Denmark on 1 January 2001.
2.
The instrument of ratification specifies that the Charter will apply to German in respect of the
German minority in Southern Jutland (Sønderjylland). At the time of ratification, the Danish authorities
made a declaration concerning the Faeroese language and Greenlandic, stating that the Charter is not
applicable to these languages and the government does not intend to submit periodical reports as far
as they are concerned. The Committee of Experts interprets the declaration to cover these languages
in the Faeroe Islands and Greenland respectively .
3.
Article 15, paragraph 1 of the Charter requires States Parties to submit three-yearly reports in
a form prescribed by the Committee of Ministers. The Danish authorities presented their third
periodical report to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe on 14 April 2010.
4.
In its previous evaluation report on Denmark (ECRML (2007) 6), the Committee of Experts of
the Charter (hereinafter referred to as “the Committee of Experts”) outlined particular areas where the
legal framework, policy and practice could be improved. The Committee of Ministers took note of the
report presented by the Committee of Experts and adopted recommendations (RecChL (2007) 6),
which were addressed to the Danish authorities.
1.2.

The work of the Committee of Experts

5.
This third evaluation report is based on the information obtained by the Committee of Experts
from the third periodical report of Denmark and through interviews held with representatives of
speakers of German, Greenlandic, Faeroese and the Roma, as well as the Danish authorities during
the on-the-spot visit, which took place on 14-16 June 2010. The Committee of Experts received a
number of comments from bodies and associations legally established in Denmark, submitted
pursuant to Article 16 paragraph 2 of the Charter.
6.
The present report focuses on the provisions and issues which were singled out in the second
evaluation report as raising particular problems. It evaluates in particular how the Danish authorities
have reacted to the issues raised by the Committee of Experts and where relevant, to the
recommendations made by the Committee of Ministers. It also aims at highlighting new issues
detected by the Committee of Experts during the third monitoring cycle.
7.
The report contains detailed observations that the Danish authorities are encouraged to take
into account. The Committee of Experts has, on the basis of its detailed observations, also established
a list of proposals for recommendations to be addressed to Denmark by the Committee of Ministers,
as provided in Article 16 paragraph 4 of the Charter.

4

8.
The present report reflects the policies, legislation and practice prevailing at the time of the onthe-spot visit. Any changes will be taken into account in the next report of the Committee of Experts
concerning Denmark.
9.

This report was adopted by the Committee of Experts on 28 September 2010.

1.3.

Presentation of the regional or minority language situation in Denmark: up-date

10.
A number of legislative acts which have a bearing on the situation of the German-speakers
have been passed or entered into force since the Committee of Experts’ last evaluation. These have
been detailed in Denmark’s third periodical report as follows:
- Consolidated Act No. 941 of 1 October 2009 on Social Services
- Consolidated Act No. 1203 of 10 December 2009 on Legal Protection and
Administration in Social Matters (as amended)
- Consolidated Act No. 705 of 3 July 2009 on the Private Independent Schools
- Consolidated Act No. 387 of 27 May 2008 on the Act on the Board of Equal Treatment
- Order No. 207 of 8 March 2007 on Regional Cooperation with Adjacent Countries’
Authorities and Organizations
- Order No. 881 of 17 September 2009 on Local Radio Broadcasting
- Order No. 1082 of 20 November 2009 on Guaranteed Day-Care Availability, LocalAuthority Subsidies for Day-Care, After-School and Club Facilities, Parents’ Own
Payment and Obtaining Children’s Certifications.

1.4.

General issues arising in the evaluation of the application of the Charter in Denmark

The application of the Charter to the German language
11.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts observed that the responsibility for the
implementation of the Charter in Denmark rested with the central authorities, despite the fact that
German is spoken mainly at the regional and local levels. In many policy areas, local and regional
authorities merely receive recommendations from the central State and are otherwise free to take their
own decisions.
12.
In the light of the information received, the Committee of Experts notes that the situation has
not improved. In some cases the information regarding the obligations that arise from the Charter
provided by the state to the responsible authorities is insufficient. Also a systematic approach towards
promoting German as a minority language is lacking. The Committee of Experts encourages the
Danish authorities to take a more proactive and structured approach in applying Denmark’s
undertakings ensuing from the Charter.
Undertakings under the Charter
13.
During the on-the-spot visit and in the statement submitted pursuant to Article 16 paragraph 2
of the Charter, the representatives of the German-speakers pointed out that the undertakings chosen
by Denmark in the fields of judicial authorities, administrative authorities and media do not adequately
reflect the situation of the German language and that the ratification of the Charter by Denmark should
be changed in a more ambitious manner concerning Part III provisions. In particular, the fact that
Denmark has not chosen any undertakings under Article 10 paragraph 2 (local and regional
authorities) is regrettable considering the importance of regional and local authorities for the promotion
of the German language. Also, the German-speakers consider that it would be more realistic to apply
one of the options contained in Article 11 paragraph 1 a (public service radio and television) to the
German language rather than the demanding undertakings that Denmark has chosen but so far not
implemented (Articles 11 paragraph 1 b.i and c.i). The Danish authorities may wish to investigate, in
close consultation with the German-speakers, whether additional obligations under the Charter could
be accepted in the aforementioned fields.

5

Greenlandic and Faeroese languages
14.
In the second monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts was informed that after renewed
consultation the Faeroese authorities expressed no interest in the possible extension of the application
of the Charter to the Faeroe Islands, whereas the Greenland authorities communicated that they
would reconsider this issue. The Committee of Experts expressed its hope that Greenland would
accept the extension of the Charter to the Greenlandic language.
15.
According to the third periodical report, Greenland and the Faeroe Islands were consulted and
expressed no change in their position on the question of whether the Charter should apply to
Greenlandic and Faeroese. Furthermore, the Act on Greenland Self-Government entered into force on
21 June 2009 and states that Greenlandic is the official language in Greenland.
16.
As far as Greenlandic and Faeroese in mainland Denmark are concerned, the Committee of
Experts lacked sufficient information in the second monitoring cycle as to whether these languages
could qualify as Part II languages. It encouraged the Danish authorities to provide more information on
the traditional presence of these languages in mainland Denmark in their next periodical report.
17.
During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed by representatives of the
Greenlandic speakers and the authorities that Greenlanders started to arrive in Denmark mainly for
th
educational purposes in the 19 century, but have taken permanent residence there only after 1960.
With respect to the Faeroese language, the Committee of Experts was informed that the Faroese
started to arrive in Denmark a few hundred years ago in very small numbers for educational purposes.
However, there are no indications that this immigration led to a continuous presence of the Faeroese
language in mainland Denmark until the 1960s.
18.
Based on the information received, the Committee of Experts considers that the Greenlandic
and Faeroese languages are not “traditionally used” in mainland Denmark in conformity with the
definition of a “regional or minority language” contained in Article 1 of the Charter.
Romani language in Denmark
19.
In the second monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts was informed that Roma people had
been living in Denmark from around the year 1500, but, as they were not considered welcome in the
Kingdom, the majority since left the country, leaving only a small group of an estimated number of 200
by the end of the 1960s. The Committee of Experts was of the view that the issue of the traditional and
continuous presence of the Romani language in Denmark depended on whether these estimated 200
Roma spoke Romani or were linguistically assimilated. It encouraged the Danish authorities to
examine this question thoroughly, if necessary with the help of experts, and to return to it in the next
periodical report. Furthermore, the Committee of Ministers recommended that the Danish authorities
clarify the issue of the traditional presence of the Romani language in Denmark.
20.
According to the third periodical report, the Roma population living in Denmark today has no
historic or long-lasting continuous presence in Denmark, but is made up of immigrants and refugees.
The authorities have informed the Committee of Experts that they have reviewed multiple sources and
tried also to obtain information by contacting universities in Scandinavia, but did not find any
documentation in support of the traditional presence of the Romani language in Denmark.
21.
During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts met with a representative of the Roma
who argued that there are around 5.000 persons still living in Denmark who might be considered, on
the basis of their names, descendants of ten Sinti families that came from Schleswig-Holstein in the
th
19 century. However, there is no accurate information as to whether the persons in question do in
fact have a Sinti background or whether they still speak the language.
22.
In the view of the Committee of Experts the issue of the traditional presence of the Romani
language spoken by Sinti and maybe other indigenous groups in Denmark needs further clarification.
It encourages the Danish authorities to extend research on this matter, through a scientific study to
clarify the issue.

6

Chapter 2 Conclusions of the Committee of Experts on how the Danish authorities reacted to
the recommendations of the Committee of Ministers

Recommendation no. 1:
“take steps towards the full implementation of Denmark’s undertakings in the field of radio and
television, in close co-operation with the German-speakers”
23.
No structured measures seem to have been taken in order to implement the undertakings
chosen in the field of radio and television. The Danish authorities continue to provide yearly subsidies
to the newspaper of the German minority, Der Nordschleswiger, for production and purchasing of
broadcasting time for news in German at the South Jutland local radio station Radio Mojn. The Danish
authorities have maintained their position that insisting that the Danish Broadcasting Cooperation (DR)
and TV Syd should broadcast programmes in German would interfere with the independence of the
media.
Recommendation no. 2:
“take measures to increase awareness of and understanding for German as a regional or minority
language of Denmark among the Danish population at large”
24.
The Danish authorities state that knowledge about the German minority in Denmark and about
German as a minority language is generally sound, but they continue to pay attention to this matter. In
2009, in the new shared goals for all primary and secondary education subjects the issues relating to
human rights, globalisation, minorities and the border area were strengthened. It has become
mandatory to include the culture, history and language related to the border area in history teaching. A
parliamentary conference was also organized in October 2008 about the contribution of the minorities
residing on both sides of the Danish-German border to the societies. The Committee of Experts has
not been made aware of any other measures, for example in the media.
Recommendation no. 3:
“clarify the issue of the traditional presence of the Romani language in Denmark”
25.
The Danish authorities reviewed multiple sources relating to the presence of Roma in
Denmark, including the presence of the Romani language. The material collected did not support the
traditional presence of the Romani language in Denmark (see also paragraph 20 above). The
authorities however expressed their willingness to hear any new information in this respect.

7

Chapter 3.
Charter

The Committee of Experts' evaluation in respect of Part II and Part III of the

3.1. Evaluation in respect of Part II of the Charter
26.
The Committee of Experts will focus on the provisions of Part II which were singled out in the
second report as raising particular problems. It will therefore not comment in the present report on
provisions about which no major issues were raised in the first and/or second reports and for which
the Committee of Experts has not received any new information requiring it to reassess their
implementation. These provisions are as follows:
Article 7, paragraph 1.a (see paragraph 32 of the first evaluation report)
Article 7, paragraph 1.e (see paragraph 38 of the first evaluation report)
Article 7, paragraph 1.f (see paragraph 39 of the first evaluation report)
Article 7, paragraph 1.g (see paragraph 40 of the first evaluation report)
Article 7, paragraph 1.h (see paragraph 41 of the first evaluation report)
Article 7, paragraph 1.i (see paragraphs 42 of the first evaluation report)
Article 7, paragraph 2 (see paragraph 43 of the first evaluation report)
Article 7, paragraph 5 (see paragraph 49 of the first evaluation report)

Article 7
Paragraph 1
In respect of regional or minority languages, within the territories in which such languages are used and according to
the situation of each language, the Parties shall base their policies, legislation and practice on the following objectives
and principles:
...
b

the respect of the geographical area of each regional or minority language in order to ensure that
existing or new administrative divisions do not constitute an obstacle to the promotion of the
regional or minority language in question;

27.
According to the information received during the on-the-spot visit, the further implementation of
the municipal reform is progressing without negative effects for the German-speakers.
28.
In 2009 the German minority requested a clarification from the Danish Government regarding
the historic and geographic settlement area of the minority in the context of the Local Government
Reform, as the County of South Jutland was abolished. The response of the Danish authorities was
that the new borders in connection with the reform did not change the legal definition of the settlement
area of the German minority and did not have any influence on the definition of the areas in which the
Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities and the European Charter for
Regional or Minority Languages apply. A letter was also sent by the Danish Minister for the Interior
and Social Affairs to the municipalities in the former County of South Jutland and the Region of South
Denmark, informing them that the Local Government Reform does not change the settlement area of
the German minority and the application of the two conventions.
c

the need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in order to safeguard them;
1

29.
The Committee of Experts recalls that “resolute action to promote regional or minority
languages in order to safeguard them” covers inter alia the provision of adequate financial resources.
During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed by the representatives of the
German-speakers that the Danish and especially the German authorities have announced
considerable cuts in their financial support for the German minority in Denmark. According to the
German-speakers, these cuts will put the continued provision of the services offered by the German
minority (education, media, social services etc.) at serious risk.

1

See also second evaluation report on Germany, ECRML (2006) 1, paragraph 24

8

d

the facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of regional or minority languages, in speech and
writing, in public and private life;

30.
In the second monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts welcomed the involvement of the
central authorities in providing guidance to local and regional authorities in connection with the
municipal reform and the use of German and hoped that this encouragement would lead to concrete
results regarding the promotion of German in public life. In connection with the municipal reform, the
Committee of Experts expressed its hope that new municipalities would take that opportunity to
improve services in German on their territory. The Committee of Experts also noticed the limited use of
German in broadcasting media.
31.
According to the third periodical report and the information received during the on-the-spot
visit, the Regional State Administration for South Denmark has taken practical measures to encourage
and facilitate the use of German by informing citizens at the reception desk that German is spoken
within the administration. Moreover, in 2008 the local authority of Aabenraa launched an internal
German language training of its staff with a view to improving the possibilities of assisting Germanspeakers. The municipalities of Aabenraa, Haderslev and Sønderborg offer information in German on
their websites.
32.
However, the Committee of Experts was informed by the representatives of the Germanspeakers that these measures are inconsistent and that the conditions for using German in public life
still needed to be improved. At present, there is no structured approach regarding the use of German
as a minority language in administrative authorities and public services. The existing potential of
German-speaking administrative staff is not properly exploited. On the websites of national, regional or
local authorities, information in German is insufficient or not present at all. Access to the main
documents relating to the German-speakers in German, including those concerning the Charter, is not
always possible. The Committee of Experts was also informed that a common approach was lacking
at the level of the four municipalities in South Jutland with respect to signage. The representatives of
the German-speakers expressed their wish for improvement and extension in the use of bilingual
signs, including bilingual place-name signs in the four main municipalities in South Jutland, in order to
improve the visibility of the German language in public life.
33.
The Committee of Experts encourages the Danish authorities to pursue the dialogue with the
representatives of the German-speakers with a view to further improving the presence of the German
language in public life.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to promote, by appropriate measures, mutual understanding between all the linguistic groups of
the country and in particular the inclusion of respect, understanding and tolerance in relation to regional or minority
languages among the objectives of education and training provided within their countries and encouragement of the
mass media to pursue the same objective.

34.
In the second monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts was of the view that more efforts
were needed to promote awareness of and understanding for German as a minority language in
Denmark. It was mentioned that possible measures might include clearer guidelines for the
implementation of the relevant sections of school curricula, the inclusion of this aspect in the
2
monitoring of the Folkeskole , as well as an increased attention to this issue in the context of teaching
materials and mainstream teacher training, or similar measures of a general nature. It encouraged the
Danish authorities to take measures to promote awareness of and understanding for German as a
minority language in Denmark. Furthermore, the Committee of Ministers recommended the Danish
authorities to take measures to increase awareness of and understanding for German as a
regional or minority language of Denmark among the Danish population at large.
35.
According to the third periodical report, the Danish authorities find that knowledge about the
German minority in Denmark and about German as a minority language is generally sound. However,
the authorities continue to pay attention to this matter and in the new shared goals set for all primary
and secondary education subjects in 2009 issues relating to human rights, globalisation, minorities
and the border area have been strengthened. It is mandatory to include the culture, history and
language related to the border area in history teaching. A parliamentary conference was also
2

Primary and lower secondary schools in Denmark

9

organized in October 2008 about the contribution of the minorities residing on both sides of the
Danish-German border to their societies. During the on-the-spot visit the Committee of Experts was
informed that the teaching of subjects related to border area issues refers to the past Danish-German
border conflict and the present situation.
36.
However, it is not clear to the Committee of Experts to what extent the information provided in
schools about “the border area” promotes awareness of and understanding for German as a minority
language in Denmark or whether this has been accompanied by other measures, such as guidelines
for the implementation of the relevant sections of school curricula, the inclusion of this aspect in the
monitoring of the Folkeskole or increased attention to this issue in the context of teaching materials
and mainstream teacher training. The representatives of the German-speakers informed the
Committee of Experts that there is a need for dedicated information campaigns for the population at
large, as there is in fact little knowledge about the status of German as a minority language and the
history associated with it. The Committee of Experts requests the Danish authorities to provide, in the
next periodical report, specific information on these aspects and other measures to promote
awareness of and understanding for German as a minority language in Denmark.
37.
As far as the mass media is concerned, in the second monitoring cycle, the Committee of
Experts received no information about measures taken in this field.
38.
According to the third periodical report, the press in Denmark is free and can independently
report what takes place in the country. The main objectives of the media policy are to maintain and
strengthen the democratic debate and to safeguard traditional cultural and general educational
purposes. The government does not decide with respect to the content of the media reports or
otherwise impose restrictions on the free press in Denmark.
39.
The Committee of Experts recalls that “respect for regional or minority languages and the
development of a spirit of tolerance towards them are part of a general concern to develop
understanding for a situation of language plurality within a state. The development of this spirit of
tolerance and receptiveness through the educational system and the media is an important factor in
the practical preservation of regional or minority languages. The encouragement of the mass media to
pursue such objectives is not considered to constitute illegitimate state influence; indeed respect for
human rights, tolerance of minorities and avoidance of incitement to hatred are the kinds of objective
3
which most European states do not hesitate to impose as obligations upon the media” .
40.
In the third periodical report and during the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was
informed that TV Syd broadcasts issues related to the German minority, as part of its normal news
coverage. However, the representatives of the German-speakers informed the Committee of Experts
that coverage of issues related to the minority and the border area at the level of the national Danish
TV stations is inadequate. The same applies to radio broadcasters. The German-speakers have sent
a letter to the minister for culture asking for the German minority to be included in the upcoming public
service contracts concerning the broadcasting media when reporting from the area of South Jutland.
The German-speakers have pointed out that in the present public service contracts there is such an
obligation concerning the Danish speaking minority living in Germany. In his answer to this request the
minister of culture, however, states that DR and TV Syd, under the public service obligations, cover
the German speaking minority sufficiently, as the public service providers are obliged to offer
programmes that reflect the multitude of cultural interests that exist in the Danish society.
41.
As mentioned above, a provision with respect to the Danish minority in Germany is included in
the current public service contract between the Danish state and the public broadcaster TV Syd. The
Committee of Experts notes that this is not seen as an undue infringement of the independence of the
media and encourages the Danish authorities to consider the possibility of including a provision
concerning the proportional and balanced reporting about the German minority in the new public
service contracts between the Danish state and public broadcasters.

3

Explanatory Report to the Charter, paragraph 74

10

Paragraph 4
In determining their policy with regard to regional or minority languages, the Parties shall take into consideration the
needs and wishes expressed by the groups which use such languages. They are encouraged to establish bodies, if
necessary, for the purpose of advising the authorities on all matters pertaining to regional or minority languages.

42.
The Danish authorities have established a special working group to discuss and evaluate
measures taken under the Charter and also issues related to the Framework Convention for the
Protection of National Minorities. The Committee of Experts considers this best practice. However, the
Committee of Experts was informed by the representatives of the German-speakers that the special
working group only met shortly before the submission of the state reports. The German-speakers
expressed their hope for a strengthening of the working group, to be achieved by convening regular
meetings aimed at implementing the provisions laid down in the Charter. The Committee of Experts
encourages the Danish authorities to convene regular meetings of the working group.

11

3.2. Evaluation in respect of Part III of the Charter
43.
The Committee of Experts has examined in detail the protection of the German language,
which is the only language identified by Denmark for the purposes of the protection mechanism of Part
III of the Charter.
44.
The Committee of Experts will not comment on provisions in relation to which no major issues
were raised in the previous reports and for which it did not receive any new elements requiring a
revised assessment or a different presentation of their implementation. It reserves, however, the right
to evaluate the situation again at a later stage. These provisions are listed below:
Article 8, paragraph 1 aiii, b.iv, c.iii/iv, e.ii, f.ii, h, i; paragraph 2;
Article 10, paragraph 1 a.v, 4.c; paragraph 5;
Article 11, paragraph 1.e.i;
Article 12, paragraph 1.a, b ; paragraph 2;
Article 13, paragraph 1.a, c d;
Article 14.a, b
Article 8 – Education
General issues
45.
In South Jutland education for the German-speakers takes place almost exclusively in private
schools receiving support from the Danish state. The Danish Private Schools Act ensures the
educational autonomy and financial security of the German-language schools. However, the Danish
authorities have announced a gradual reduction of subsidies for all Danish private schools and cuts of
the transport allowances. If these were also applied to the German-language schools, it would have, in
the opinion of the representatives of the German-speakers, unpredictable consequences that would
almost certainly lead to the closure of some of the schools run by the German organisation. This could
lead to non-fulfilment of some of the undertakings under Article 8 listed above.
The Committee of Experts encourages the Danish authorities to ensure that the reduction of
subsidies for private schools and cuts of the transport allowances will not jeopardize the
continued functioning of the German-language schools at the current level.
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used, according to the
situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
...
d

...
iii

to provide, within technical and vocational education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum;

46.
In the previous monitoring cycles, the Committee of Experts has considered this undertaking
fulfilled. During the on-the-spot visit however, the Committee of Experts was informed by the
representatives of the German-speakers that within technical and vocational education the level of
teaching of the German language is not satisfactory.
47.
The Committee of Experts requests the Danish authorities to provide specific information on
the teaching of German within technical and vocational education in the next periodical report.
g

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected by the
regional or minority language;

48.
In the second monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking partly
fulfilled. It was of the view that there was scope for ensuring the teaching of the history and culture of
the German-speakers more systematically, notably through measures such as clearer guidelines for
the implementation of the relevant sections of school curricula, the inclusion of this aspect in the

12

monitoring of the Folkeskole, as well as an increased attention to this issue in the context of teaching
materials and mainstream teacher training.
49.
According to the third periodical report, in 2009, all primary and secondary education subjects
were given new common objectives and subjects relating to human rights, globalization, minorities and
the border area issues have been strengthened. The culture, history and language related to the
border area are mandatory in history teaching, but they can also be included in other subjects.
50.
During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed that the new subjects
related to human rights, globalization, minorities and the border area have been accepted by nearly all
municipalities in Denmark. The teaching of subjects related to border area issues includes the past
Danish-German border conflict and the present situation. However, it is not clear to the Committee of
Experts to what extent the information provided in schools about “the border area” ensures the
teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected by the German language in Denmark or
whether this has been accompanied by other measures, such as guidelines for the implementation of
the relevant sections of school curricula, the inclusion of this aspect in the monitoring of the Folkeskole
or increased attention to this issue in the context of teaching materials and mainstream teacher
training (see also paragraph 36 above).
51.
The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It requests the Danish
authorities to provide more specific information in the next periodical report on the extent to which the
teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected by the German language in Denmark is
ensured in practice.

Article 9 – Judicial authorities
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents using the regional or
minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to the situation of each of these languages and
on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper
the proper administration of justice:
...
b

in civil proceedings:
...
iii

to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages,

if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

c

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
...
iii

to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages,

if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake:
a

not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because they are
drafted in a regional or minority language

52.
In the second monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts was of the view that dialogue with
the judicial authorities should be pursued in order to encourage them to take practical or
organisational measures to improve the implementation of these undertakings in practice.
Nevertheless, it considered these undertakings fulfilled.

13

53.
In the third monitoring cycle, the Danish authorities did not provide any information about
practical or organisational measures taken by judicial authorities to improve the implementation of
these undertakings in practice. In addition, the Committee of Experts was informed by the
representatives of the German-speakers that the submission of statutes and other legal documents in
German often meets with difficulties and that the centralization of the land registry has created even
additional problems concerning the processing of legal documents in German. The Committee of
Experts encourages the Danish authorities to clarify these issues. The Committee of Experts also
encourages the Danish authorities to report in the next periodical report about the practical or
organisational measures taken to improve the implementation of the undertakings chosen in practice.

Article 11 – Media
54.
The Committee of Experts observes that no significant developments have occurred in
implementing the undertakings chosen by Denmark in the field of broadcasting media. Although the
Committee of Experts is aware of the limited role of the state in relation to the media, it recalls that the
possibility of introducing encouragement or facilitation measures for the media in the regional or
minority languages still exists, for example through financial support or licensing requirements.
55.
The Committee of Experts was informed that the representatives of the German-speakers are
interested in regular German-language programmes at the level of the Danish public broadcasters
(TV, radio, internet). The Committee of Experts encourages the Danish authorities to find ways to
include and support German-language programmes in the public broadcasting media.
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in which those
languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly or
indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence and
autonomy of the media:
...
b

i

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one radio station in the regional or minority
languages; or

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the regional or minority
languages on a regular basis;

56.
As underlined by the Committee of Experts in its previous evaluation reports, these two
paragraphs are alternative options, which makes paragraph b.ii redundant. However, in view of the
ratification, the Committee of Experts has also looked at measures taken to encourage the
broadcasting of radio programmes in German.
57.
In the second monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking not
fulfilled. It encouraged the Danish authorities, in close co-operation with the speakers, to take steps
towards the full implementation of this undertaking and to take interim measures to increase the level
of radio broadcasting. Furthermore, the Committee of Ministers recommended that the Danish
authorities take steps towards the full implementation of Denmark’s undertakings in the field of
radio and television, in close co-operation with the German-speakers.
58.
According to the third periodical report, the Danish authorities continue to provide annual
subsidies of DKK 250,000 (about €33.500) to the newspaper of the German minority, Der
Nordschleswiger, for production and purchasing of broadcasting time for news in German at the South
Jutland local radio station Radio Mojn (three two-minute German language news programmes a day).
The Committee of Experts was informed by the representatives of the German-speakers that they are
interested in continuing the broadcasts, making them more attractive and extending them. However,
this would require increased funding, also to guarantee training of staff, since current costs for
production already reach DKK 400,000 (about €53.000).
59.
The Danish authorities have maintained their position that insisting that the Danish
Broadcasting Cooperation (DR) and TV Syd should broadcast programmes in German would interfere
with the independence of the media. The Committee of Experts notes that the broadcasting time of six

14

minutes per day is clearly insufficient to comply with any of the undertakings chosen by Denmark in
this respect.
60.
During the on-the-spot visit the German-speakers expressed their wish for the Danish
authorities to take measures to increase substantially the level of radio broadcasting in German.
61.
As no steps were taken by the Danish authorities to fully implement the undertaking or to
increase the level of radio broadcasting, the Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not
fulfilled.
62.
On the basis of the wishes of the German-speakers, the Committee of Experts urges the
Danish authorities to take measures in order to ensure that the level of radio broadcasting in German
is substantially increased.
The Committee of Experts urges the Danish authorities to take measures, in close co-operation
with the speakers, to increase the level of radio broadcasting in German.

c

i

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one television channel in the regional or
minority languages; or

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;

63.
These two paragraphs are alternative options, which makes paragraph c. ii redundant.
However, in view of the ratification, the Committee of Experts has also looked at whether any
measures were taken to encourage the broadcasting of television programmes in German.
64.
In the second monitoring cycle the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not
fulfilled. It encouraged the Danish authorities to take steps towards the implementation of this
undertaking in close co-operation with the speakers. Furthermore, the Committee of Ministers
recommended that the Danish authorities take steps towards the full implementation of
Denmark’s undertakings in the field of radio and television, in close co-operation with the
German-speakers.
65.
The Committee of Experts observes that no significant measures have been taken by the
Danish authorities towards the implementation of this undertaking. During the on-the-spot visit, the
Committee of Experts was informed about a cross-border television project involving Aabenraa Lokal
TV. This project is still being developed, but if successful, it could be one of the ways to broadcast
television programmes in German. The Danish authorities allocated DKK 290.405 (about €38.000) to
this project in 2010.
66.
The Committee of Experts welcomes this new information and encourages the Danish
authorities to continue the support for this project and to support also other activities aimed at
broadcasting TV programmes in German in South Jutland.
67.
Having regard to the undertaking chosen by Denmark, the Committee of Experts must
however maintain its previous conclusion that the undertaking is not fulfilled.
The Committee of Experts urges the Danish authorities to find ways to provide TV broadcasts
in German in South Jutland, in close cooperation with the German-speakers.
d

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual works in the
regional or minority languages;

68.
In the second monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking not
fulfilled.
69.
During the third monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts was not informed of any measures
to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual works in
German. The authorities refer to the general support under the Danish Film Act and state that no

15

special funds have been earmarked for the German minority in connection with audio or audiovisual
production.
70.
The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Danish
authorities to take measures to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and
audiovisual works in German.
f

...
ii

to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions in the
regional or minority languages;

71.
In the second monitoring cycle the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking formally
fulfilled.
72.
The Committee of Experts is not aware of any measures being applied to the audiovisual
productions in German. As in the case of the previous undertaking, the authorities refer to the
general support under the Danish Film Act and state that no special funds have been earmarked for
the German minority in connection with audio or audiovisual production.
73.
The Committee of Experts considers the repeated lack of specific information on this
undertaking as an indication that no financial assistance is being applied to audiovisual productions in
German and considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Danish authorities to apply
existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions in German.
g

to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using regional or minority languages.

74.
In the second monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking fulfilled
regarding journalists. However, it lacks information regarding other media staff. The Committee of
Experts requests the Danish authorities to inform about this aspect in the next periodical report.

Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring
countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language, and not to oppose the
retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language. They further
undertake to ensure that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of information
in the written press in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of
the above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities,
conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the
interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for preventing disclosure of
information received in confidence, or for maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.

75.
In the second monitoring cycle the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking fulfilled,
but drew the attention of the Danish authorities to the fact that this undertaking may require some
positive action on the part of the authorities in the future, in the context of increasingly difficult
reception in South Jutland of programmes broadcast from Germany, due to digitalisation.
76.
According to the third periodical report, a condition under the autumn 2007 tender for
broadcasting possibilities for the commercial gatekeeper was to offer a neighbouring country channel
in connection with the transition from analogue to digital TV. The winner of the tender is currently
offering a German TV channel.
77.
During the on-the-spot visit, the representatives of the German-speakers informed the
Committee of Experts that direct reception of radio and television broadcasts from Germany is difficult,
especially in the northern part of South Jutland (north of Aabenraa). It is important for the Germanspeakers that reception of digital terrestrial broadcasting and analogue signals from German public
television stations is freely accessible throughout South Jutland using the standard receivers currently
available, as well as the reception of German stations via cable without having to buy complete
packages that include other stations.

16

78.
The Committee of Experts encourages the Danish authorities to provide information on the
extent to which the reception of radio and TV broadcasting from Germany is possible in South Jutland
and on the potential costs for the listeners and viewers.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural centres, museums,
archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production, vernacular forms of cultural
expression, festivals and the culture industries, including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties
undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are
competent, have power or play a role in this field:
...
d

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of various
kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of regional or minority
languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for which they provide backing;

e

to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural
activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of the regional or minority language
concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest of the population;

f

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or minority
language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

79.
In the second monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts considered these obligations partly
fulfilled and indicated that it would welcome information on concrete examples, if they exist, of the
participation of the German-speakers in cultural activities in South Jutland in general.
80.
According to the third periodical report, the Ministry of Culture and the Cultural Region South
Jutland, which comprises the local authorities of Haderslev, Tønder, Sønderborg and Aabenraa have
concluded a cultural agreement, aimed at promoting South Jutland culture in the border area as well
as mutual understanding between minorities across the Danish-German border. The German minority
is represented in the political steering committee for the Cultural Region. The activities organised by
the Cultural Region include a Danish-German children’s theatre festival, an Organ Festival South
Jutland/Schleswig and the creation of a Danish-German academy for brass instrumentalists. The
German-speakers continue to be present in the cultural cooperation in the Euroregion South JutlandSchleswig, where they are represented in the common Danish-German political committees.
“Language for children”, a seminar about how to motivate children and young people to learn the
neighbour’s language is planned for October 2010 and the German minority was part of its steering
committee. Another project dedicated to the German minority in Denmark, the Danish minority in
Germany and life in the border area is “Minority life – when history becomes real”, which involves also
minority museums.
81.

The Committee of Experts considers these undertakings fulfilled.
g

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for collecting, keeping a copy of and
presenting or publishing works produced in the regional or minority languages;

82. In the previous monitoring cycles, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking fulfilled.
83. According to the statement submitted by the representatives of the German-speakers, however, the
German minority is facing increasing difficulties in running the German museum in Sønderborg and a
school museum in Aabenraa with voluntary staff only. In May 2010, the German minority therefore
applied for financial support from the Ministry of Culture in order to recruit staff, but the application was
rejected. The Committee of Experts notes that the museum in Sønderborg is particularly relevant for
this undertaking due to its broad scope of activity. It encourages the Danish authorities to facilitate the
running of this museum at a professional level.
84. The Committee of Experts nevertheless considers this undertaking still fulfilled at present.

17

Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for regional or minority
languages and the cultures they reflect.

85.
In the second monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts indicated that it looked forward to
receiving more information on the inclusion by the Danish authorities of the language and culture of
the German-speakers in South Jutland in pursuing their cultural policy abroad.
86.
In the third periodical report, the Danish authorities refer to the cultural cooperation in the
Euroregion South Jutland-Schleswig. The Committee of Experts recalls, however, that the concept of
the ‘cultural policy abroad’ not only refers to the state in which the minority language is used, but also
obliges the authorities to show the multilingual nature more generally in countries in which their
4
cultural institutions are active .
87.
The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Danish
authorities to make appropriate provision for the language and culture of the German-speakers in
South Jutland in pursuing their cultural policy abroad and inform the Committee of Experts in the next
periodical report about the measures taken.

Article 13 – Economic and social life
Paragraph 2
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the public authorities are competent,
within the territory in which the regional or minority languages are used, and as far as this is reasonably possible:

...
c

to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and hostels offer the
possibility of receiving and treating in their own language persons using a regional or minority
language who are in need of care on grounds of ill-health, old age or for other reasons;

88.
In the second monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking partly
fulfilled, but encouraged the Danish authorities to strengthen their efforts to ensure that German could
be used in social care facilities, in particular with regard to social care for the elderly. The Committee
of Experts emphasized that considering that the undertaking chosen requires the authorities to ensure
the use of German, a more systematic approach was needed at the level of the municipalities and the
new region of South Denmark and a bilingual human resources policy should be an integral
component of this approach.
89.
With regard to hospitals, the third periodical report states that the use of German when
receiving or treating members of the German minority in hospitals in the Region South Denmark
depends on the circumstances. Patient advisors in the region can assist patients in German, if
requested. Information in German about the hospitals in South Jutland is available on the Internet. In
the psychiatric treatment system, German can be used both by patients and relatives in contacts with
the hospitals.
90.
During the on-the-spot visit the Committee of Experts was informed by the representatives of
the German-speakers that it was yet not clear whether German-speaking doctors could treat patients
using German, as there is a general recommendation for doctors to use Danish. The relevant
authorities informed the Committee of Experts that doctors may use German when treating Germanspeaking patients and they would further clarify any misunderstanding in this respect. The hospitals in
the region have 120 employees from Austria and Germany and on the whole one third of the 3000
employees state that they understand and speak German. Moreover, the website of the hospitals of
South Jutland contains information on the Charter and on the possibility for German-speakers to use
German when communicating with the hospitals.

4

See also third evaluation report in respect of Hungary, ECRML (2007) 5, paragraph 202

18

91.
The Committee of Experts welcomes this initiative. The Committee of Experts asks the Danish
authorities to provide information in the next periodical report on how information concerning the
possibility to use German in relations with the German-speakers was disseminated to the Germanspeaking staff.
92.
Regarding social care facilities, the third periodical report states that the local authorities of
Haderslev, Sønderborg, Tonder and Aabenraa provide adequate assistance in German to the extent
necessary. In the care sector for the elderly, local authorities from Sønderborg and Aabenraa have
German-speaking staff and German can be used, should the need arise. In practice, some residents
in nursing centres or using home care prefer to speak German, but it is not a problem for the local
authority. In Aabenraa and Sønderborg the local authorities have assessed that there is no need for
special measures in the area.
93.
The Committee of Experts was informed by the German-speakers that the existing potential of
German-speaking staff in hospitals and other social facilities has not been fully exploited and there is
need for a systematic investigation of the existing bilingualism of employees in institutions and a proactive utilization of these skills.
94.
The Committee of Experts maintains its position from the second evaluation report that a more
systematic human resources policy is needed on the side of the authorities in order to ensure that
German-speaking staff are actually available in social care facilities, including hospitals.
95.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking partly fulfilled.

The Committee of Experts urges the Danish authorities to strengthen their efforts to ensure
that German can actually be used in social care facilities, in particular with regard to social
care for the elderly.

19

Chapter 4

Findings of the Committee of Experts in the third monitoring cycle

A.
The Committee of Experts appreciates the excellent co-operation it enjoyed with the Danish
authorities in the organisation of its “on-the-spot” visit. The information provided by the authorities and
by the representatives of the speakers allowed the Committee of Experts to obtain a clearer picture of
the situation of the regional or minority languages in Denmark.
B.
Denmark is to be commended for its continued commitment to the protection and promotion of
the German language in South Jutland. The protection of the German language benefits greatly from
the good cooperation and the open dialogue between the Danish authorities and the Germanspeakers. Danish legislation reflects the Danish authorities’ consciousness of the need to protect and
promote German through special measures.
C.
The reform of the municipal and administrative structures has now been fully implemented in
practice and thanks to the special measures with respect to the German-speakers, the protection of
the German language has not been negatively affected by the reform.
D.
After renewed deliberations, the Greenlandic and Faeroese authorities have maintained their
previous position that they are not interested in the possible application of the Charter to Greenland
and the Faeroe Islands. In the opinion of the Committee of Experts this is regrettable, as the inclusion
of Greenlandic and Faeroese languages under the Charter would be an asset for the protection of
regional or minority languages in Europe.
E.
In the light of the information received during the on-the-spot visit, it seems that
th
Greenlanders started to arrive in Denmark mainly for educational purposes in the 19 century, but did
not take up permanent residence there until after 1960. Regarding the Faroese, they started to arrive
in Denmark a few hundred years ago in very small numbers for educational purposes, but there are no
indications that this immigration led to a continuous presence of the Faeroese language in mainland
Denmark until the 1960s. Based on this information the Committee of Experts has come to the
conclusion that the Greenlandic and Faeroese languages are not “traditionally used” in mainland
Denmark and therefore fall outside the definition of a “regional or minority language” contained in
Article 1 of the Charter.
F.
Romani is today spoken mainly by immigrants arriving in Denmark since the 1960s. Based on
information received during the on-the-spot visit, the issue of a traditional presence of the Romani
spoken by Sinti and possibly other indigenous groups in Denmark needs further clarification on the
part of the authorities.
G.
Regarding the German language, it seems that in some cases the state authorities have not
informed the responsible regional and local authorities sufficiently about the undertakings under the
Charter. There is a need for a more proactive and structured approach in applying Denmark’s
undertakings ensuing from the Charter. The fact that Denmark has not chosen any undertakings under
Article 10 paragraph 2 (local and regional authorities) is regrettable considering the importance of
regional and local authorities for the promotion of the German language.
H.
The provision of German-medium education through the private schools of the German
minority remains exemplary. However, there is a danger that the state support for the German schools
could be reduced. This could have serious consequences and might jeopardize the functioning of the
schools run by the German organisation at the current level.
I.
The presence of the German language in the Danish broadcasting media remains very weak.
No significant steps have been taken by the Danish authorities to further implement the undertakings
or to increase the level of radio broadcasting. As regards television, the cross-border television project
involving Aabenraa Lokal TV, which is still being developed, could, if successful, be one of the ways to
broadcast television programmes in German. It is clear, however, that more decided efforts are
needed for Denmark to implement its Part III undertakings in this field.
J.
The Danish Ministry of Culture, as well as the relevant local and regional authorities, actively
support cultural activities of the German-speakers’ organisation. The German-speakers are

20

represented in bodies responsible for organising cultural activities in South Jutland, including crossborder cooperation.
K.
While it remains to a large extent possible to use German in the health and social care
sectors, Denmark’s undertakings in this field are far-reaching and a more systematic human resources
policy is needed in order to ensure that services are generally available in German in social care
facilities, including hospitals.
L.
Finally, there is still a need to increase awareness of and understanding for German as a
regional or minority language of Denmark among the Danish population at large.

The Danish government was invited to comment on the content of this report in accordance with
Article 16.3 of the Charter. The comments received are attached in Appendix II.
On the basis of this report and its findings the Committee of Experts submitted its proposals to the
Committee of Ministers for recommendations to be addressed to Denmark. At the same time it
emphasised the need for the Danish authorities to take into account, in addition to these general
recommendations, the more detailed observations contained in the body of the report.
At its 1107th meeting on 2 March 2011, the Committee of Ministers adopted its Recommendation
addressed to Denmark, which is set out in Part B of this document.

21

Appendix I: Instrument of Ratification
Denmark
Declaration contained in a Note Verbale from the Permanent Representation of Denmark,
handed at the time of deposit of the instrument of ratification on 8 September 2000 - Or. Engl.
In accordance with Article 2, paragraph 2, and Article 3, paragraph 1, of the European Charter for
Regional or Minority Languages, Denmark declares that it will apply the following provisions of Part III
of the Charter to the German minority language in Southern Jutland:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a iii; b iv, c iii/iv, d iii; e ii, f ii, g; h; i; paragraph 2;
Article 9, paragraph 1 b iii; c iii; paragraph 2 a/b/c;
Article 10, paragraph 1 a v; paragraph 4 c; paragraph 5;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b i/ii, c i/ii; d, e i, f ii; g, paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; b; d; e; f; g; paragraph 2; paragraph 3
Article 13, paragraph 1 a; c; d; paragraph 2 c;
Article 14, a; b.
The Danish Government considers that Article 9, paragraphs 1 b iii, and 1 c iii, does not preclude that
national procedural law may contain rules which require that documents produced in a foreign
language before courts as a general rule be accompanied by a translation.
Period covered: 1/1/2001 The preceding statement concerns Article(s) : 2, 3
Declaration contained in a Note Verbale from the Permanent Representation of Denmark,
handed at the time of deposit of the instrument of ratification on 8 September 2000 - Or. Eng.
The Danish Realm comprises Denmark, the Faroe Islands and Greenland.
Section 11 of Act No. 137 of 23 March 1948 on Home Rule of the Faroe Islands states that "Faroese
is recognized as the principal language, but Danish is to be learnt well and carefully, and Danish may
be used as well as Faroese in public affairs." By virtue of the said Act the Faroese language enjoys a
high degree of protection and the provisions of the Charter will therefore not be applicable to the
Faroese language, cf. Article 4 (2) of the Charter. For this reason, the Danish Government does not
intend to submit periodical reports according to Article 15 of the Charter as far as the Faroese
language is concerned.
Denmark's ratification of the Charter does not in any way prejudice the outcome of the negotiations on
the future constitutional status of the Faroe Islands.
Section 9 of Act No. 577 of 29 November 1978 on Greenland Home Rule states that:
"(1) Greelandic shall be the principal language, Danish must be thoroughly taught.
(2) Either language may be used for official purposes."
By virtue of the said Act the Greenlandic language enjoys a high degree of protection and the
provisions of the Charter will therefore not be applicable to the Greenlandic language, cf. Article 4(2)
of the Charter. For this reason, the Danish Government does not intend to submit periodical reports
according to Article 15 of the Charter as far as the Greenlandic language is concerned.
Period covered: 1/1/2001 The preceding statement concerns Article(s) : 15, 4
Communication contained in a Note Verbale from the Permanent Representation of Denmark,
dated 25 August 2000, handed at the time of deposit of the instrument of ratification on 8
September 2000 - Or. Engl.
Upon instruction the Representation hereby transmits certified translations into English of the
Greenland Home Rule Act of 29 November 1978 and the Home Rule Act of the Faroe Islands of 23
March 1948, on the basis of which mandatory consultations were held as part of the ratification

22

process. Attention is drawn to sections 9 and 11 respectively and to the corresponding lists of matters
brought under Home Rule.
[Note by the Secretariat : The final versions are available on request to the Treaty Office.]
Period covered: 1/1/2001 The preceding statement concerns Article(s) : -

23

Appendix II: Comments by the Danish authorities
The Danish Government is pleased to respond to the invitation of the Committee of Experts of the
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages to comment on the proposals for
recommendations to the Committee of Ministers, as contained in the third report on Denmark.
Please find below the Danish comments.
Comment on item 36 in chapter 3 “The Committee of Experts' evaluation in respect of Part II
and Part III of the Charter”:
The Committee of Experts continues in its third report to pay attention to the awareness of and
understanding for German as a regional or minority language of Denmark among the Danish
population at large. In this report as well as in its previous reports, the Committee of Experts
encourages the Danish authorities to take measures to increase awareness of and
understanding for German as a regional or minority language.
In the third - present - report The Committee of Experts also requests the Danish authorities to
provide, in the next periodical report, certain specific information. What is requested is: 1) whether
information provided in schools on “the border area” promotes awareness of and understanding for
German as a minority language in Denmark and/or 2) whether this awareness has been accompanied
by other measures. The Danish authorities would appreciate to engage in a closer dialogue with the
Committee of Experts and representatives of the German minority as to how awareness rising could
be made more tangible. We can, however, provide you with the following concrete information:
In Denmark we are absolutely aware of the fact that the German minority is covered by the
conventions on Minorities and the Language Charter, and that this fact is to be given in an educational
context.
The Danish Folkeskoles (primary and lower secondary school) history teaching encompasses relevant
mutual, regional history and border developments between Germany and Denmark in its political
context as well as the development that led to the partial reunion of South Jutland with Denmark in
1920. The German programmes include intercultural understanding, and a statement of the academic
year 2008/2009 shows that 78.5 per cent of the pupils in the Danish Folkeskole are taught German in
the (6th) 7th to 9th form.
The objectives of the Danish Folkeskole are to be attained through a decentralised teaching structure.
As an overwhelming majority of the Danish municipalities uses the Ministry of Education's curriculum
guidelines, it is furthermore expected that especially the pupils of the municipalities of Southern
Jutland are well-informed concerning the German minority, also in its historical context.
Comment on the proposal for the recommendation to “increase the level of radio broadcasting
in German and provide TV broadcasts in German in South Jutland, in cooperation with the
German-speakers”:
The Committee of experts notes in its third report as in the second and the first that the presence of
the German language in the Danish broadcasting media remains very weak. The Committee finds that
no significant steps have been taken by the Danish authorities to further implement the undertakings
or to increase the level of radio broadcasting.
Concerning the issue of radio broadcasting the Ministry of Culture informs that the situation is as
follows: Rather than having their own German speaking radio station representatives of the German
speaking minority informed the Ministry of Culture several years ago that it prefers having news
broadcasts in German on a channel that has many Danish speaking listeners. This possibility is also
offered by the Danish legislation and since 2005 an annual support of 250.000 DKK to the Germanspeaking minority in South Jutland for the purchase of broadcast time for news in German on a local
radio station has been provided. The broadcasts have been very successful according to the daily
Newspaper Der Nordschleswiger that provides the news for the broadcasts. These have resulted in
better information to the Danish/Southern Jutland population on the views of the German minority and
it has improved the position of the German language in the public sphere.

24

Concerning the Committee’s recommendation that also TV broadcasts in German should be provided
in close cooperation with the German-speakers, the Ministry of Culture would like to refer to and
reiterate its previous comments, namely that measures taken are considered adequate and in
conformity with obligations of public-service broadcasters taking the principle of independence and
autonomy of media into consideration.
The Danish authorities are ready to continue the dialogue with the Committee of Experts and
representatives of the German minority on these issues.

25

B.

Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of
Europe on the application of the Charter by Denmark

Recommendation RecChL(2011)1
of the Committee of Ministers
on the application of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages by Denmark
(Adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 2 March 2011
at the 1107th meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies)

The Committee of Ministers,
In accordance with Article 16 of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages;
Having regard to the instrument of ratification submitted by Denmark on 8 September 2000;
Having taken note of the evaluation made by the Committee of Experts on the Charter with respect to
the application of the Charter by Denmark;
Bearing in mind that this evaluation is based on information submitted by Denmark in its third
periodical report, supplementary information given by the Danish authorities, information submitted by
bodies and associations legally established in Denmark and the information obtained by the
Committee of Experts during its on-the- spot visit,
Having taken note of the comments made by the Danish authorities on the contents of the Committee
of Experts' report;
Recommends that the Danish authorities take account of all the observations of the Committee of
Experts and, as a matter of priority:
1.
increase the level of radio broadcasting in German and provide TV broadcasts in German in
South Jutland, in close cooperation with the German-speakers;
2.
ensure that the reduction of subsidies for private schools and cuts of the transport allowances
will not jeopardize the continued functioning of the German-language schools at the current level;
3.
clarify the issue of the traditional presence of the Romani language spoken by Sinti and
possibly other indigenous groups in Denmark.

26

