Strasbourg, 23 January 2003

MIN-LANG/PR (2003) 1

EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR R EGIONAL OR M INORITY LANGUAGES

Initial Periodical Report
presented to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe
in accordance with Article 15 of the Cha rter

DENMARK

CONTENTS

PART I. GENERAL INFORMATION ON THE EUROPEAN MINORITY
LANGUAGES CHARTER AND ITS IMPLEMENTATION IN DENMARK ..................3
1. Introduction on the implementation of the Minority Languages Charter in
Denmark .................................................................................................................................... 3
2.

Demographics ................................................................................................................... 5

3. Organisations promoting the protection of the German language in Denmark ............ 6
4. Organisations and institutions consulted in connection with the preparation of this
report ......................................................................................................................................... 6
5. Denmark’s fulfilment of its undertaking to provide information under Article 6 of
the Charter................................................................................................................................ 6
6.

Denmark’s implementation of Article 7 of the Charter in respe ct of German.......... 7

PART II.
DENMARK’S IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROVISIONS SPECIFIED
BY DENMARK AS APPLYING TO GERMAN AS A MINORITY LANGUAGE ............9
Article 8 – Education................................................................................................................ 9
Article 9 – Judicial authorities.............................................................................................. 13
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services .............................................. 14
Article 11 – Media .................................................................................................................. 15
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities........................................................................ 18
Article 13 – Economic and social life .................................................................................... 21
Article 14 – Transfrontier exchanges ................................................................................... 22
APPENDICES........................................................................................................................24

2

Part I.

1.

General information on the European Minority Languages Charter and
its implementation in Denmark
Introduction on the implementation of the Minority Languages Charter in
Denmark

Denmark ratified the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages of
5 November 1992 (Minority Languages Charter) on 8 September 2000. The Charter entered
into force for Denmark on 1 January 2001. Prior to ratification, on 24 November 1999, the
Danish Minister for Foreign Affairs presented a proposal for a parliamentary resolution on
Denmark’s ratification of the Minority Languages Charter (motion for resolution No. B 50).
On 26 May 2000, Parliament (the Folketing) gave its approval for ratification.
The purpose of the Charter is to protect and promote the historical regional or minority
languages of Europe as a threatened aspect of Europe’s cultural heritage. The Charter does
not, on the other hand, set out to protect linguistic minorities, nor does it establish any
individual or collective rights for the speakers of regional or minority languages. The Charter
covers languages that are traditionally used within a given territory of a state by nationals of
that state who form a group numerically smaller than the rest of the state’s population. The
Charter does not include either dialects of the official language(s) of the state or the languages
of migrants.
The Minority Languages Charter contains a preamble and 23 articles. It is to a wide extent
based on an “à la carte” system, enabling the States Parties to specify the provisions that seem
to be most appropriate for the individual languages.
At the time of ratification, Denmark identified German as a minority language in the sense of
the Charter and therefore declared that the Minority Languages Charter will apply to German
in respect of the German minority in South Jutland. The German minority comprises 1520,000 people, who reside mainly in the southern and western parts of Sønderjylland County,
where they account for between five and twenty per cent of the population in some of the 23
local authority areas. Most members of the German minority in Denmark are Danish
nationals.
The German minority came into existence after World War I: In 1920 referendums were held
in northern and central Schleswig, resulting in the reunification of North Schleswig and
Denmark the same year. This step brought about a German minority in Denmark. In the interwar period, the German minority was in favour of a border rectification. Immediately after the
end of World War II, the Danish Government established that the border between Denmark
and Germany is definite. The German minority proclaimed its loyalty to the Danish King and
State and recognised the border. The permanent nature of the Danish-German border was
subsequently recognised by all parties in the Danish-German borderland – the states, the
majorities as well as the national minorities. The consensus on this issue provided a basis for
the declarations by the governments of Denmark and Germany of 29 March 1955 on the
rights of the two countries’ national minorities north and south of the Danish-German border,
the so-called Copenhagen-Bonn Declarations (Appendix 1). The Copenhagen Declaration
confers various individual rights on the members of the German minority and lays down some
general principles obliging the Danish authorities to take the minority’s interests into account.
One of these principles is that persons belonging to the German minority must not be
prevented, orally and in writing, from using the language of their choice. The use of the
German language in court and in communication with public authorities complies with
relevant statutory rules and regulations. Another central issue is the principle that a person
3

may freely profess his loyalty to Germa n nationality and German culture and that such a
profession of loyalty must not be contested or verified by the authorities.
The protection of the German minority’s fundamental rights is also safeguarded by the
general provisions of the Constitutional Act of the Kingdom of Denmark (Appendix 2) and
other legislation governing equality before the law, freedom of religion and expression,
freedom of association and assembly, etc. Added to this, there are the obligations Denmark
has assumed under international conventions.
To ensure the continued promotion of the German minority’s interests through contact with
the Danish Parliament and Government, it was decided in 1965 to set up the Liaison
Committee concerning the German Minority. In this forum, representatives of the German
minority together with the Danish Government and members of the political parties
represented in Parliament negotiate domestic policy affairs of interest to the minority. The
Committee was set up because the German minority was no longer represented in Parliament
and has, since its establishment, demonstrated its vital significance as a practical instrument
for solving the minority’s problems. Moreover, in 1983 a special Secretariat to the German
Minority was set up in Copenhagen. The operation of the Secretariat is financed by subsidies
from the Danish Government, but it does not fall within the responsibilities of a government
department. The head of the Secretariat is appointed by the German minority. The duties of
the Secretariat include, amongst others, the ongoing observation of parliamentary work, both
plenary and committee meetings, contact with Parliament, the Government and ministries as
well as representation of the minority’s interests. The head of the Secretariat has participated
as a member of the Danish official delegation to international meetings of relevance to
minority issues.
Against this background, it is evident that the problems that used to exist between the two
ethnic groups of the borderland have yielded to mutual respect and close cooperation in which
consideration for the minority’s wish to use its own language is taken into account as a matter
of course.
In this context, even long before Denmark’s ratification of the Minority Languages Charter,
Denmark had thus provided solutions for the German language that satisfy the principles of
the Charter for the protection of regional or minority languages. For example, it is an
established fact that existing Danish legislation and administrative practice comply with the
principles of the Charter, and Denmark has therefore not amended its statutes nor taken other
special measures to give effect to these principles.
In connection with Denmark’s ratification of the Minority Languages Charter, Denmark made
a declaration concerning the Faroese and Greenlandic languages. It appears from the
declaration that the Faroese and Greenlandic languages, under the Home Rule Acts for the
Faroe Islands and Greenland, enjoy a high degree of protection and that the provisions of the
Charter will therefore not be applicable to the Faroese and Greenlandic languages, see Article
4, paragraph 2, and that the Danish Government therefore does not intend to present
periodical reports under Article 15 of the Charter in respect of the languages in question.
At the time of depositing Denmark’s instrument of ratification, Denmark’s permanent
representative to the Council of Europe forwarded certified translations into English of the
Greenland Home Rule Act of 29 November 1978 and the Home Rule Act of the Faroe Islands
of 23 March 1948, on the basis of which statutory consultations have been conducted as part
of the ratification process. Reference is made to Articles 9 and 11 of the respective home rule
acts and to the lists of cases transferred to the home rule authorities.
4

The Minority Languages Charter is not designed to remedy the language difficulties arisen in
conjunction with the migrations of recent years, and the Charter consequently does not apply
to the languages of migrants, see the definition set out in Article 1. Therefore, the Charter
does not cover a language such as Romany, which is spoken by the about 1500 Romanies in
Denmark. About 800 of these people arrived in Denmark in the late 1960s, and most of the
rest in the mid-1990s in connection with the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia. The
Romanies have thus no historical or long-term affiliation to Denmark.
It should be emphasised, however, that all persons residing in Denmark are entitled to speak
the language of their choice. The fact that the Minority Languages Charter does not apply to a
certain language therefore only means that the language in question is not covered by the
special promotional measures specified in the Charter.

2.

Demographics

German is spoken by the German minority in South Jutland.
The presence of a German-minded community in South Jutland can be ascribed to historical
developments, which brought the region under alternately Danish and German rule. The
Duchy of Schleswig was created in the 12th century and, with its changeable history, belonged
to Denmark until the defeat to Prussia and Austria in the Danish-German war of 1864. In
consequence, South Jutland – together with the German-speaking, but Danish duchies of
Holstein and Lauenburg – was later annexed to Prussia. After the end of World War I, the
Versailles Treaty of 1919 between the Allied victors and Germany called for the holding of
referendums in northern and central Schleswig. The referendums were held in February and
March 1920, respectively. The results meant that Schleswig was divided and that North
Schleswig was surrendered by Germany and, therefore, reunited with Denmark in the summer
of 1920. These events left the present national minorities in the Danish-German borderland:
The Danish minority in Germany and the German minority in Denmark. The German
community demanded that the delineation of the border should be rectified. Up to 1933 the
German minority demanded that the parts of North Schleswig that achieved a German
majority in the referendum of March 1920 should be reunited with Germany. After the Nazis
seized power in Germany in 1933, the German minority insisted on the return to Germany of
all of North Schleswig. After World War II, the newly organised German minority made a
declaration of loyalty to Denmark and also recognised the border from 1920. In 1955 the
foundations for the present state of total détente were provided with the Copenhagen-Bonn
Declarations. In these parallel and almost identical declarations, which are still in force, the
Danish Government established the German minority’s rights in Denmark, whereas the
Western German Government established the Danish minority’s rights in the Federal
Republic of Germany.
The compilation of statistics on Danish demography is the responsibility of Statistics
Denmark. Statistics Denmark registers no information on minorities other than nationals of
foreign states and persons born outside Denmark. Since affiliation to the German minority,
for instance under the Copenhagen Declaration of 1955, is based on a free, individual choice,
this cannot be registered anywhere either.
Consequently, there is no official record of the size of the German minority in Denmark, but
the German minority itself has stated that it comprises about 15-20,000 people.

5

The minority, fluent in both German and Danish, mainly resides in the southern and westerns
parts of Sønderjylland County, where it constitutes between 5 and 20 per cent of the
population in some of the county’s local authority areas. Moreover, members of the German
minority live scattered throughout other parts of the region.
As practically all members of the German minority speak German, the members of the
German minority are defined as “speakers of regional or minority languages”.
3. Organisations promoting the protection of the German language in Denmark
The European Bureau for Lesser Used Languages (EBLUL), which is an independent, panEuropean organisation established in 1982 and funded by the European Union, aims to
facilitate the use of minority languages in EU member states. EBLUL cooperates with a broad
range of organisations of European minorities, including Bund deutscher Nordschleswiger.
EBLUL has Member State Committees in all EU member states, apart from Greece. In
Denmark EBLUL only comprises the German minority in South Jutland. Through this
cooperation, EBLUL contributes to promoting the German minority in South Jutland,
including the German language. EBLUL is currently preparing a homepage with a special
view to the language and culture of the German minority.
Verein für deutsche Kulturbeziehungen im Ausland (VDA) aims to ensure that Germanlanguage minorities worldwide are capable of maintaining contact to Germany and to the
German culture and language. VDA grants support to, among others, German media outside
Germany and organises lectures and seminars for members of the German minorities. The
German minority runs a local unit of VDA.
4.

Organisations and institutions consulted in connection with the preparation of
this report

The report has been prepared by the Danish Ministry of Interior Affairs and Health on the
basis of consultations of various other Danish government departments and the Government
Office of Sønderjylland County. The Secretariat to the German Minority in Copenha gen and
the Danish Institute of Border Region Studies have also contributed to and commented on the
contents of the report.
Furthermore, the report has been submitted to Sønderjylland County and to the Association of
Local Authorities in South Jutland.
5.

Denmark’s fulfilment of its undertaking to provide information under Article 6
of the Charter

In 2001 the Danish Ministry of Foreign Affairs published a booklet on the Minority
Languages Charter, available in both a Danish and a German edition (Appendix 3). The
booklet explains the importance of the Charter in all relevant legal areas. The booklet has
been forwarded to the relevant Danish government departments and to the authorities of South
Jutland, including the Government Office of Sønderjylland County. In addition, the book has
been sent to the local authorities of South Jutland and to Sønderjylland County. The German
minority has received 6000 copies in German and 1000 copies in Danish for distribution
among its members.
The contents of the Minority Languages Charter have been the subject of in-depth debate in
the Liaison Committee concerning the German Minority. This report has also been made
6

available to the public in both a printed edition and in electronic form at the Ministry of
Interior Affairs and Health’ website.
Like all other motions for resolutions and bills, the Minority Languages Charter has been
published in the Official Report of the Folketing Proceedings, Annex A, and was advertised in
the Law Gazette C by Order No. 28 of 23 August 2001. Moreover, the Minority Languages
Charter is available at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs’ website and will also be available at
the Ministry of Interior Affairs and Health’ website.

6.

Denmark’s implementation of Article 7 of the Charter in respe ct of German

6.1 General
Article 7 of the Minority Languages Charter enunciates various general objectives and
principles applying to all the regional or minority languages that are spoken within the
territories of the States Parties and which fall within the definition in Article 1. In Denmark’s
case, Article 7 applies in respect of German.
Article 7 lays down, among other stipulations, that the States Parties must base their policies
and legislation on the recognition of the regional or minority langua ges as an expression of
cultural wealth and on the respect of the geographical area of each of these languages in order
to ensure that administrative divisions do not constitute an obstacle to the promotion of the
languages in question. Article 7 further prohibits any unjustified discrimination relating to the
use of regional or minority languages and obliges the States Parties to promote mutual respect
and understanding between all the linguistic groups of the country, especially within the
educational sys tem and the mass media.
The members of the German minority are protected under section 70 of the Danish
Constitution, which reads as follows, “No person shall be deprived of access to the full
enjoyment of civic and political rights for reasons of creed or descent”.
Section 70 of the Constitution means that members of the German minority must not, because
of their descent, encounter any obstacles in their access to the enjoyment of the rights enjoyed
by any Danish national.
In addition, section 77 of the Constitution lays down that “any person shall be at liberty to
publish his ideas in print, in writing, and in speech”, and the right to speak or write in a
minority language is not subject to any restriction under current Danish law.
6.2 German
The Copenhagen Declaration of 1955 lays down the fundamental principles governing the
peaceful co-existence between the German minority and the rest of Danish society and is
rooted in, for example, the recognition of the German language as an expression of cultural
wealth. The Copenhagen Declaration of 1955 thus incorporates the principle that persons
belonging to the German minority must not be prevented from using the language of their
choice, see Part II, paragraph 2, of the Declaration. The provision covers the right to use
German in both public and private life.
This principle must be seen in combination with the principle of the Declaration that a person
may freely profess his loyalty to German nationality and German culture and that such a
7

profession of loyalty must not be contested or verified by the authorities, see Part II,
paragraph 1, of the Declaration.
These principles have been implemented in detail through various provisions of Danish
legislation.
The right to use German in legal proceedings is for instance safeguarded by the provisions of
the Danish Administration of Justice Act. In civil cases, it is thus allowed to produce
documents and evidence in German – if necessary by the use of interpreters and/or
translations. The validity of legal documents must not be denied solely because they are
drafted in German.
It thus appears from section 149(2), first clause, of the Administration of Justice Act that
“documents issued in a foreign language shall be accompanied by a translation into Danish,
which, if required by the court or the adversary, shall be certified by an authorised translator”.
Under section 149(2), second clause, however, the right to a translation may be waived when
both parties agree to do so and the court believes it has adequate knowledge of the foreign
language.
The German minority’s right to use German in both private life and in its relations with public
authorities is free and unobstructed, and there are no administrative or other divisions that
constitute an obstacle to the promotion of the German language in South Jutland. The Danish
Government will bear in mind also in the future that such divisions should not be
implemented.
Reference is also made to the comments on the individual articles below.
6.3 General measures to eliminate distinctions and promote mutual understanding between
all linguistic groups in Denmark
Endeavours are made at the early stages of primary education in the Danish Folkeskole
(primary and lower secondary school) to promote a common understanding between all
linguistic and cultural groups in Denmark, including equality between these groups. Section
1(3) of the Danish Folkeskole Act reads as follows: “The Folkeskole shall familiarise the
pupils with Danish culture and contribute to their understanding of other cultures and of
man’s interaction with nature. The school shall prepare the pupils for active participation,
joint responsibility, rights and duties in a society based on freedom and democracy. The
teaching of the school and its daily life must therefore build on intellectual freedom, equality
and democracy.”
The local council is responsible for the detailed planning of teaching in the Folkeskole in
cooperation with the individual school. Therefore, not least the schools in South Jutland have
ample opportunities to strengthen the pupils’ knowledge under the special circumstances
relating to the German minority and, in that manner, provide the optimum platform for
ensuring that the members of the minority are met with understanding and respect when they
wish to use their own language.
The Folkeskole Act also allows the Folkeskole to offer a broad range of culture and leisure
activities in close cooperation with the socio-cultural and associative life of the local
community. This also opens up an opportunity for establishing close cooperation with the
German minority’s organisations for the development of mutual understanding between the
linguistic groups.
8

The Board for Ethnic Equality was set up in 1993 for the purpose of ensuring that the issue of
ethnic equality is incorporated into all aspects of community life and for the purpose of
highlighting and counteracting discrimination against persons of Danish and other ethnic
origins.
In 1997 the Folketing passed a new Board for Ethnic Equality Act, strengthening the position
of the Board in several ways. The effect of the legislative amendment was that the Board now
has a statutory right to make statements on ethnic discrimination, including issues concerning
discrimination against the German minority. Thus, it has been emphasised that the Board can
discuss problems within the framework of the Act and issue opinions on the basis of requests
from individuals. It is therefore possible for the Board to take measures to promote
understanding between all ethnic groups, including all linguistic groups, in Denmark.
The Board for Ethnic Equality is due to be closed down at the end of 2002. The closure
should be seen in the light of Council Directive 2000/43/EC implementing the principle of
equal treatment between persons irrespective of racial or ethnic origin. By an Act
establishing the Danish Centre for International Studies and Human Rights (Act No. 411 of 6
June 2002), the Danish Government has implemented the provisions of Article 13,
paragraphs 1 and 2, requiring member states to designate independent bodies for the
promotion of equal treatment. The Act thus entails the establishment of an Institute for
Human Rights, whose duties include the promotion of equal treatment of all persons without
discrimination on the grounds of racial or ethnic origin, see section 2(2), para. 4, of the Act.
As mentioned above, the Liaison Committee concerning the German Minority was set up in
1965. In this forum, representatives of the German minority together with the Danish
Government and members of the political parties represented in Parliament negotiate
domestic policy affairs, including linguistic issues. The implementation of the Minority
Languages Charter in Denmark has for instance been up for discussion in the Liaison
Committee several times, on which occasions the minority has proposed measures to ensure
the best possible promotion of the objectives of the Charter.
The Secretariat to the German Minority, established in 1983, is also in regular contact with
the Government on issues of any nature, including linguistic issues.

Part II.

Denmark’s implementation of the provisions specified by Denmark as
applying to German as a minority language

In compliance with Article 3(1) of the Charter, Denmark has specified German as a minority
language, to which the provisions chosen under Article 2(2) of the Charter will apply after the
Charter has entered into force in Denmark.
Article 8 – Education
Denmark has specified that the following provisions on education will apply to German as a
minority language:
1. With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such
languages are used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without
prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
9

a iii) to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above [availability of preschool education in the relevant regional or minority languages] at least to those pupils
whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient;
b iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above [availability of primary
education in the relevant regional or minority languages] at least to those pupils whose
families so request and whose number is considered sufficient;
c iii/iv) to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or to apply one of the measures
provided for under i to iii above [availability of secondary education in the relevant regional
or minority languages] at least to those pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so
wish in a number considered sufficient;
d iii) to provide, within technical and vocational education, for the teaching of the relevant
regional or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum;
e ii) to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher education
subjects;
f ii) to offer such languages as subjects of adult and continuing education;
g) to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is
reflected by the regional or minority language;
h) to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of
paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;
i) to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken and
progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority
languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.
2. With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the
regional or minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of
users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching
in or of the regional or minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.
The provisions Denmark has specified from among the provisions on education set out in
Article 8 of the Minority Languages Charter have been implemented as described below:
1.
a iii) “Pre-school education” in Denmark, see section 37 of the Folkeskole Act, generally only
comprises the one-year pre-school classes that are offered to children attaining the age of 6
during the calendar year in question. The German- language private independent basic schools
(see below) are, like their Danish equivalents, entitled to make pre-school classes available to
the age group mentioned, thus qualifying for state subsidy.
b iv) The Danish Act on Private Independent Schools and Private Independent Basic Schools
etc. allows the setting up of private independent basic schools where German is the main
teaching language. A private independent basic school must offer education that meets the
general requirements of the Folkeskole Act, see section 1 of the Act. The teaching language is
10

German in the German minority schools, see section 2(3) of the Act. Today, 15 German
private independent basic schools exist in Denmark.
A private independent basic school must have 28 pupils at 1st to 7th form levels - in the first
and second school year, however, only 12 to 20 pupils. It appears from section 19 of the Act,
though, that the Minister for Education may dispense with the requirement for the number of
pupils in special cases. This rule has been used to grant the German minority schools in
Denmark a general exemption from the requirement, reducing the minimum number to 10
pupils.
Under the Act on Private Independent Schools and Private Independent Basic Schools etc., all
private independent basic schools, including the German minority’s basic schools in
Denmark, are eligible for state subsidy. State subsidy is granted according to the number of
pupils enrolled in the school during a year. The average subsidy per pupil per year is laid
down in the Finance Act based on the cost per pupil in the Folkeskole according to the latest
statement of accounts. The cost is adjusted according to prices and salaries up to the fiscal
year.
The state grants a supplementary subsidy to the German minority schools within the limits of
a yearly allocation laid down in the Finance Act. In the Finance Act 2002, the amount of
DKK 4.0 million is laid down as a supplementary subsidy to the German minority schools.
Deutscher Schul- und Sprachverein für Nordschleswig distributes the subsidy among the
schools. The extra subsidy to the German minority schools is designed to meet the special
costs required for maintaining and ensuring the operation of the German minority’s school
system. The required costs include lessons in double mother-tongue instruction (Danish and
German), a special grant towards operational expenditure to secure the existence of the
schools and other special arrangements for minorities as well as their own approved school
psychological services, their own approved arrangement concerning educational, labour
market and vocational guidance (“Berufsberatung”) and a special approved arrangement
concerning training of teachers from Germany in the Germa n minority’s school system
(“zweites Staatsexamen”).
Finally, it should be mentioned that the minority’s school-based day-care facilities receive a
state subsidy in line with the day-care facilities provided by Danish private independent
schools and private independent basic schools. The subsidy is granted per pupil per year,
amounting to DKK 8,700 in 2002.
c iii/iv) The provision has been applied at the level of final secondary education by virtue of
German-language teaching in private schools. At the level of upper secondary education, the
provision has been applied in the sense that Deutsches Gymnasium in Aabenraa provides
education in German, a course leading to full Danish high-school graduation.
The education at Deutsches Gymnasium is thus in principle identical with a Danish upper
secondary school- leaving examination in terms of both contents and qualifications, apart from
the fact that the pupils are more proficient in German.
Deutsches Gymnasium is a private upper secondary school receiving a state subsidy. The
subsidy is granted under the same rules as those applying to subsidies to other private
independent upper secondary schools in Denmark. The state subsidy accounts for a total of 85
per cent of the county’s annual expenses per pupil.
d iii) The provision is considered to have been applied through the possibility of choosing
German as an optional subject within vocational education. Vocational education is provided
11

in the form of short, qualifying programmes, primarily within building-related and technical
subjects.
e ii) German is offered as a subject at universities and other institutions of higher education,
including business schools. Therefore, no special initiatives have been initiated in connection
with the ratification of this provision.
f ii) The Danish Act on Preparatory Adult Education (PAE Act) requires every adult
vocational training centre to teach the core subjects of Danish, mathematics, English, German
or French, social studies and natural science. Every adult vocational training centre is obliged
to offer these subjects at least once a year. Denmark has 72 adult vocational training centres.
g) The provisions must be considered to have been applied, for instance through the teaching
of history and German in the Folkeskole. Under the Folkeskole Act, the education provided
by the nine- year basic school includes, for all pupils, history at 3rd to 8th form levels and social
studies at the 9th form level. Moreover, the school must make the teaching of German
available to its pupils at 7th to 9th form levels. Some of the purposes of teaching history are to
enable the pupils to occupy themselves with historical events and social conditions throughout
the times and to teach the pupils to see Denmark’s history in the context of the history of the
rest of Scandinavia, Europe and the world at large. Denmark’s relations with its neighbouring
country Germany and its history and culture will form a natural part of these classes. The
purpose of teaching Germany is, besides helping the pupils to acquire proficiency in German,
to give the pupils some insight into cultural and social conditions in German-speaking
countries.
h) In the provisions governing the Danish State Education Grant and Loan Scheme, special
conditions have been stipulated for the German minority in Denmark, as the Danish State
Education Grant and Loan Authority may direct that educational grants may be used for
educational programmes in Germany, see section 50 of the Order on State Education Grants
and Loans until Master’s Degrees. In practice, grants are given to training of kindergarten
teachers, teachers (including upper secondary school teachers), ministers of religion (the study
of theology) and librarians. The grant is given for the official period of study, whereas grants
are normally only given for no longer than four years for educational programmes outside
Scandinavia.
i) A working group has been set up among the appropriate government departments and the
German minority, who meet at regular intervals to discuss and evaluate the measures taken
with regard to the provisions of Part III of the Charter that Denmark has agreed to apply,
including measures in the educational field.
The German minority’s Schools and Language Association (Deutscher Schul- und
Sprachverein für Nordschleswig) issues a comprehensive annual report on the education
provided by the minority’s kindergartens, primary and lower secondary schools and the upper
secondary school. As mentioned above, the teaching language in the minority’s primary and
lower secondary schools is German, see section 2(3) of the Danish Act on Private
Independent Schools and Private Independent Basic Schools etc.
2. The Folkeskole provides for the teaching of German at 7th to 9th form levels, see the
comment on paragraph 1, sub-paragraph g above, and pupils in upper secondary schools may
choose German as their advanced or elementary foreign language. German is also offered as a
subject at universities and other institutions of higher education, see the comments on
paragraph 1, sub-paragraph e, ii) above.
12

Article 9 – Judicial authorities
Denmark has specified that the following provisions will apply to German as a minority
language:
1. The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of
residents using the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below,
according to the situation of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the
facilities afforded by the present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the
proper administration of justice:
b in civil proceedings:
iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;
c in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;
2. The Parties undertake:
a) not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because they
are drafted in a regional or minority language; or
b) not to deny the validity, as between the parties, of legal documents drawn up within the
country solely because they are drafted in a regional or minority language, and to provide
that they can be invoked against interested third parties who are not users of these languages
on condition that the contents of the document are made known to them by the person(s) who
invoke(s) it; or
c) not to deny the validity, as between the parties, of legal documents drawn up within the
country solely because they are drafted in a regional or minority language.
The provisions Denmark has specified from among the provisions on judicial authorities set
out in Article 9 of the Minority Languages Charter have been implemented as described
below:
1.
b iii) and c iii) In civil proceedings and in proceedings concerning administrative matters,
documents and evidence may be produced in the regional or minority languages, if necessary
by the use of interpreters and translations. For this purpose, reference is made to Denmark’s
interpretative declaration, according to which Denmark has reserved the right to demand that
documents drafted in a foreign language should be accompanied by a translation. Denmark
has not accepted sub-paragraph d of Article 9, paragraph 1, which means that the persons
availing themselves of the possibility to produce documents and evidence in their regional
languages may be required to pay the cost of trans lators and interpreters.

13

2.
a, b and c) Reference is made to the comments made immediately above and in paragraph 6.2
of Part I of this report.

Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
Denmark has specified that the following provisions will apply to German as a minority
language:
1. Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are
users of regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according
to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
a v) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document in
these languages;
4. With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by
them, the Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
c) compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a
knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that
language is used.
5. The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or
minority languages, at the request of those concerned.
The provisions Denmark has specified on administrative authorities of the state and public
services have been implemented as described below:
1.
a v) The administrative law duty to provide guidance under section 7 of the Danish
Administrative Powers Act (Act No. 571 of 19 December 1985 as amended by Act No. 347 of
6 June 1991) implies that in cases when a person with insufficient command of the Danish
language communicates – in person or in writing – with a public authority on a matter
pending a decision, the authority must, according to circumstances, make the services of an
interpreter or translator available to the person in question as required. The administrative law
duty to provide guidance thus ensures that users of the German minority language may validly
submit documents in German to the state authorities in South Jutland so far as is reasonable
practicable.
Many of the state authorities in South Jutland have employees who have a full command of
German, and it is therefore seldom necessary to arrange for interpretation or translation when
documents in German are submitted to such authorities. The Employment Service of South
Jutland, for example, processes all documents submitted in German with the assistance of its
own employees, and oral inquiries in German are also answered in German. Similarly, the
customs and tax regions of South Jutland have employees who are fluent in German and
capable of handling the cases on the basis of documents submitted in German. When
recruiting both clerical and legal employees, the Government Office of Sønderjylland County
attaches importance to the job applicants’ knowledge of German to facilitate the submission
of documents in German without translation. Moreover, the Government Office has stated
14

that persons contacting the authority in German will usually receive a reply in German. The
Health Inspection Authority of Sønderjylland County has bilingual employees, who help
translate documents in German whenever their services are needed.
4.
c) The state authorities in South Jutland comply, to the widest possible extent, with the
requests of employees having a knowledge of German to be appointed in the territory where
the German language is used. This is one of the areas where steps are taken to ensure that the
German minority has the possibility of being served by the state authorities in South Jutland
in German.
5. Danish authorities recognise the names, including the letters ü, ö and ä, of the German
minority in all relations.
More specific rules on names are set out in the Danish Personal Names Act.
A family name is assumed on birth or adoption on the basis of marriage. In addition, a family
name may be assumed or changed through notification to the church register (in South Jutland
the names register) or through the issue of a certificate of name.
Section 2 of the Names Act lists the cases when a family name may be changed through
notification. It is thus possible to change a family name to a family name the person in
question has previously borne unless the name was assumed on marriage. Notifications are
free of charge.
Under section 6 of the Names Act, a certificate of name may be issued to a new family name
unless the family name falls within one of the categories of names listed in the provision.
Basically, a foreign name commonly known in Denmark is therefore – like a Danish name –
not allowed as a new family name. By a foreign name commonly known in Denmark is
understood names such as Churchill and Monet.
Under section 8 of the Names Act, regardless of section 6, a certificate of name may be issued
in a number of cases where the applicant has a special connection to a family name. For
instance, a certificate of name may be issued to a name that is or used to be borne by one of
the applicants’ parents, grandparents or great-grandparents unless the name was assumed on
marriage. A certificate of name costs DKK 3,000.
It is not allowed to choose a first name that is not a proper first name or which may
inconvenience the child, see section 10(1) of the Names Act. The Ministry of Ecclesiastical
Affairs has distributed a list of recognised names. In practice, German names are recognised
although these are not included in the list.

Article 11 – Media
Denmark has specified that the following provisions on media will apply to German as a
minority language:
1. The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the
territories in which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language,
to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or
15

play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the
media:
b i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one radio station in the regional or
minority languages;
b ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;
c i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one television channel in the
regional or minority languages;
c ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the regional
or minority languages on a regular basis;
d) to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in the regional or minority languages;
e i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one newspaper
in the regional or minority languages;
f ii) to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions in the
regional or minority languages;
g) to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using regional or minority
languages.
2. The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a
regional or minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure
that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of
information in the written press in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional
or minority language. The exercise of the above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it
duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or
penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests
of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or
crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of
others, for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the
authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
The provisions Denmark has specified from among the provisions on media set out in Article
11 of the Minority Languages Charter have been implemented as described below:
1.
Sub-paragraphs b i) and ii), c i) and ii) and d
The Radio and Television Broadcasting Act opens up opportunities for companies,
associations and similar bodies to obtain licences to run their own radio or television stations.
Local boards, which must be widely represented by local associations in the area, issue
broadcasting licences. Basically, at least one transmission facility is at the disposal of each
16

local authority. To offer as varied a media picture as possible, it is standard practice for
licence holders to share transmission facilities.
Furthermore, everyone who is not licensed to provide local programme services may obtain a
licence to run a radio or television station by way of satellite or cable transmission systems.
The Danish Ministry of Cultural Affairs contributes a total annual grant of DKK 50 million
(2002) for non-commercial local radio and television broadcasting all over the country.
The Act thus opens up an opportunity for the German minority in South Jutland – on an equal
footing with Danish companies, associations and others – to broadcast local radio and
television programmes in their own language.
The Danish Broadcasting Corporation (DR) and TV2 – including regional radio and television
stations – are public service bodies. This implies that they are obliged to serve the entire
population and place requisite emphasis on freedom of information and expression.
Programmes are required to embrace the dissemination of news, information, entertainment
and culture and, under sections 7 and 18 of the Act, must strive towards quality, plurality and
diversity.
In South Jutland, DR runs "Radio Syd" and TV2 runs "TV Syd". The German minority is
represented on both Radio Syd’s County Programming Council and on TV Syd’s Council.
For the sake of completion, it should also be mentioned that there is a wide selection of
German radio and television stations whose programmes are received in South Jutland.
e i) The Danish Act on Financial Support to the Financial Institution of the Daily Press (Act
No. 192 of 9 May 1984 as amended by Act No. 1113 of 29 December 1997) has opened up
opportunities for financial assistance to daily newspapers. The scheme is administered by the
Financial Institution of the Daily Press, the overriding objective of which is to secure a larger
and more varied supply of newspapers than market conditions would normally generate
because it is recognised that the newspapers are of special importance to society, democracy
and freedom of expression. Financial assistance can be used for the construction, rebuilding,
enlargement, etc. of facilities for production of newspapers and distribution, product
development and other purposes and for financial restructuring and development aid. “Der
Nordschleswiger”, which is the German minority’s daily paper in South Jutland, has received
funding to the tune of DKK 1 million since the foundation of the Financial Institution of the
Daily Press. The institution provides financial assistance after a concrete assessment of the
daily papers’ needs.
In the final report from 1997, entitled ”Information til tiden” (“Information on time”), a
committee set up under the Danish Ministry of Research recommends that the public sector
chooses the media from a balanced point of view and with care. It states that the public
sector’s choice of media should exclusively be based on professional criteria for how to reach
the target group in the optimum way within the given financial framework. This means, for
instance, that due consideration must be given to citizens who do not use the significant,
nationwide media.
Furthermore, Part II, paragraph 7, of the Copenhagen Declaration referred to below, lays
down that public orders should give reasonable consideration to the German minority’s daily
papers.
17

f ii) Reference is made to the above comments on sub-paragraphs b and c. It should be noted
that financial assistance to local radio and television media is not calculated by giving special
consideration to the additional costs involved in broadcasting productions in regional or
minority languages, see sub-paragraph f i).
g) As mentioned under sub-paragraph h of Article 8(1), students belonging to the German
minority in Denmark are eligible, under section 50 of the Order on State Education Grants
and Loans and as directed by the Authority, to obtain educational grants for educational
programmes in Germany. Students from the German minority in Denmark who want to enrol
in a programme of journalism or media training with a view to using the German language
may thus obtain educational grants throughout the period of study – even if the period exceeds
four years.
2) As mentioned above, the German minority in South Jutland can receive a wide selection of
German radio and television stations.
It should further be noted that any person belonging to the German minority is covered by
section 77 of the Danish Cons titution with regard to freedom of expression. Freedom of
expression implies that “any person shall be at liberty to publish his ideas in print, in writing,
and in speech subject to his being held responsible in a court of law”.
Section 77 of the Constitution prohibits advance censorship but is no bar to subsequent
intervention against expressions that are contrary to substantive rules, including the Criminal
Code. The fact that it is a national minority communicating or that communication is in a
minority language can never form the basis of intervention under Danish law.
It also appears from the Copenhagen Declaration of 1955 that the Danish Government
recommends that the German minority be duly taken into consideration within the framework
of the rules in force from time to time on the use of radio.

Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Denmark has specified that the following provisions in the field of culture will apply to
German as a minority language:
1. With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural
centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film
production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries,
including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have
power or play a role in this field:
a) to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority languages
and foster the different means of access to works produced in these languages;
b) to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in regional or
minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and
subtitling activities;
d) to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of
various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of
18

regional or minority languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for
which they provide backing;
e) to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting
cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of the regional or
minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest of the population;
f) to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or
minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;
g) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for collecting,
keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the regional or minority
languages;
2) In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are
traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority
language justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and
facilities in accordance with the preceding paragraph.
3) The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy
abroad, for regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.
The provisions Denmark has specified from among the provisions on cultural activities set out
in Article 12 of the Minority Languages Charter have been implemented as described below:
1.
The German minority is a very active participant in cultural life in South Jutland. Not least
through various associations does the minority ensure its members access to a broad spectrum
of cultural activities, practically all of which are in German. The minority’s cultural
associations are organised in the main organisation, “Bund deutscher Nordschleswiger”,
which aims to maintain and strengthen the spiritual and cultural ties to the German people.
The minority’s numerous cultural associations include, among others, “Deutscher
Jugendverband für Nordschleswig”, which is the main organisation for the minority’s sports
associations and youth clubs with a total membership of 2500. The objective of the
organisation is to organise sports and culture festivals, journeys and youth camps in a
German-language setting.
“Verband deutscher Büchereien” handles, among other activities, the operation of five
libraries in the towns of South Jutland, assisting the minority’s schools in running their
libraries. The association organises book and art exhibitions, public readings by Germanlanguage writers and literary discussions. The organisation has about 150,000 mainly German
books and periodicals at its disposal.
“Sozialdienst Nordschleswig” is an association of various local social associations. Its
primary functions are social counselling, old-age care services, family counselling, provision
of health resort accommodation, travel services for retirees as well as courses and leisure
events for families, children and young people.

19

“Nordschleswigsche Musikvereinigung” secures the ties to German music life by organising
one or two annual performances of major choral pieces with the symphony orchestra of
Schleswig Holstein.
a) The Danish Ministry of Cultural Affairs grants a special amount of DKK 50,000 per year
from the football pools to the German minority’s cultural activities. Moreover, under section
17(1) of the Libraries Act, the ministry contributes a special annual grant of about DKK 2.5
million to the German minority’s libraries in South Jutland. In addition, Sønderjylland Count y
provides an annual grant of DKK 398,688 (2000) to the Germany central library in Aabenraa,
and most of the local authorities in the county also make funding available to the German
library service in South Jutland. This combined funding amounted to DKK 344,104 in 2000.
b) The provision is considered to have been applied in the sense that a considerable number of
works are generally translated etc. from German into Danish. This is for instance done in
connection with the broadcasting of German- language programmes on DR and TV 2.
d) The provision is considered to have been applied in the sense that the German minority
participates in the ordinary cultural activities etc. in the region.
e) The bodies in South Jutland responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities will
generally have persons at their disposal who have a full command of both Danish and
German, and no special initiatives have therefore been taken in connection with the
ratification of this provision.
f) The provision has been applied as the German minority is usually requested to participate
in the cultural activities of the region.
g) The provision is considered to have been applied through the activities undertaken today by
the German library service, including the central library in Aabenraa, and the Danish public
libraries, including the Regional Library of Aabenraa, see the comments on sub-paragraph a
above in respect of the funding of the German library service in South Jutland.
2. The provision is found to be of no rele vance in relation to the German minority since
German is exclusively spoken by the German minority in South Jutland.
The German minority is allowed and able to initiate cultural activities in all parts of Denmark.
The minority’s musical society, “Nordschleswigsche Musikvereinigung”, has thus organised
concerts in Copenhagen, Ribe and Viborg.
Allowance is made for the minority’s culture in other ways, for instance via the possibility of
borrowing German- language literature at Danish libraries, also outside South Jutland.
3. Denmark will mainly be able to fulfil this provision through the Ministry of Cultural
Affairs’ and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs’ exchange activities with other countries, which
are handled through the Danish Secretariat for Interna tional Cultural Relations and which will
make appropriate provision for the German minority’s language and culture. No concrete
activities were carried out in 2001, but the Danish Secretariat for International Cultural
Relations and the German minority have agreed to discuss the possibilities in more detail.

20

Article 13 – Economic and social life
Denmark has specified that the following provisions on economic and social life will apply to
German as a minority language:
1. With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole
country:
a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without justifiable
reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to economic or
social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in agro-technical documents such as
instructions for the use of products or installations;
c) to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority languages in
connection with economic or social activities;
d) to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by means other
than those specified in the above sub-paragraphs.
2. With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the public
authorities are competent, within the territory in which the regional or minority languages
are used, and as far as this is reasonably possible:
c) to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and hostels offer
the possibility of receiving and treating in their own language persons using a regional or
minority language who are in need of care on grounds of ill-health, old age or for other
reasons;
The provisions Denmark has specified from among the provisions on econo mic and social life
set out in Article 13 of the Minority Languages Charter have been implemented as described
below:
1.
a) The Danish Act on the Employer’s Duty to Inform the Employee of the Terms of
Employment (see Consolidating Act No. 385 of 11 May 1994) does not specify the language
in which the contract of employment should be written. The most common language of a
contract of employment is Danish, but there is no provision prohibiting a contract of
employment in German.
Furthermore, Danish legislation contains no provisions contravening Article 13(1), subparagraph a. In the experience of the Danish Ministry of Economic and Business Affairs,
manufacturers and users have a common interest in ensuring that information in instructions
for the use of products or installations are written in a language the user understands. The
requirement in certain cases that such information should be available in Danish does in no
way prevent the manufacturer from providing the information in German, as well.
c) The provision is considered to have been implemented in compliance with the Copenhagen
Declaration of 1955 and in relation to the measures described elsewhere in this report, in
particular the measures set out in Articles 9, 10, 11 and 12.
There are no Danish laws or regulations that contravene the provision.
21

d) Considerable government subsidies are made available to the German minority’s
associations, sports clubs, etc., contributing to encouraging the use of the minority language.
The German minority thus receives financial assistance from the Danish State and the local
authorities for its organisations, including the agricultural organisation Landwirtschaftlicher
Hauptverein für Nordschleswig, which advises the minority’s farmers on technical and
financ ial matters.

2.
c) The hospitals in Sønderjylland County receive and treat, according to circumstances, the
members of the German minority in German. The county has stated that it will in most cases
be possible to find persons who understand and speak German, including physicians who
have grown up and studied in Germany.
With regard to local government retirement homes and home-help services provided in
people’s own homes, the Association of Local Authorities in South Jutland has reported that
most of the local authorities have not adopted special regulations on these matters. It is natural
for the parties to communicate without difficulty, either because the user from the minority
understands Danish, or because the local government official speaks Germa n. It must
therefore be assumed that the Danish care and nursing staff serving the citizens from the
German minority are fully capable of communicating with these citizens in Danish or, if
required, in German.
Some of the local authorities are also engaged in cooperation with the organisation
“Sozialdienst Nordschleswig”, which assists in providing certain care and nursing tasks.
Sozialdienst Nordschleswig, which is the minority’s social organisation, has for some years
received financial assistance for social activities from, among other sources, the Ministry of
Social Affairs’ Grant Programme for Special Social Purposes. For 2001/02, the ministry has
thus allocated a total of DKK 90,000 from the Grant Programme for Development of
Voluntary Social Work and from the football pools and Lotto funds to projects like “Haus
Quickborn”, which is the setting for a substantial part of the activities undertaken by
Sozialdienst Nordschleswig. These activities include recreational stays, holidays and courses
in the house.

Article 14 – Transfrontier exchanges
Denmark has specified that the following provisions from among the provisions on
transfrontier exchanges set out in Article 14 of the Minority Languages Charter will apply to
German as a minority language:
The Parties undertake:
a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the States in
which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if necessary to seek to
conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster contacts between the users of the same
language in the States concerned in the fields of culture, education, information, vocational
training and permanent education;
22

b) for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or promote co-operation
across borders, in particular between regional or local authorities in whose territory the
same language is used in identical or similar form.
The provisions Denmark has specified from among the provisions on transfrontier exchanges
set out in Article 14 of the Minority Languages Charter have been implemented as described
below:
a) The provision has been applied through the practical application of the Copenhagen-Bonn
Declaration of 1955 and the European Council Framework Convention for the Protection of
National Minorities, which is in force between Denmark and Germany. Denmark and
Germany have also signed a bilateral cultural agreement of 18 June 1974, under which a
number of scholarships are granted annually to Danish and German students etc. enrolled in
educational programmes in Germany and Denmark, respectively.
b) Both Denmark and Germany are States Parties to the European Outline Convention on
Transfrontier Co-operation between Territorial Communities or Authorities of 21 May 1980.
Moreover, reference can be made to the German minority’s participation in the cooperation in
Region South Jutland-Schleswig, which was set up as a transfrontier cooperation body in
1997. Region South Jutland-Schleswig comprises Sønderjylland County on the Danish side
and Stadt Flensburg, Kreis Schleswig-Flensburg and Kreis Nordfriesland on the German side.
The German minority is directly represented in the regional council, appointed by the South
Jutland County Council.

23

APPENDICES1
Appendix 1: Pamphlet issued by the Danish Ministry of Foreign Affairs on 40 years of
cooperation in the borderland.
Appendix 2: The Constitutional Act of the Kingdom of Denmark of 5 June 1953.
Appendix 3: Pamphlet issued by the Danish Ministry of Foreign Affairs on the European
Charter for Regional or Minority Languages.

1

The appendices are available for consultation at the Secretariat of the European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages

24

