NB: UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION
©Ministry of Transport and Communications of Finland

$FW RQ <OHLVUDGLR 2\

(Finnish Broadcasting Company)
(1380/1993; amendments up to 635/2005 included)
__________
Chapter 1
*HQHUDO SURYLVLRQV
Section 1 (492/2002)
6WDWXV RI WKH FRPSDQ\
Yleisradio Oy shall be a limited company operating in the administrative
sector of the Ministry of Transport and Communications and engaged in
public service in accordance with section 7. The company may also engage
in other activities in accordance with its articles of association.
The right of the company to operate television and radio broadcasting shall
be governed by separate provisions. The technical equipment required for its
activities shall be governed by the provisions of the Radio Act (1015/2001)
and the Communications Market Act (396/1997).
The provisions of the Companies Act (734/1978) shall be applied to the
company with exceptions provided for in this Act.
Section 2
2ZQHUVKLS RI WKH FRPSDQ\
The State shall own and control the share capital of the company to an
extent which corresponds to at least 70 per cent of all the shares in the
company and of the votes generated by all the shares in the company.
Section 3 (492/2002)
2SHUDWLQJ UHTXLUHPHQWV RI WKH FRPSDQ\
In developing other television and radio broadcasting activities including the
related additional and extra services, the Ministry of Transport and
Communications shall take into account the operating requirements of public
service referred to in section 7.

Chapter 2
$GPLQLVWUDWLRQ

2
Section 4
$GPLQLVWUDWLYH RUJDQV
The administrative organs of the company shall consist of an Administrative
Council, a Board of Directors, and a Director General acting as Managing
Director.
Section 5 (37/2000)
$GPLQLVWUDWLYH &RXQFLO
The company shall have an Administrative Council which shall have 21
members.
The members of the Administrative Council shall be elected by Parliament in
its first session of the parliamentary term. Their term of office shall begin as
soon as the election has been completed, and it shall continue until the
election of the new members of the Administrative Council. The members of
the Administrative Council shall include representatives from the fields of
science, art, education, business and economics, as well as representatives
of different social and language groups.
The members of the Administrative Council shall elect a chairman and a vice
chairman from among themselves.
6XEVHFWLRQ  KDV EHHQ UHSHDOHG E\ $FW 

Section 6 (635/2005)
'XWLHV RI WKH $GPLQLVWUDWLYH &RXQFLO
The duties of the Administrative Council shall be:
1) to elect and dismiss the company’s Board of Directors and its Chairman
and to determine the compensation for Board Members;
2) to decide on issues concerning considerable restriction or expansion of
the activities or significant changes in the organization of the company;
3) to oversee and supervise that tasks involving public service programme
activities are carried out;
4) to submit every second year to Parliament a report on the implementation
of the public service in the past two years after having heard the Sami
Parliament;
5) to decide on the economical and operational guidelines;
6) to review and approve the annual report of the Board of Directors;
7) to supervise the administration of the company and issue a statement on
the financial statement and the auditors’ report to the Ordinary General
Meeting of the shareholders.
The Administrative Council shall also discuss other matters referred to it by
the Board of Directors.

3
The Chairman shall summon the Administrative Council, if a written request
by at least one third of its members to deal with a referred issue has been
submitted. A notice of meeting shall be issued within one month of the
request.
Section 6 a (635/2005)
%RDUG RI 'LUHFWRUV
The company shall have a Board of Directors with at least five and at the
most eight members who shall not be members of the Administrative Council
or the company’s senior management.
The Board of Directors shall represent sufficient expertise and both language
groups.
The duties of the Board of Directors shall be:
1) to elect and dismiss the company’s Director General and to confirm his or
her salary and other terms concerning the office; the Director General shall
not be a member of the Administrative Council or the Board of Directors;
2) to elect other members of the company’s senior management and confirm
their salaries and other terms concerning their office;
3) to decide the budget for the following year;
4) to summon the Ordinary General Meeting and prepare the items of the
agenda;
5) to submit an annual report of the company’s operations to the Finnish
Communications Regulatory Authority.

Chapter 3
7KH GXWLHV RI WKH FRPSDQ\
Section 7 (635/2005)
3XEOLF VHUYLFH
The company shall be responsible for the provision of comprehensive
television and radio programming with the related additional and extra
services for all citizens under equal conditions. These and other content
services related to public service may be provided in all telecommunications
networks.
The public service programming shall in particular:
1) support democracy and everyone’s opportunity to participate by providing
a wide variety of information, opinions and debates as well as opportunities
to interact;

4
2) produce, create and develop Finnish culture, art and inspiring
entertainment;
3) take educational and equality aspects into consideration in the
programmes, provide an opportunity to learn and study, give focus on
programming for children, and offer devotional programmes;
4) treat in its broadcasting Finnish-speaking and Swedish-speaking citizens
on equal grounds and produce services in the Sami, Romany, and sign
languages as well as, where applicable, in the languages of other language
groups in the country;
5); support tolerance and multiculturalism and provide programming for
minority and special groups;
6) promote cultural interaction and provide programming directed abroad;
and
7) broadcast official announcements, for which further provisions shall be
issued by decree, and make provision for television and radio broadcasting
in exceptional circumstances

Section 7 a (396/2003)
'LIIHUHQWLDWLRQ RI PDWHULDO SURYLVLRQ
If the company provides material, which has been created in the production
of television and radio programming, elsewhere than in television and radio
operations, it shall differentiate between the public service television and
radio broadcasting and other public service operations.
For the purposes of this section, differentiation means that for each financial
period a profit and loss statement shall be issued on the differentiated
operations as well as a balance sheet on public service operations. A profit
and loss statement and a balance sheet that both must be traceable to
company accounts shall be drawn up, where appropriate, in accordance with
provisions of the Accounting Act (1336/1997).
If the company takes into its own use material produced in public service
television and radio operations in order to provide it elsewhere than in
television and radio operations, the same terms shall be applied as when the
company releases material to be used outside the company.
Compliance with subsections 1 – 3 shall be monitored by the Finnish
Communications Regulatory Authority. On request of the Communications
Regulatory Authority the company shall deliver its financial statements and
the profit and loss statements and balance sheets of the differentiated
operations.
Section 8 (396/2003)
2WKHU GXWLHV
The annual general meeting may decide to amend the articles of association
in such a manner that the company can engage in other activities than public
service provided in accordance with section 7. In accounting, these activities
shall be kept separate from public service operations.

5

Section 8 a (396/2003)
'LIIHUHQWLDWLRQ RI QHWZRUN VHUYLFH
If the company provides network service as referred to in section 2 of the
Communications Market Act (393/2003), it shall for accounting purposes
differentiate between the operations related to network service provision and
other operations.
Compliance with this section shall be monitored by the Finnish
Communications Regulatory Authority. On request of the Communications
Regulatory Authority the company shall deliver financial statements and the
profit and loss statements and balance sheets of the differentiated
operations.
Chapter 4
&KDSWHU  KDV EHHQ UHSHDOHG E\ $FW 

Chapter 5
0LVFHOODQHRXV SURYLVLRQV
Section 12 (492/2002)
3URKLELWLRQ RQ DGYHUWLVLQJ
The company shall not broadcast advertising in connection with its television
or radio programmes or other content services that are provided within the
framework of public service in various telecommunications networks.
The company shall not produce sponsored programmes.
Section 12 a (396/2003)
5HSRUW WR WKH )LQQLVK &RPPXQLFDWLRQV 5HJXODWRU\ $XWKRULW\
By the end of April every year Yleisradio Oy shall submit a report to the
Finnish Communications Regulatory Authority on the public service provided
during the previous calendar year. The report shall include the information
needed in the supervision of television and radio broadcasting by the
Communications Regulatory Authority. The Communications Regulatory
Authority shall issue a statement to Government about the report by the end
of September.
Chapter 6
(QWU\ LQWR IRUFH
Section 13
(QWU\ LQWR IRUFH

6
This Act enters into force on 1 January 1994.
Measures necessary for the implementation of this Act may be undertaken
before the Act’s entry into force.
Section 14
5HSHDOHG SURYLVLRQV
This Act shall repeal the following:
1) the Act on the right of the Government to Transfer to a Limited Company
State Property Acquired for the Purpose of Public Broadcasting (216/34),
given on 18 May 1934, as amended, and
2) subsection 1 of section 6 of the Telecommunications Act given on 20
February 1987.
Section 15
7UDQVLWLRQDO SURYLVLRQ
The operating licence for broadcasting issued by the Government to
Yleisradio Oy shall expire on the entry into force of this Act. The
Administrative Council elected for Yleisradio Oy on 16 April 1991 shall
continue in office after the entry into force of this Act as an Administrative
Council in the meaning of this Act until the close of its present term of office.
Decisions concerning the transition period shall be made by the
Administrative Council as regards the management appointed for the fiveyear term beginning on 1 January 1990. The transition period shall close by
the end of the year 1994.
_______________
Application and entry into force of amending provisions:
340/1995:
This Act enters into force on 20 March 1995.

746/1998:
This Act enters into force on 1 January 1999
Measures necessary for the implementation of this Act may be undertaken
before the Act’s entry into force.

37/2000:
This Act enters into force on 1 March 2000.

7
492/2002:
This Act enters into force on 1 July 2002.
Measures necessary for the implementation of this Act may be undertaken
before the Act’s entry into force.

396/2003:
This Act enters into force on 25 July 2003.
Measures necessary for the implementation of this Act may be undertaken
before the Act’s entry into force.
635/2005:
This Act enters into force on 1 January 2006.
Section 6(1)(4) of this Act shall be applied for the first time to the report
covering 2005 and 2006.
Measures necessary for the implementation of this Act may be undertaken
before the Act’s entry into force.

