NB: Unofficial translation
Ministry of Social Affairs and Health, Finland

Child Welfare Act
(417/2007; amendments up to 1390/2007 included)

Chapter 1 – General provisions
Section 1 – Objective
The objective of this Act is to protect children’s rights to a safe growth environment,
to balanced and well-rounded development and to special protection.
Section 2 – Responsibility for a child’s wellbeing
(1)

(2)

(3)

The primary responsibility for a child’s wellbeing rests with the child’s parents and
other custodians. The child’s parents and custodians must safeguard the child’s
balanced development and wellbeing in the manner laid down in the Child Custody
and Right of Access Act (361/1983).
The public authorities that work with children and families must support parents and
custodians in their child upbringing and must endeavour to provide families with the
necessary assistance at a sufficiently early stage, and must refer the child and the
family to the child welfare services where necessary.
Child welfare must provide parents, custodians and other persons responsible for
child care and upbringing with support in child care and upbringing by arranging the
necessary services and support measures. Under the conditions laid down below in
this Act, a child may be placed away from home or other measures taken to arrange
care for and custody of the child.

Section 3 – Child welfare
(1)

(2)

(3)

Child welfare provision is child-specific and family-specific. The municipalities also
provide preventive child welfare as referred to in chapter 2, with the aim of promoting
the wellbeing of children and young people.
Child-specific and family-specific child welfare consists of an investigation of the
need for child welfare measures, the provision of support in open care, emergency
placement of the child and taking the child into care, as well as substitute care and
after-care related to these.
Preventive child welfare is used to promote and safeguard the growth, development
and wellbeing of children and to support parenting. If the child or family in question is
not a child welfare client, preventive child welfare may also include special support
given in other municipal service provision, such as in prenatal and child health clinics,
other health-care services, day care, education and youth work.

Section 4 – Main principles of child welfare

2
(1)

(2)

Child welfare must promote the favourable development and wellbeing of the child.
Child welfare must provide support in child upbringing and care for parents,
custodians and other persons responsible for child care and upbringing. Child welfare
must be aimed at preventing child and family problems and intervening sufficiently
early if problems are found. When assessing the need for child welfare and in the
provision of child welfare, it is first and foremost the interests of the child that must be
taken into account.
When assessing the interests of the child, consideration must be given to the extent
to which the alternative measures and solutions safeguard the following for the child:
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
6)
7)

(3)

balanced development and wellbeing, and close and continuing human
relationships;
the opportunity to be given understanding and affection, as well as supervision
and care that accord with the child’s age and level of development;
an education consistent with the child’s abilities and wishes;
a safe environment in which to grow up, and physical and emotional freedom;
a sense of responsibility in becoming independent and growing up;
the opportunity to become involved in matters affecting the child and to
influence them; and
the need to take account of the child’s linguistic, cultural and religious
background.

In child welfare, action must be taken with as much sensitivity as possible, and
assistance in open care must be given precedence, unless the interests of the child
demand otherwise. If substitute care is needed in view of the interests of the child,
this must be arranged without delay. When providing substitute care, the aim of
reuniting the family must be taken into account in a manner that accords with the
child’s interests.

Section 5 – Views and wishes of the child or young person
The children’s right to obtain information in a child welfare case affecting them, and
the opportunity for them to present a view on the case, must be safeguarded for the
child in a manner in keeping with their age and level of development. When
assessing that of the need for child welfare, a decision concerning a child or young
person or the provision of child welfare, must pay special attention to the views and
wishes of the child or young person.
Section 6 – Children and young people
In this Act, anyone under 18 years of age is considered to be a child and anyone 18-20
years of age a young person.

Chapter 2 – Promoting the wellbeing of children and young people
Section 7 – Monitoring and promoting the wellbeing of children and young people
(1)

The municipal bodies responsible for social services must work together with the
municipalities’ other authorities to monitor and promote the wellbeing of children and

3

(2)

young people, and must eliminate, and prevent the emergence of, disadvantageous
factors concerning the circumstances in which they are brought up.
The municipal bodies responsible for social services must provide information on the
circumstances in which children and young people are being brought up and on any
social problems arising, and must provide expert assistance for other public
authorities and for residents of, and organizations operating within, the municipality.

Section 8 – Developing services to support upbringing
(1)

(2)

When arranging and developing social and health-care services, education services
and other services intended for children, young people and families with children, the
municipalities must ensure that these services provide support in child upbringing for
parents, custodians and other persons responsible for child care and upbringing, and
that the special support needs of children, young people and families with children
are investigated. Where necessary, the municipalities must arrange activities to
assist children and young people in need of special support.
When services are being arranged and developed, special consideration must be
given to the needs and wishes of children and young people.

Section 9 – Support for schooling
(1)

(2)

The municipalities must see that schools are provided with psychologist and social
worker services that give sufficient support and guidance concerning schooling for
pupils receiving pre-primary, basic and voluntary additional basic education and
preparatory instruction within the municipality under the Basic Education Act
(628/1998), and with the aim of preventing and eliminating social and psychological
difficulties affecting the development of these pupils. These services must also
further the development of cooperation between the school and the home.
The education providers referred to in sections 7 and 8 of the Basic Education Act
are responsible for providing their pupils with the services referred to in subsection 1
above.

Section 10 – Taking children into consideration in services for adults
(1)

(2)

Where an adult is being provided with social and health-care services, particularly
substance abuse and mental health services, and where the adult’s capacity to give
their fullest attention to the child’s care and upbringing is deemed to have
deteriorated as a consequence, or if the adult is condemned in prison, the need for
care and support of a child who is in the care of and being brought up by the adult
must be investigated and the care and support safeguarded.
Where necessary, the social and health-care authorities must arrange essential
services for the special protection of pregnant women and unborn children.

Chapter 3 – Arranging child welfare
Section 11 – Arranging and developing child welfare services
(1)

The municipalities must ensure that preventive child welfare and child-specific and
family-specific child welfare are arranged in such a way that the content and extent of
such services accord with the need prevailing within the municipality. Child-specific

4

(2)
(3)

Child welfare must be of such a nature that it guarantees the assistance and support
needed by those children, young people and their families who require such services.
In each municipality, the functions involved in child welfare provision are the
responsibility of the body referred to in section 6(1) of the Social Welfare Act
(710/1982) (municipal body responsible for social services). When arranging child
welfare, the municipal body responsible for social services must cooperate as
necessary with the municipality’s various administrative bodies, other public
authorities, other municipalities, joint municipal boards and other service-providing
organizations and institutions, with the aim of arranging services that are sufficient
and meet the need and of safeguarding expertise within the municipality.

Section 12 – Plan for arranging and developing child welfare services
(1)

(2)

Each municipality, or two or more municipalities together, must draw up a plan, which
will be subject to approval by the council of each of the municipalities involved and
will be reviewed at least once every four years, concerning the actions to promote the
wellbeing of children and young people and to arrange and develop child welfare
services. The plan must be taken into account in the drawing up of the budget and
financial plan referred to in section 65 of the Local Government Act (365/1995).
The plan must include information on the following for the plan period:
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
6)

7)

the circumstances in which children and young people are being brought up,
and the state of their wellbeing;
activities and services for promoting the wellbeing of children and young people
and for problem prevention;
the need for child welfare within the municipality;
the resources reserved for child welfare;
the child welfare services system available for fulfilling the duties laid down in
the Child Welfare Act;
the arrangements for cooperation between the different public authorities and
the organizations and institutions producing services for children and young
people; and
how the plan is to be put into effect and monitored.

Section 13 – Municipal officeholders who decide on child welfare measures
(1)

In cases concerning taking into care or substitute care under section 43(1) of this Act
or termination of the period in which a child is in care under section 47, or the start
and continuation of special care referred to in section 72(2), the decision-making
power is exercised by the municipal officeholder who has been appointed to direct
social services as determined under the municipality’s regulations and who satisfies
the qualification requirements under section 10(1) of the Act on Qualification
Requirements for Social Welfare Professionals (272/2005). The municipal
officeholder directing social services may designate another municipal officeholder to
exercise decision-making power as well, and this officeholder must satisfy the
qualification requirements under section 10(1), 10(2) or 3 of the same Act. This
person must be someone other than the social worker responsible for the child’s
affairs referred to in subsection 3 below. The municipal officeholder directing social
welfare services or the municipal officeholder designated by the officeholder directing
social welfare services may also decide whether to submit an application for an

5

(2)

(3)

examination to be made of a child referred to in section 28 or for taking a child into
care, and for the related substitute care, as referred to in section 43(2).
In cases concerning emergency placement and concerning the restricting of contact
in emergency situations referred to in section 63(2), the decision-making power
under sections 38 and 39 will be exercised by a municipal officeholder who is
professionally qualified as a social worker under section 3 of the Act on Qualification
Requirements for Social Welfare Professionals and has been appointed by the
municipal body responsible for social services.
A social worker must be appointed to be in charge of the affairs of a child who has
become a child welfare client (social worker responsible for the child’s affairs). The
social worker responsible for the child’s affairs must be professionally qualified as a
social worker in accordance with section 3 of the Act on Qualification Requirements
for Social Welfare Professionals.

Section 14 – Safeguarding multiprofessional expertise
(1)

(2)

The municipalities must ensure that social workers responsible for a child’s affairs
have at their disposal expertise in child growth, development and health care, and
legal and other expertise necessary in child welfare work.
Each municipality, or two or more municipalities together, must set up a team of child
welfare experts consisting of social and health-care representatives, child growth and
development experts and other experts needed in child welfare work. The team of
child welfare experts will assist social workers in preparations for taking a child into
care and for substitute care, and in other aspects of child welfare provision. The team
of experts will also issue opinions where necessary for decision-making on child
welfare measures.

Section 15 – Special health-care obligations
Health centres and hospital districts must provide expert assistance in child-specific
and family-specific child welfare and, where necessary, arrange an examination of
the child and health-care and therapy services for the child. Services needed by
children in connection with the investigation of suspected sexual abuse or assault
must be arranged such that they can be provided urgently.
Section 16 – Municipality responsible for arranging child welfare
(1)

(2)

The provisions of sections 14 and 15(1) of the Social Welfare Act apply to the
obligation of municipalities to arrange child welfare. The provisions of sections 15(2),
42(1) and 42(3) of the same Act also apply to family care and institutional care
arranged under this Act. Notwithstanding the above provisions, the responsibility for
arranging a child’s substitute care and for the costs incurred in this lies with the
municipality in which the need arose for arranging for the child to be taken into care
or for substitute care. The responsibility for arranging after-care referred to in chapter
12 below lies with the municipality that was responsible for arranging substitute care.
The municipality in which a child or young person is placed through assistance in
open care or is placed in substitute care or is in after-care (placement municipality)
must arrange, in cooperation with the municipality responsible under subsection 1 or
section 17 (placing municipality), the services and support measures necessary for
the custody or care of the child or young person. The placement municipality is
entitled to be reimbursed by the placing municipality for the costs incurred in
arranging services and support measures.

6
(3)

Provisions on the obligation of a placement municipality to arrange health-care
services as a supportive measure in open care or health-care services needed by a
child or young person who is placed in substitute care or is in after-care, in a situation
referred to in subsection 2, are laid down in section 14b of the Primary Health Care
Act (66/1972) and in section 30a of the Act on Specialized Medical Care
(1062/1989). Provisions on the reimbursement of costs incurred in health-care
services are laid down in section 24 of the Primary Health Care Act and section 42 of
the Act on Specialized Medical Care. Provisions on the obligation of a placement
municipality to arrange basic education as a supportive measure in open care or for a
child placed in substitute care or a child who is in after-care are laid down in the
Basic Education Act, and provisions on reimbursement for the costs incurred in this
are laid down in section 50 of the Act on the Financing of Education and Culture
(635/1998).

Section 17 – Arranging child welfare in certain special situations
(1)

(2)

(3)

If, by virtue of Council Regulation 2201/2003/EC concerning jurisdiction and the
recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters and in matters of
parental responsibility, re2pealing Regulation 1347/2000/EC, a case concerning the
placement of a child in family care or institutional care has to be decided in Finland
but no municipality is obliged under section 16 to arrange the care or custody in
question, the decision on arranging this shall be made by the municipal authorities of
the child’s most recent permanent or temporary place of residence. If the child has
had no permanent or temporary place of residence in Finland, the decision-making
power shall rest with the authorities of the municipality in which both or one of the
child’s parents are/is residing permanently or temporarily or, if neither parent is
residing permanently or temporarily in Finland, with the authorities of the municipality
in which both or one of the child’s parents were/was last residing permanently or
temporarily. If neither of the parents has resided permanently or temporarily in
Finland, the decision-making power shall rest with the authorities of the City of
Helsinki. If a decision is taken to arrange family care or institutional care for the child
in Finland, the responsibility for arranging this and for the costs incurred shall lie with
the municipality whose authorities decided the case as outlined above.
Arranging child welfare for a child whose parents are or have been, or one of whose
parents is or has been, a Finnish citizen but who, according to investigations by the
Ministry of Social Affairs and Health, have/has no permanent or temporary place of
residence in Finland and who, according to preliminary information obtained by the
Ministry of Social Affairs and Health, can not be deemed to be receiving appropriate
care in the child’s country of domicile or residence, shall be the responsibility of the
municipality determined on the basis of the provisions of subsection 1. Child welfare
may be arranged under this subsection only if the Regulation referred to in
subsection 1 does not provide otherwise.
The municipality concerned may request executive assistance through the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs for conducting an investigation abroad into the need for child
welfare. An investigation may also be conducted abroad by someone who is qualified
under section 33 of the Consular Services Act (498/1999) to perform the duties of a
public notary.

Section 18 – Relationship with other laws

7
The Act on Welfare and Health Care Planning and State Subsidy (733/1992) applies
to the actions taken and activities arranged by municipalities under this Act, unless
otherwise provided by law.
Section 19 – Client fees
Client fees may be collected for child welfare in accordance with the provisions of the Act
on Client Fees in Social Welfare and Health Care (734/1992).

Chapter 4 – Involvement of the child
Section 20 – Ascertaining the child’s views and hearing the child
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

In the provision of child welfare, the child’s wishes and views must be ascertained
and they must be taken into account in a way that is appropriate for the child’s age
and level of development. The child’s views must be established with sensitivity and
in a manner that does not cause unnecessary harm to the relationship between the
child and the child’s parents or others close to the child. The way in which the child’s
views are ascertained and the principal substance of these views must be entered in
the client documents concerning the child.
Children of twelve years of age or more, must be reserved an opportunity to express
their views in a child welfare case concerning them, in accordance with section 34 of
the Administrative Procedure Act (434/2003).
Only in cases where ascertaining the child’s views would endanger the child’s health
or development, or if it is otherwise manifestly unnecessary, may this not be
undertaken.
In connection with ascertaining the views of the child and hearing the child, the child
must not be given any information that would endanger the child’s development or
which is contrary to some other very important private interest of the child.

Section 21 – Exercising a child’s right to be heard
In addition to the child’s custodian or other legal representative, a child who is twelve
years of age or more is entitled to be heard in a child welfare case concerning said
child.
Section 22 – Designating a guardian to deputise for a custodian
(1)

If the following circumstances apply in a child welfare case, the child must be
designated a guardian who may deputise for a custodian in exercising the child’s
right of action:
1)
2)

(2)

there is good cause to assume that the custodian is unable to supervise the
child’s interests in the case without prejudice; and
designation of a guardian is necessary in order to investigate a case or
otherwise to safeguard the interests of the child.

An application for designating a guardian may be submitted by a registry office
functioning as guardianship authority as laid down in the Guardianship Services Act

8

(3)

(442/1999), or by a municipal body responsible for social services, or by the
custodian.
The designation of a guardian may be made by a registry office functioning as
guardianship authority if the custodian and the municipal body responsible for social
services concur with the decision. The guardian shall otherwise be designated by a
court of law. The designation of a guardian is subject to the provisions concerning
designation of a guardian’s deputy laid down in the Guardianship Services Act or in
another act.

Section 23 – Fees and costs of a guardian
The costs incurred in designating a guardian referred to in section 22 above and the
fees and costs of the guardian will be met by the municipality which, under sections
16 and 17, is responsible for arranging child welfare.
Section 24 – Responsibility for safeguarding the interests of the child
(1)

(2)

Social workers responsible for a child’s affairs must oversee compliance with the
interests of the child and must, by right of office, provide assistance for children or
young people in exercising their right to be heard and, where necessary, must direct
the child or young person to seek legal aid or ensure that an application is made for a
child’s guardian in situations referred to in section 22.
The municipal body responsible for social services must be represented in any pretrial investigation of, and court proceedings on, a punishable act alleged to have
been committed by a child, and during the handling by a municipal body responsible
for education of any matter concerning the expulsion from school of a child of
compulsory schooling age, unless the municipal body responsible for social services
deems such presence to be unnecessary. Where necessary, the municipal body
must refer the child to conciliation under the Act on Conciliation in Criminal and
Certain Civil Cases (1015/2005).

Chapter 5 – Becoming a child welfare client
Section 25 – Duty to notify
(1)

(2)

Persons employed by, or in positions of trust for, social and health-care services,
education services, youth services, the police service or a parish or other religious
community, and persons employed by some other social services or health-care
services provider, education or training provider, or unit engaged in asylum-seeker
reception, in emergency centre activities or in morning and evening activities for
schoolchildren, and health-care professionals, have a duty to notify the municipal
body responsible for social services without delay and notwithstanding confidentiality
regulations if, in the course of their work, they discover that there is a child for whom
it is necessary to investigate the need for child welfare on account of the child’s need
for care, circumstances endangering the child’s development, or the child’s
behaviour.
Persons other than those referred to in subsection 1 may also submit such a
notification, notwithstanding any confidentiality regulations that may apply.

9
(3)

(4)
(5)

(6)

Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 1, any separate provisions or
regulations concerning Christian Confirmation or other form of pastoral care will
apply.
The municipal body responsible for social services must keep a register of child
welfare notifications and their content.
If a child moves away from the municipality during the time in which the need for child
welfare under section 27 is being investigated or at a time when the child is otherwise
a child welfare client, the municipal body responsible for social services must, without
delay and notwithstanding confidentiality regulations, notify the child’s new
municipality of domicile about the move. Where necessary, the new municipality of
domicile must also be supplied, without delay, with any documents on the case that
are essential for assessing the need for child welfare or for arranging child welfare
measures. The child’s new municipality of domicile must continue with the
investigation or other child welfare measures.
In addition to the provisions on the right to give information voluntarily to the police as
referred to in section 18(3) of the Act on the Status and Rights of Social Welfare
Clients (812/2000), and notwithstanding confidentiality regulations, the child welfare
authorities must notify the police if there are reasonable grounds to suspect that in
the environment within which a child is being brought up, the child has been the
subject of an action punishable by law under chapter 20 or 21 of the Penal Code
(39/1889), for which the maximum penalty prescribed is at least two years
imprisonment.

Section 26 – Initiation of proceedings in a child welfare case and the start of a client
relationship
(1)

(2)

(3)

Proceedings are initiated in a child welfare case upon application or when a social
worker or other child welfare worker receives a notification under section 25 or
otherwise becomes aware of a child who may be in need of child welfare.
Once proceedings are initiated in a child welfare case, the social worker or other
child welfare worker must assess immediately the child’s possible urgent need for
child welfare. In addition, the social worker must decide no later than seven days
after receipt of the notification or other message, whether, on this basis, to begin
investigating the need for child welfare referred to in section 27, or whether the
notification is clearly of a kind that does not require measures to be taken.
A child welfare client relationship begins when, following the initiation of proceedings
in a child welfare case referred to in subsection 1, child welfare measures are taken
urgently or a decision is taken to investigate the need for child welfare referred to in
section 27. The social worker must make an entry in the child welfare documents to
the effect that a child welfare client relationship has begun, and must notify the
custodian and the child of this, but nevertheless giving due consideration to the
provisions of section 11 of the Act on the Status and Rights of Social Welfare Clients.

Section 27 – Investigating the need for child welfare
(1)

The social worker responsible for the child’s affairs must investigate the child’s
situation. The investigation must include an assessment of the circumstances in
which the child is being brought up, and of the prospects for the custodians or other
persons who are at that time responsible for the child’s care and upbringing to see to
this care and upbringing, and of the need for child welfare measures. The extent of
the investigation will be as required by the circumstances of the case in question. In
conducting the investigation, the social worker may, where necessary, contact

(2)

10
persons who are close to the child as well as various cooperating parties and experts
in the manner laid down in sections 16 and 17 of the Act on the Status and Rights of
Social Welfare Clients.
The investigation must be conducted without undue delay. It must be completed no
more than three months after the initiation of proceedings in the child welfare case.
After completion of the investigation, the custodian and the child must be notified of
the continuation of the child welfare client relationship. Correspondingly, notification
must be given if the client relationship is terminated, taking due account of the
provisions laid down in section 11 of the Act on the Status and Rights of Social
Welfare Clients. The client relationship is terminated if the investigation gives no
cause for pursuing child welfare measures.

Section 28 – Court authorization for examining a child
(1)

(2)

(3)
(4)

Upon application by a municipal officeholder referred to in section 13(1), an
administrative court may authorize an examination of the child by a physician or other
expert if the examination is essential for investigating the need for child welfare but
the custodian forbids an examination. The views of the child must be ascertained
before an application is submitted, unless this is impossible in view of the child’s age,
level of development or other circumstances.
The authorization referred to in subsection 1 above is issued for a fixed period.
Before the authorization is issued, the administrative court must hear the views of the
child’s custodian and of the child if the child is at least twelve years of age. If there is
an extremely pressing reason for doing so, authorization may be issued even where
it has not been possible to hear these views.
When deciding on issuing authorization, the administrative court may stipulate that
an authorized examination may proceed despite any appeal.
For the purpose of ensuring that the administrative court’s authorization decision is
complied with, the relevant provisions of the Act on the Enforcement of Decisions
Concerning Child Custody and Right of Access (619/1996) apply to the obligations
imposed on the custodian.

Chapter 6 – Rules of procedure
Section 29 – Access to the child
(1)

(2)

(3)

When putting child welfare measures into effect, the social worker responsible for the
child’s affairs, or other child welfare worker, must see the child in person sufficiently
often.
When arrangements are being made to see the child in person, the aim must be to
cooperate with the custodian or other person responsible for the child’s care and
upbringing.
The social worker or other child welfare worker is entitled to see the child where
necessary, even without the consent of the custodian, if this is considered to be in
the child’s interests in view of the child’s age or development, or the child’s
circumstances in some other respect. The reasons for seeing the child against the
wishes of the custodian must be entered in the documents concerning the child. The
custodian must be notified of this access to the child, unless this would clearly not be
in the child’s interests.

11
Section 30 – Client plan
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

A client plan must be drawn up for every child who is a child welfare client, unless
the client relationship is terminated after an investigation of the need for child
welfare or the situation is one of temporary advice and guidance.
Unless there is a clear impediment, the client plan must be drawn up and reviewed
in cooperation with the child and custodian, and, where necessary, with the child’s
other legal representative, parent, other person responsible for the child’s care and
upbringing or person close to the child, and any party closely involved with the
child’s care. The client plan will include reference to the particular circumstances
and matters which the plan seeks to address, the child’s and the child’s family’s
support needs, services and other supportive measures with which the support
needs are intended to be met, and the estimated time within which the objectives
are intended to be reached. The client plan must also refer to any dissenting views
of the parties involved concerning the need for support and the arrangement of
services and other support measures. The client plan must be reviewed where
necessary, and at least once a year.
A client plan for a child taken into care will additionally include reference to the
purpose and objectives of substitute care, and the arrangement of special support
and assistance for the child, the child’s parents, custodians and other persons
responsible for the child’s care and upbringing. The plan will also set out how
contact with the child is to be made and how collaboration is to be achieved
between the child’s parents and other persons close to the child, and how at the
same time the objective of reuniting the family is to be taken into account in a
manner that is in the child’s interests. A separate client plan offering parenting
support for the parents of a child taken into care must be drawn up, unless this is
deemed unnecessary. Where necessary, the plan will be drawn up in cooperation
with other social and health-care organizations, such as substance abuse and
mental health services.
A client plan for a child or young person in after-care will include reference to the
purpose and objectives of after-care and the arrangement of special support and
assistance for the child or young person and for the child’s parents, custodians and
other persons responsible for the child’s care and upbringing.
Where necessary, the client plan will be supplemented with a separate care and
upbringing plan.

Section 31 – Negotiations on matters concerning the client
(1)

(2)

Negotiations must be held for the purpose of investigating the need for child welfare
and arranging the provision of child welfare and, where necessary and on the basis
of an assessment by a child welfare worker, these may involve the child, the
parents and custodians, other persons responsible for the child’s care and
upbringing and persons closely involved with the child’s care, other persons close to
the child or family, and official bodies and other cooperating parties.
Information necessary for investigating the child’s need for support and for
arranging the care needed by the child may be given to participants in the
negotiations in the manner laid down in sections 16 and 17 of the Act on the Status
and Rights of Social Welfare Clients and in section 26(3) of the Act on the
Openness of Government Activities (621/1999).

Section 32 – Identifying the network of people close to the child

12
(1)

(2)

(3)

Before a child’s placement away from home, it is necessary to investigate what
opportunities there are for the child to live with the parent with whom the child does
not primarily reside, with the relatives or with other persons close to the child, or for
these parties otherwise to participate in supporting the child. This process may be
omitted if it is not required on account of the urgency of the case or for some other
justified reason. A matter concerning the child’s accommodation or placement
location must always be resolved in a manner consistent with the child’s interests.
The municipal body responsible for social services must take measures to arrange
care of the child by agreement between the parents or by a court decision if this is
deemed appropriate in view of the child’s interests.
A person entrusted with care of the child alongside or in place of the child’s parents
and with whom the child resides, must safeguard the conditions referred to in
sections 4(1) and 4(2) of the Family Carer Act (312/1992) for the child’s care and
upbringing as necessary.

Section 33 – Documentation
(1)

(2)

Child welfare workers must note down all information affecting the arrangement of
the child welfare measures needed by the child or young person in the documents
concerning the child or young person, starting with the initiation of proceedings in the
child welfare case referred to in section 26(1), and all information necessary for
planning, implementing and monitoring the measures.
Further provisions on drawing up child welfare documents may be given by Decree of
the Ministry of Social Affairs and Health.

Chapter 7 – Open care
Section 34 – Obligation to provide support in open care
(1)

The municipal body responsible for social services must provide support in open care
in accordance with this chapter without delay if:
1)
2)

(2)

(3)

the circumstances in which the children are being brought up are endangering
or failing to safeguard their health or development; or
the children’s behaviour is endangering their health or development.

The purpose of support in open care is to promote and support the child’s
development and to support and enhance the upbringing skills and opportunities of
the parents, custodians and persons responsible for the child’s care and upbringing.
Assistance in open care will be provided wherever possible in cooperation with the
child and the parents, and with the custodians or other persons responsible for the
child’s care and upbringing.

Section 35 – Safeguarding the means of support and accommodation
(1)

If the need for child welfare is to a significant extent due to inadequate means of
support, poor living conditions or lack of accommodation, or if these factors form a
material impediment to the rehabilitation of the child and family, the municipality
must, without delay, arrange sufficient financial support and rectify the deficiencies in
living conditions or arrange for accommodation that meets the need.

(2)

13
Adequate financial support and accommodation must also be arranged for a child or
young person for whom after-care is being provided under section 75(1) if the child’s
or young person’s rehabilitation so requires.

Section 36 – Other child welfare support in open care
In addition to social services such as child day-care and home-help services referred to in
section 17(1) and 17(2) of the Social Welfare Act, and social assistance and preventive
social assistance under the Act on Social Assistance (1412/1997), the municipal body
responsible for social services must, wherever necessary, arrange the following as child
welfare support in open care, giving due consideration to the client plan based on the
support needs of the child and family:
1)
2)

3)
4)
5)
6)
7)
8)
9)

support for investigating a problem situation involving the child and family;
financial and other support for the child’s schooling and in acquiring an
occupational qualification, obtaining accommodation, finding work, in free-time
pursuits, maintaining close human relationships and satisfying other personal
needs;
a support person or support family;
care and therapy services supporting the child’s rehabilitation;
family work;
section 37 placement of the whole family in family or institutional care;
peer group activities;
holiday and recreational activities; and
other services and supportive measures to support the child and family.

Section 37 – Placement as support in open care
(1)

(2)

Family or institutional care may be arranged as support in open care for a child
together with a parent, custodian or other person responsible for the child’s care and
upbringing, in the manner referred to in the client plan and in the form of care in
which the need for support is assessed or in the form of rehabilitative care.
Placement as support in open care may also be arranged on a short-term basis for
the child alone. Such placement requires the consent of the child’s custodian and, if
the child is twelve years of age or more, the consent of the child. The preconditions
for the placement are that it is necessary for:
1)
2)
3)

(3)

(4)

assessing the child’s need for support;
rehabilitating the child; or
arranging care for the child temporarily on account of the custodian or other
person in charge of the child’s care and upbringing being ill, or for some other
similar reason.

Placement as support in open care may not, however, be arranged for the child if the
preconditions for taking the child into care under section 40 are met. Nor may
placement as support in open care be arranged repeatedly for the child unless a new
short-term placement is essential in view of the interests of the child.
If the child has more than one custodian and the views of one of more of these
custodians can not be heard on account of travel arrangements, illness or some
other reason, or if the custodians have differing views concerning the child’s
placement, the placement may nevertheless proceed if the custodian with whom the

(5)

14
child is living, or with whom the child will live during the period of placement, agrees
to it and the placement is considered to be in the child’s interests.
When the decision about a placement is made, the objectives and estimated duration
of the placement must be specified. If the placement is for the child alone under
subsection 2, the preconditions for continuing the placement and the alternatives
available must be assessed no later than three months after the start of the
placement. If the placement continues, an assessment must be made every three
months. The possible need for taking the child into care must also be investigated in
connection with the assessment.

Chapter 8 – Emergency placement of a child
Section 38 – Emergency placement of a child
(1)

(2)
(3)

(4)

If a child is in immediate danger for a reason referred to in section 40 below, or is
otherwise in need of urgent placement and substitute care, the child may be placed
with urgency in family care or institutional care, or the care and custody the child
requires may be arranged in some other way.
The decision on emergency placement shall be made by the social worker referred to
in section 13(2).
Before a decision on emergency placement is made, the views and perceptions of
the child, the parent, the custodian or other person now responsible for the child’s
care and upbringing in regard to the case must be ascertained. It is not necessary to
ascertain these views and perceptions if the resulting delay in dealing with the case
would harm the child’s health, development or safety.
While an emergency placement is being undertaken, the municipal body responsible
for social services is entitled to take decisions on the child’s affairs to the extent
necessary in view of the purpose of the emergency placement and in the manner laid
down in section 45.

Section 39 – Termination of emergency placement
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

When the grounds for emergency placement no longer exist or when the placement
has been cancelled under circumstances referred to in subsections 2-4 below, the
social worker referred to in section 13(2) or 13(3) must make a decision on the
termination of placement without delay.
An emergency placement is cancelled if an application for the continuation of
placement or an application for taking a child into care referred to in section 43(2)
has not been submitted to an administrative court within 30 days of the
commencement of the placement.
If a custodian and a child who is 12 years of age or more agree to a continuation of
emergency placement for the purpose of preparing a decision to take the child into
care, emergency placement is not however, cancelled, unless a decision on taking a
child into care or an application for continuing placement or taking a child into care
has not been submitted to an administrative court within 45 days of the
commencement of the placement.
On application by a social worker responsible for a child’s affairs, an administrative
court may continue emergency placement for a period that is necessary for preparing
the matter of taking the child into care, however, not for longer than 60 days from the
expiry of the deadlines referred to in subsections 2 and 3. When the deadline expires

15

(5)

the placement is cancelled unless an application referred to in section 43(2) in the
matter concerning taking the child into care has been submitted to the administrative
court.
When a decision is made on emergency placement after an application for taking the
child into care is already under discussion in an administrative court, an interlocutory
order referred to in section 83 must be applied for without delay. The emergency
placement is cancelled when the administrative court issues an interlocutory order.

Chapter 9 – Taking into care
Section 40 – Duty to take a child into care and provide substitute care
(1)

(2)

Children must be taken into care and substitute care must be provided for them by
the municipal body responsible for social services if
1) their health or development is seriously endangered by lack of care or other
circumstances in which they are being brought up; or
2) they seriously endanger their health or development by abuse of intoxicants, by
committing an illegal act other than a minor offence or by any other comparable
behaviour.
Taking a child into care and provision of substitute care may, however, only be
resorted to if
1) the measures referred to in chapter 7 would not be suitable or possible for
providing care in the interests of the child concerned or if the measures have proved
to be insufficient
2) substitute care is estimated to be in the child's interests in accordance with section
4.

Section 41 – Preparations for taking a child into care and substitute care
(1)

(2)

Cases relating to taking a child into care and substitute care are prepared by the
social worker responsible for the child's affairs in cooperation with another social
worker or some other employee familiar with child welfare. Legal expertise and other
expertise necessary for the implementation of child welfare must be available to
support the preparation work.
In addition to what is provided in section 20 of the Act on the Status and Rights of
Social Welfare Clients on the right of access to information by municipal social
services bodies, the social worker referred to in subsection 1 above has the right to
obtain views from the parties referred to in the said provision if they are needed for
preparing the taking into care, for deciding on taking a child into care or for providing
substitute care.

Section 42 – Hearing of parties concerned
(1)

(2)

Before making a decision on taking a child into care, substitute care and termination
of care, the child's own views must be ascertained and an opportunity must be
reserved for the child to be heard in accordance with section 20.
A child's parent, custodian and persons in charge of the care and upbringing of the
child during or immediately before the preparation of the case must be reserved an
opportunity to be heard in matters referred to in subsection 1 as provided in section
34 of the Administrative Procedure Act.

16
(3)

(4)

The hearing may be omitted if it can be considered justified on the basis of lack of
contact between the child and the person to be heard and the hearing cannot be
presumed to be necessary for clarifying the matter or if the place of residence or
whereabouts of the person to be heard cannot be determined by reasonable means.
The reasons for not hearing the persons concerned must be recorded in the
documents concerning the child.
Persons who have not been heard for reasons referred to in subsection 3 must,
however, be notified of decisions on taking a child into care, substitute care or
termination of care as provided on verifiable service in the Administrative Procedure
Act.

Section 43 – Making decisions on taking a child into care and placement in substitute care
(1)

(2)

Decisions on taking a child into care and substitute care are made by municipal
officeholders determined by section 13(1) after the social worker responsible for the
child's affairs has prepared the case if the custodian or a child of 12 years of age or
more does not oppose the taking into care and related placement into substitute
care. The said municipal officeholder also makes the decision when the hearing has
not been carried out for reasons referred to in section 42(3).
If the child's custodian or a child of 12 years of age or more opposes the taking into
care or related placement into substitute care or if the hearing has not been carried
out for reasons other than those referred to in section 42(3), the case is decided by
an administrative court on application by a municipal officeholder determined under
section 13(1) when the social worker responsible for the child's affairs has prepared
the case.

Section 44 – Applications to administrative court
(1)

An application by the municipal officeholder referred to in section 43(2) concerning
taking a child into care and related placement into substitute care must include
1)

a demand that the child be taken into care and placed into substitute care and
that an interlocutory order under section 83 be issued and justifications for the
demands where necessary;
2) a client plan regarding the child under section 30;
3) a report on the supportive measures in open care given or offered to the family
and the child;'
4) a report on the charting of the network of persons close to the child referred to
in section 32(1);
5) a description of the place of substitute care;
6) a plan for maintaining contact between the child and persons close to the child;
7) a plan for or report on examination of the child's state of health under section
51;
8) a report on ascertaining of views and hearing under section 42;
9) expert opinions where necessary; and
10) any other reports and documents with a potential bearing on the decision.
(2)

Client plans and other documents referred to in subsection 1 may be submitted
separately when necessary if it has not been possible to draw them up on account of
the urgency of the application.

Section 45 – Custody of children taken into care

17
(1)

(2)

(3)

When a child has been taken into care, the municipal body responsible for social
services has the right, in order to implement the purpose of taking the child into care,
to decide on the child's whereabouts and care, upbringing, supervision and other
care and the instruction and health care necessary for the provision of these.
The social worker responsible for the child's affairs referred to in section 13(3) above
or the social worker referred to in subsection 2 of the same section or the director of
an institution decides on restrictions on contact between the child that has been
taken into care and the child's parents and other persons close to the child as
provided in sections 62 and 63.
In situations referred to in subsections 1 and 2 above, efforts must be made to
cooperate with the children, parents and custodians concerned, and the interests of
the child concerned must be given priority.

Section 46 – Decisions on the custody of a child during care
(1)

(2)

During care a court of law may decide who is to have custody or guardianship of the
child as provided in the Child Custody and Right of Access Act or the Guardianship
Services Act.
If, on the basis of the Child Custody and Right of Access Act, a child's custody has
been given to persons who have made a commission agreement under the Family
Carer Act instead of the child’s parents, the municipal body responsible for social
services may pay them a compensation for the child's maintenance and care and,
when necessary, a remuneration, and support the child's care and upbringing in other
ways, too. Before submitting an application or report to a court on the transfer of the
child's custody to persons who have made a commission agreement, the municipal
body responsible for social services must agree with them on the supportive
measures referred to in this subsection and on remuneration and compensation. At
the same time an assessment must be made about whether it is necessary to
designate a separate guardian for the child.

Section 47 – Duration and termination of care
(1) Taking into care is valid indefinitely. When the need for care and substitute care
under section 40 no longer exists, the municipal officeholder determined under
section 13(1) must make a decision on terminating the care when the social worker
responsible for the child's affairs has prepared the case. Care must not be terminated
even if the conditions for taking a child into care no longer exist if termination is
manifestly not in the interests of the child in the manner referred to in subsection 3.
(2) The social worker responsible for the child's affairs must assess the conditions for
continuing care when the client plan is reviewed, when a child or custodian applies
for termination of care or when it otherwise proves necessary.
(3) When a child's interests are being considered in a case concerning termination or
care, in addition to what is said in section 4(2), the following must be taken into
account: the duration of substitute care, the quality of the affection between the child
and the party providing substitute care, interaction between the child and the parents
and the child's views.
(4) Care is terminated when the child concerned becomes 18 years of age.
Section 48 – Non-validity of care decisions
Decisions on taking a child into care are cancelled if implementation has not begun
within three months of the decision becoming legally valid.

18
Chapter 10 – Substitute care
General provisions on substitute care
Section 49 – Substitute care
(1)

(2)
(3)

A child's substitute care means arranging the care and upbringing of a child that has
been taken into care, placed urgently or placed on the basis of an interlocutory order
referred to in section 83 of the Act away from the child's own home. (1390/2007)
A child's substitute care may be arranged in the form or family care, institutional care
or in some other way required by the child's needs.
A child that has been taken into care may be placed temporarily for a maximum
period of six months under the care and upbringing of a parent or other custodian
when the child's return home is being prepared after placement away from home or
when it is otherwise justified in terms of the child's interests for some other reason.

Section 50 – Choosing a place for substitute care
When a place is chosen for substitute care, particular attention must be paid to the
justification for taking the child into care, the child's needs, maintenance of relations
with siblings and other close human relations and the continuation of the care. In
addition, the child's linguistic, cultural and religious background must be taken into
account as far as possible.
Section 51 – Examining a child’s state of health
When a child is placed in substitute care, the child's state of health must be
examined unless it is deemed unnecessary in view of the reasons leading to taking
the child into care.
Section 52 – Cooperation during substitute care
In order to safeguard the continuity of the child's care, the social worker responsible
for the child's affairs or some other child welfare employee and the employee
responsible for the child's care and upbringing in substitute care must cooperate
with the child placed in substitute care, the child's parents and custodian and a
representative of the place of substitute care.
Children’s status in substitute care
Section 53 – Disclosing information to children and opportunity for discussion
(1)

(2)

The social worker responsible for a child's affairs must ensure that it has been
explained to the child in substitute care, in a manner suited to the child's age and
development level, why the child has been taken into care and the measures which
have been or will be taken in the child's case.
A child must be provided, in a manner to be recorded in detail in the client plan, with
adequate opportunity to meet the social worker responsible for the said child's affairs
or some other child welfare employee in person without the presence of other people
and to discuss matters concerning the child and the provision of substitute care.

Section 54 – Human relations and contacts

19
(1)

(2)

Children in substitute care must be guaranteed human relations that are important,
continuous and safe for their development. Children have the right to meet their
parents, siblings and other people close to them by receiving visitors or by making
visits outside the place of substitute care and to keep in contact otherwise by
telephone or by sending and receiving letters or comparable confidential messages
or other deliveries.
The municipal body responsible for social services and the place of substitute care
must support and promote contact between children and their parents and other
persons close to the children concerned. Children’s substitute care must be arranged
so that the distance of the place is not an obstacle to contact with persons close to
the children.

Section 55 – Disposable funds
(1)

(2)

(3)
(4)

When children or young people are placed outside their own homes under provisions
concerning placement as a supportive measure in open care, substitute care or aftercare, the municipality must ensure that their studies and leisure activities are
supported financially if necessary.
In addition to financial support referred to in subsection 1 above, children or young
people must be given in a calendar month the following disposable funds for their
own use for personal needs depending on age and growth environment:
1) to children under 15, an amount equalling their personal needs; and
2) to children or young people of 15 years of age or more at least an amount
equalling one third of the amount of maintenance laid down for a single child under
section 7 of the Security of Child Maintenance Act (671/1998).
Notwithstanding what is provided in the Guardianship Services Act, underage
persons have the right to decide on spending the funds paid under subsection 2.
The place where a child is placed must keep a record of payments of disposable
funds to the child.

Family care
Section 56 – Arranging substitute care as family care
What is provided in sections 25, 26 and 26a of the Social Welfare Act and in the
Family Carer Act applies to family care.
Institutional care
Section 57 – Child welfare institutions
Child welfare institutions in which substitute care of a child referred to in this Act
and placement as a supportive measure in open care referred to in section 37
include children’s homes, correctional schools and other comparable child welfare
institutions.
Section 58 – Circumstances in which children are brought up and facilities
(1)

What is provided in section 1 of the Child Custody and Right of Access Act must be
complied with in child care and upbringing and arrangement of circumstances in

20

(2)
(3)

which children are brought up. Child care and upbringing must be arranged so and
children must be treated so that their privacy is respected.
Child welfare institutions must have adequate and appropriate facilities and operating
equipment.
An institution may have one or more residential units. The units may also operate
separately from each other.

Section 59 – Number of children and young people to be cared for together
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

A maximum number of seven children or young people may be cared for in a
residential unit. A maximum of 24 children or young people may be placed in one
building. If institutional care is arranged for a child together with a parent, custodian
or other person responsible for the child’s care and upbringing, more children may be
cared for together.
A residential unit must have a minimum of seven employees in care and upbringing
work. If there is more than one residential unit in the same building, there must be a
minimum of six employees in care and upbringing work per residential unit. If an
employee in care and upbringing work lives together with the children or young
people to be cared for, exceptions can be made concerning the said numbers of
personnel.
In urgent cases it is possible to make temporary exceptions to the numbers of
children referred to in subsection 1 if it is necessary in order to arrange care for a
child.
In situations referred to in subsections 1-3 above, the number of personnel must be
in appropriate proportion to the number of children or young people to be cared for,
the care and upbringing required by them and the nature of operations, giving due
consideration to what is provided in section 60.

Section 60 – Personnel
(1)

(2)

(3)

Child welfare institutions must have a number of professional social welfare and
other personnel that is sufficient with regard to the care and upbringing required by
the children and young people.
Directors responsible for care and upbringing duties in an institution must have the
qualifications laid down in section 10(4) of the Act on Qualification Requirements for
Social Welfare Professionals.
The special needs of the clientele and the nature of operations in the operating unit
must be taken into account in the qualifications for personnel in care and upbringing
work.

Chapter 11 – Restrictions in substitute care
Section 61 – Scope of application for the provisions
(1)

(2)

Restrictions referred to in sections 62 and 63 of this chapter apply to substitute care
that is arranged both as family care and institutional care and restrictive measures
referred to in sections 64–74 only to substitute care arranged as institutional care.
Provisions laid down in this chapter relating to the restrictive authority given to
directors of or other personnel in child welfare institutions apply to all child welfare
institutions referred to in section 57 regardless of whether the personnel concerned is
in a public-service or other employment relationship unless otherwise separately

21
provided by law. Provisions on the public criminal liability of persons other than those
in public service employment relationships are laid down in chapter 40, section 12 of
the Penal Code.
Section 62 – Restrictions on contact
(1)

The rights of children in substitute care to keep in contact with their parents or other
persons close to them may be restricted by a decision referred to in section 63 if it
has not been possible to reach agreement on contact in the client plan referred to in
section 30 or otherwise for some special reason with the children concerned and
their parents or other close persons and if:
1)
2)
3)

4)

(2)

the contact endangers the purpose of a child's substitute care and the
restriction is necessary for the child's care and upbringing; or
the contact endangers a child's health, development or safety; or
the restriction is necessary because of the safety of the parents or other
children in the family or the family care home or other children or personnel in
an institution; or
a child of 12 years of age or more opposes contact; the same applies to
children under 12 years of age if they are sufficiently developed for their views
to be taken into account.

On the grounds referred to above in subsection 1 it is possible:
1)
2)
3)

4)

to restrict children's rights to meet their parents or other people close to them;
to restrict children's rights to keep in contact with persons close to them by
telephone or using other devices or means of contact;
to read and withhold private letters sent by children or addressed to them or
other similar confidential messages or inspect and withhold some other delivery;
and
for the place of substitute care to confiscate for the duration of the restriction all
communication means or equipment held by the children concerned or restrict
their use.

(3)

On the grounds referred to in subsection 1, children's whereabouts may be kept from
parents or custodians during care.
(4) Restriction of contact referred to in sections 1-3 above can only be applied to the
extent it is necessary in each individual case to achieve the purpose laid down in law.
Any letters withheld and other confidential messages must be kept separate from
other documents relating to the children concerned so that they may only be read by
the parties referred to in section 63(2).

Section 63 – Decisions concerning restrictions on contact
(1)

(2)

A decision must be made concerning restrictions on contact referred to above in
section 62(1-3) which must be issued for a fixed term and last for a maximum of one
year at a time. The decision must include the reason for the restriction, the persons
restricted, the kind of contact the restriction concerns and to what extent the
restriction is enforced.
Decisions on restricting contact are made by the social worker responsible for the
child's affairs referred to in section 13(3) or in cases of emergency placement and
when necessary in other urgent situations a social worker referred to in section 13(2).

22
The director of a child welfare institution may also decide on a short-term restriction
not exceeding 30 days referred to in section 62(1) and 62(2). If it is necessary to
continue the restriction or to decide on a restriction lasting longer than 30 days, the
social worker responsible for the child's affairs will make the decision. Restrictions on
contact must be lifted as soon as they are no longer necessary in the manner
referred to in section 62(1).
Section 64 – General requirements for application of restrictive measures
During substitute care arranged in the form of institutional care, restrictive measures
may only be applied to a child under sections 65-73 of this Act to the extent that is
necessitated by the purpose of taking the child into care, the child's own or another
person's health or safety or safeguarding some other interests laid down in the
above-mentioned provisions. Such measures must be implemented in a manner as
safe as possible and respecting the child's value as a human being.
Section 65 – Confiscation of substances and objects
(1)

(2)

(3)

If a child is in possession of substances used for intoxication or equipment
specifically suited to using such a substance, these must be confiscated by the
institution. Also substances or objects that a child is in possession of and that are
meant for harming the child or another person must be confiscated by the institution.
The institution is allowed to confiscate substances or objects with characteristics that
render them suitable for endangering the child's own or another person's life, health
or safety or damaging property if the child is likely to use these substances or objects
in the manner referred to in this provision. What is laid down elsewhere in law applies
to handing over or destroying confiscated possessions. Provisions are laid down in
section 60 of the Alcohol Act (1143/1994) concerning destruction of alcoholic
beverages or other substances containing alcohol and of beverages referred to in
section 34(5) of the Alcohol Act. On termination of substitute care in an institution, all
confiscated possessions must be returned to the child unless otherwise provided
elsewhere in legislation concerning the return or destruction of possessions.
Confiscation referred to in subsection 1 above may be carried out by the director of
an institution or a person who is a member of the institution’s care or upbringing
personnel. The director or a member of the care and upbringing personnel
designated by the director must be informed of such matters without delay, and this
person must make a decision on confiscation if the possessions are not returned.
Substances and objects in a child’s possession other than those referred to in
subsection 1 which are likely to cause serious harm to the provision of substitute care
for the child concerned or other children or to public order in the institution may also
be confiscated by the institution. Decisions on such confiscation are made by the
institution’s director or a member of the care and upbringing personnel designated by
the director. The measure may not continue longer than is necessary for the reasons
mentioned in the provision and for the child's care and upbringing.

Section 66 – Bodily search and physical examination
(1)

If there is a justified reason to suspect that children have in their clothing or otherwise
on them substances or objects referred to in section 65(1), a bodily search may be
carried out on them for the purpose of investigating the matter. This search is to be
carried out by the director of the institution or a member of the care and upbringing
personnel designated by the director. The search must be carried out in the presence

23

(2)

(3)

(4)

of another member of the care and upbringing personnel unless there are special
reasons to proceed otherwise. The person carrying out the search and the other
person present must be of the same sex as the child unless the person concerned is
a health-care professional.
If there is a justified reason to suspect that children have been using intoxicating
substances referred to in section 65(1), a physical examination may be carried out
which may comprise a breath test or blood, hair, urine or saliva samples. Decisions
on performing a physical examination are made and examinations carried out by the
institution director or a member of the care and upbringing personnel or some other
person with a suitable professional qualification for the task designated by the
director. The examination must be carried out so that it does not cause unnecessary
harm to the child.
If a physical examination is carried out by other than a health-care professional, there
must be present another person who is a member of the care and upbringing
personnel or some other person with a suitable professional qualification. Blood
samples may only be taken by health-care professionals. Physical examinations
must not be carried out or attended by persons not of the same sex as the child
unless such a person is a health-care professional.
Notwithstanding what is provided in subsections 1 and 3 above, persons carrying out
a bodily search or a physical examination and persons present need not, however,
be of the same sex as the child if immediate action is required to ensure the child's or
another person's safety.

Section 67 – Inspection of possessions and deliveries. Leaving deliveries unforwarded
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

If there is a justified reason to suspect that children are in possession of substances
or objects referred to in section 65(1), the premises that they occupy or their
possessions may be inspected.
If there is a justified reason to suspect that a letter or some other similar confidential
message or delivery addressed to a child contains substances or objects referred to
in section 65(1), the contents of the delivery may be inspected without reading the
letter or other confidential message.
Decisions on inspections referred to in subsections 1 and 2 above are made and the
inspections are carried out by the institution director or a member of the care and
upbringing personnel designated by the director. Inspections must be carried out in
the presence of the child concerned and another member of the institution's care and
upbringing personnel. Premises occupied or possessions held by a child may,
however, for special reasons also be inspected without the presence of the child or
another person. The reason for the inspection must be explained to the child.
In addition, the social worker responsible for a child's affairs referred to in section
13(3) has for special reasons the right to decide that a message referred to in
subsection 2 or some other delivery must be left totally or partly unforwarded to the
child if the content of the message or delivery can be assessed with justification and
taking the overall situation into account as endangering the child's or some other
person's life, health, safety or development. The delivery must be forwarded to the
social worker responsible for the child's affairs without delay for decision-making.

Section 68 – Restraining a child physically
(1)

In order to calm a child, an institution’s director or a member of the care and
upbringing personnel may restrain children physically if it is likely that they may,
judging from confused or threatening behaviour, harm themselves or others and if

24

(2)

(3)

restraining is necessary to prevent immediate danger to the child's or some other
person's life, health or safety or significant damage to property. Restraining must be
therapeutic in nature and justified in view of the overall situation, giving due
consideration to the child's behaviour and the circumstances. Physical restraining
may involve moving the child. Restraining must cease as soon as it is no longer
necessary.
Persons resorting to physical restraining must submit a written report to the director
of the institution. If the institution director resorts to restraining a child physically, the
written report must be submitted to the social worker responsible for the child's affairs
referred to in section 13(3).
Provisions on excessive physical restraining are laid down in chapter 4, section 6(3)
and section 7 of the Penal Code.

Section 69 –Restrictions on freedom of movement
(1)

(2)

(3)

Children may be prohibited for a fixed period from leaving an institution's grounds,
the institution or the premises of a certain residential unit if it is necessary for their
care, if it is in their own interests and if
1) the children concerned have been taken into care on the grounds that they have
seriously endangered their health or development by using intoxicants, by committing
an illegal act other than a minor offence or by other comparable behaviour; or
2) children in an institution behave in the manner referred to in paragraph 1; or
3) the restriction is otherwise necessary for the children's care in order to protect
them from behaviour that would cause them serious harm.
Restrictions referred to in subsection 1 above must not continue longer than seven
days without a new decision. Restrictions may not continue for longer than 30 days
without interruption. Restrictions must not be imposed on a larger scale or for a
longer period than the child's care and upbringing necessitate. The measure must
also be terminated as soon it is no longer necessary in the manner referred to in
subsection 1.
The director of an institution or a member of the care and upbringing personnel
designated by the director may decide on a restriction of a maximum of seven days.
Decisions on longer restrictions of a maximum duration of 30 days are made by the
social worker responsible for the child's affairs referred to in section 13(3). The social
worker responsible for the child's affairs must be notified of the matter without delay
for the purpose of making a decision.

Section 70 – Isolation
(1)

(2)

A child may be isolated from other children in the institution if, on the basis of his/her
behaviour he/she poses a danger to him/herself or others or if isolation is necessary
for some other particularly justified reason in terms of his/her life, health or safety.
Isolation must not be ordered on a larger scale or for a longer period than the child's
care necessitates. Isolation must not continue uninterrupted for longer than 24 hours
without a new decision. Isolation must be terminated as soon as it is no longer
necessary.
Decisions on isolation are made by the director of an institution or a member of the
care and upbringing personnel designated by the director. The isolation must take
place under the continuous watch of the institution's care and upbringing personnel.
When a child is ordered to be isolated, orders must be issued at the same time
specifying whose duty it is to see to the child's safety. The circumstances of the child

25

(3)

(4)

(5)

during isolation must be arranged so that the child receives sufficient care and has
an opportunity to talk to an attendant.
Isolation can only be continued by a new decision without interruption if the
conditions for isolation laid down in subsection 1 continue to exist. A further condition
is that it is still not expedient or possible to arrange care of the child in any other way.
The total duration of isolation must never exceed 48 hours.
A medical examination must be carried out by a physician before a decision is taken
to continue isolation unless it is manifestly unnecessary. Where necessary, a medical
examination of the child must also be carried out at the beginning of or during
isolation.
The director of the institution concerned or a member of the care and upbringing
personnel designated by the director must notify the social worker responsible for the
child's affairs referred to in section 13(3) of the isolation or its continuation without
delay.

Section 71 – Special care
Special care means special multiprofessional care to be arranged in a child welfare
institution for a child in substitute care, during which care the child’s freedom of
movement may be restricted to the extent required by the care as provided in
sections 72 and 73 below.
Section 72 – Provision of special care
(1)

(2)

(3)

During substitute care, special care may be arranged for children if their extremely
important private interest so necessitates in order to interrupt a vicious circle of
intoxicant abuse or crime or when the children’s own behaviour otherwise seriously
endangers their lives, health or development. The purpose of special care is to stop
behaviour that harms the children themselves and to allow provision of
comprehensive care for them. A further precondition is that it is not possible to
arrange substitute care otherwise, giving due consideration to the need for care of
the child concerned.
Decisions on starting or continuing special care are made by the municipal
officeholder referred to in section 13(1) after the social worker responsible for the
child’s affairs referred to in section 13(3) has prepared the case. The decision must
be based on a multiprofessional assessment of the child’s situation made for the
purpose of arranging special care on the basis of expert opinions in upbringing,
social work, psychology and medicine.
Special care may be arranged for a maximum of 30 days. The period is calculated
from actual commencement of special care. A decision on the provision of special
care will expire if it is not possible to start implementation within 90 days of making
the decision. For an extremely pressing reason, special care may be continued by a
maximum of 60 days if the provision of substitute care for the child continues to
necessitate this on the basis of justifications referred to in subsection 1. Special care
must be terminated without delay if it proves ineffective in achieving the objectives
set for it or when the need for it ceases. The social worker responsible for the child’s
affairs referred to in section 13(3) makes the decision on termination.

Section 73 – Provision of special care
(1)

Special care may be arranged in a child welfare institution that has sufficient
expertise in upbringing, social work, psychology and medicine available for arranging

(2)

(3)

26
special care. The institution must have personnel that the task requires and who hold
appropriate professional qualifications. It must also have facilities appropriate for
providing special care in terms of health and other conditions. Children may be
prevented from leaving these facilities without authorization or supervision.
During special care, the persons with the expertise referred to in subsection 1 must
see the child regularly and participate in planning, implementing and assessing the
child’s special care. During special care, necessary medical examinations of the child
must be carried out by a physician. These and other measures concerning the
provision of special care and their impact on the child and the child’s situation and on
the arrangement of future substitute care for the child must be recorded during
special care. If necessary, further provisions on the content of the records may be
issued by a Decree of the Ministry of Social Affairs and Health.
Client plans for children must be reviewed when special care is terminated.

Section 74 – Recording of restrictive measures. Impact on client plan and care and
upbringing plan
(1)

(2)

(3)

In order to ensure monitoring and supervision of the application of restrictive
measures referred to in sections 65–70, the child welfare institution concerned must
record in the appropriate manner the restrictive measures it uses. The records must
include a description of the restrictive measure concerned, justification for and the
duration of the measure, the name of the person who made the decision on the
measure, the name of the person who carried the measure out in practice and of the
person present during the measure and when necessary the special reason referred
to in section 66(1) and section 67(3). In addition, the potential impact of the measure
on the care and upbringing plan must be mentioned. The records must also specify
how the child concerned was heard before the decision on the restrictive measure
was made or implemented and the child’s views on the matter. If necessary, further
provisions on the content of the records may be issued by a Decision of the Ministry
of Social Affairs and Health.
When a client plan for a child is reviewed, an assessment must be made in particular
of the achievement of the objectives of the restrictive measures applied to the child
and of their impact on the client plan. If a need for immediate revision of the client
plan arises, the director of the institution or a member of the institution’s care and
upbringing personnel designated by the director must notify the social worker
responsible for the child’s affairs referred to in section 13(3) of the matter without
delay.
Sufficient dialogue must be carried out with the child concerning the reasons for
restrictive measures applied to him/her and the potential impact of these measures
on the care and upbringing plan and the client plan.

Chapter 12 – After-care
Section 75 – Children’s and young people’s entitlement to after-care
(1)

Municipal bodies responsible for social services must provide after-care for children
or young people in accordance with this chapter after the termination of substitute
care referred to in section 40. After-care must also be provided after termination of
placement carried out as a supportive measure in open care referred to in section 37
if the placement has lasted at least six months without interruption and has been
applied to the child alone.

27
(2)
(3)

After-care can also be provided for young people other than those referred to in
subsection 1 who have been clients of child welfare services.
The duty of a municipality to provide after-care terminates when five years have
passed since the child was last a client of child welfare services after termination of
placement outside the home referred to in subsection 1. The duty to provide aftercare terminates at the latest when the young person concerned becomes 21 years of
age.

Section 76 – Content of after-care
(1)

(2)

The municipality must provide after-care giving due consideration to the client plan
drawn up in accordance with section 30(4) on the basis of the needs of the child or
young person concerned, by supporting the child or young person and their parents
and custodians and persons in charge of their care and upbringing as provided in
chapter 7 of this Act on measures supporting open care, in section 46(2) on
supporting family carers after transfer of custody, in section 54 on human relations
and contacts and in this chapter.
When after-care is terminated, the social worker concerned must, where necessary,
draw up a plan together with the young person, recording the services and supportive
measures available to the young person after the termination of after-care.

Section 77 – Funds for promoting independence
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

When a child or young person has been placed outside the home under provisions
concerning placement as a supportive measure in open care, substitute care referred
to in section 40 or after-care, a sum equivalent to at least 40 per cent of the child’s or
young person’s income, compensation or receivables referred to in section 14 of the
Act on Client Fees in Social and Health Care Services must be reserved per month
for the purpose of promoting independence. Child allowance will not be taken into
account, however, when the amount is calculated.
If a child or young person does not have income, compensation or receivables
referred to in section 14 of the Act on Client Fees in Social and Health Care Services
or if they are insufficient, the municipal body responsible for social services must
support young people who are in the process of gaining independence on the
termination of the placement with necessary funds for covering expenses relating to
accommodation, education and training and other processes of gaining
independence.
Municipal bodies responsible for social services have the right to decide on the time
of payment of the funds for gaining independence. In principle, such funds must be
given to a child or young person in the process of gaining independence on the
termination of after-care or, for a special reason relating to supporting or
safeguarding the child’s or young person’s process of gaining independence, at the
latest when the person concerned becomes 21 years of age.
Municipal bodies responsible for social services must submit a report on the accrual
and payment of the funds reserved for promoting independence when the placement
is terminated and during placement if so requested by a custodian, a guardian or a
child who is 15 years of age or older.

Chapter 13 – Supervision
Section 78 – Notification concerning child to be placed by municipal authorities

28
In situations referred to in section 16(2) of this Act in which a child is placed outside
the municipality making the placement, the placing municipality must notify the
municipal body responsible for social services in the placement municipality of the
placement and termination of placement of the child in order to allow for provision of
the services and supportive measures needed for the child and for implementation of
supervision of the place of substitute care, and this municipal body must maintain a
register of children placed in its territory.
Section 79 – Supervision of substitute care
(1)

(2)

(3)

It is the duty of the placing municipality to supervise conformity of the placement of a
child in family care or institutional care with this Act and the giving to the child the
services and supportive measures which are needed during the placement and which
must be provided by the placement municipality under section 16(2) and 16(3).
The operation of the place of substitute care is also supervised by the placement
municipality and the State Provincial Office. In carrying out supervision they must
cooperate with the placing municipality referred to in subsection 1.
If the placing municipality finds grievances or inadequacies in the operation of the
place of substitute care that may affect the care of the children placed, it must,
confidentiality obligations notwithstanding, without delay notify the placement
municipality referred to in subsection 2, the State Provincial Office concerned and
any other municipalities it knows to have placed children in the same place of
substitute care.

Section 80 – Other supervision by State Provincial Offices
(1)

(2)

In addition to what is provided in section 79 above, State Provincial Offices must
monitor the operation of child welfare institutions through inspections carried out on
their own initiative and specifically supervise the application of restrictive measures
carried out in child welfare institutions under chapter 11 of this Act. In carrying out
supervision, State Provincial Offices may reserve an opportunity for children to have
a confidential discussion with a representative of the State Provincial Office.
Authorizations to establish and expand a private child welfare institution and to make
substantial changes in such an institution’s operations are granted by State
Provincial Offices. Provisions concerning the issuing of permits and supervision of
private institutions by State Provincial Offices are issued in the Act on Supervision of
Private Social Services (603/1996).

Section 81 – Supervision of care provided for privately placed children
(1)

(2)

Municipal bodies responsible for social services must be notified without delay of
children placed in a private home on a permanent basis by other than municipal
bodies responsible for social services. Both custodians of children and persons under
whose care the children concerned have been placed are under obligation to make
such a notification. Provisions on the content of the notification may be issued by a
Decree of the Ministry of Social Affairs and Health.
When an municipal body responsible for social services receives such a notification,
it must ascertain if the conditions in the private home concerned are suitable for child
care and upbringing, if the person who has taken charge of the child is capable of
looking after the child and if the placement is in the interests of the child. The
placement must be approved by decision.

29
(3)

(4)

(5)

The municipal body responsible for social services must explain to the person who
has taken charge of the child this person’s rights and obligations and, if necessary, it
must support this person by providing supportive measures in accordance with
chapter 7 to promote the child’s care and upbringing.
The requirements for continuing placement referred to in subsection 2 above and the
need for supportive measures under subsection 3 must be monitored as necessary.
Municipal bodies responsible for social services must maintain a register of children
placed privately in the municipality.
If a private home or care and upbringing provided there are found to be inappropriate
or inadequate, the relevant municipal body responsible for social services must try to
correct the situation. If a correction cannot be achieved, the municipal body may
prohibit the child concerned from being kept in such a private home. The municipal
body must then ensure that the care and upbringing is arranged in accordance with
the child’s interests and needs.

Chapter 14 – Administrative court processing
Section 82 – General provisions concerning processing
What is provided in the Administrative Judicial Procedure Act (586/1996) applies to
processing of cases referred to in this Act in administrative courts and the Supreme
Administrative Court unless otherwise provided in this Act.
Section 83 – Interlocutory order
In processing applications for taking a child into care, administrative courts may issue
an interlocutory order concerning a child’s whereabouts and the arrangement of the
child’s care and upbringing during court procedure. The order may be issued without
hearing those concerned if the matter cannot be delayed. Unless cancelled or
amended, interlocutory orders will remain in force until an administrative court issues
a decision in a case of taking a child into care.
Section 84 – Preparatory oral hearing by administrative court
(1)

(2)

After the institution of proceedings concerning taking into care, an administrative
court may, in addition to written preparation of the case, conduct a limited oral
hearing laid down in section 37(2) of the Administrative Judicial Procedure Act in
order to find out the demands of the parties concerned and justifications for them.
The purpose of the hearing is in particular to identify the difference of opinion
between the parties concerned and the authority that has made the application or
decision and to determine what evidence can be presented to support the demands.
No oral evidence can be given or experts heard in this hearing.
After the limited oral hearing referred to in subsection 1, the processing of the case
will continue in written form or an oral hearing can be conducted as provided in
sections 37 and 38 of the Administrative Judicial Procedure Act.

Section 85 – Administrative court quorum
(1)

An administrative court decision may be given by a single legally trained member of
the administrative court:

30
1)
2)
3)

(2)

(3)
(4)

in a matter referred to in section 28 regarding authorization to search a child;
in a matter referred to in section 39(4) regarding extension of the time period for
emergency placement; and
in a matter referred to in section 83 concerning the issue of an interlocutory
order.

In a matter referred to in subsection 1, an administrative court may also give a
decision in a composition including a legally trained member of the administrative
court and an expert member if both agree on the decision.
In addition, the composition for giving a decision laid down in subsection 1 or 2 may
arrange for a preparatory oral hearing referred to in section 84(1) to be conducted.
Other provisions on the presence of a quorum in administrative courts are issued in
the Administrative Courts Act (430/1999).

Section 86 – Hearing children in administrative courts
(1)

(2)

(3)

Children may be heard in person by administrative courts or the Supreme
Administrative Court if a child requests it or consents to it. Children under 12 years of
age may, however, only be heard in person if the hearing is necessary for settling the
case and it is estimated that the hearing will not cause the child concerned significant
harm.
Children may also be heard in person so that only one or more members of the court
and the child concerned are present if the court deems this appropriate and the
procedure is necessary to protect the child or to ascertain the child’s independent
views. The parties concerned and the authority making the application or decision
must be reserved an opportunity to see the case material drawn up or recorded
about the content of the hearing and to give an opinion on its content. The right of the
parties concerned to receive information may be limited if information is withheld to
protect the child or to safeguard some other extremely important interest of the child.
Hearing a child in person may take place in oral proceedings or in some other
manner decided by the court.

Section 87 – Appointment of legal advisor for a child
(1)

(2)

An administrative court or the Supreme Administrative Court may appoint a legal
advisor for a child for court processing of a case if the child or the child’s legal
representative so requests or if the court otherwise deems such an appointment
necessary.
If an administrative court or the Supreme Administrative Court appoints a legal
advisor in spite of the fact that the child or the child’s legal representative has not
informed the court of their desire to have one, what is provided in the Legal Aid Act
(257/2002) applies as appropriate to appointing a legal advisor and to the fee and
compensation payable to the legal advisor regardless of whether the child has been
or will be granted legal aid referred to in the Legal Aid Act. To this extent the legal aid
is free of charge.

Section 88 – Urgency of proceedings
Matters of child- and family-specific child welfare referred to in this Act must be
processed as urgent.

31
Chapter 15 – Appeals
Section 89 – Right of appeal
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Appeals concerning emergency placement referred to in sections 38 and 39, taking
into care and substitute care referred to in section 43 and termination of care referred
to in section 47 may be submitted separately by a child of 12 years of age or more, a
child’s parent or custodian and a person in charge of the care and upbringing of the
child during or immediately before the preparation of the case.
Appeals concerning placement in the form of a supportive measure in open care
referred to in section 37 may be submitted separately by a child of 12 years of age or
more and a child’s custodian.
Appeals concerning restrictions on contact referred to in section 63 may be submitted
separately by a child of 12 years of age or more, a child’s parent or custodian or any
other person whose contact with the child has been restricted by a decision.
Appeals concerning restrictive measures referred to in sections 65, 67(4), 69, 70 and
72 may be submitted separately by a child of 12 years of age or more and a child’s
custodian.
Otherwise, what is provided in the Administrative Judicial Procedure Act applies to
the right of appeal and exercise of the right to be heard.

Section 90 – Appeals to administrative court
(1)

(2)

(3)

Decisions by municipal officeholders under municipal bodies responsible for social
services concerning emergency placement referred to in sections 38 and 39, taking
into care and substitute care referred to in section 43(1), termination of care referred
to in section 47, restrictions on contact referred to in section 63 and restrictive
measures referred to in sections 65, 67(4), 69, 70 and 72 may be appealed directly to
an administrative court as provided in the Administrative Judicial Procedure Act.
Decisions by persons other than municipal officeholders under municipal bodies
responsible for social services concerning restrictions and restrictive measures
referred to in chapter 11 are appealed to an administrative court. Appeals must be
submitted within 30 days of receiving notification of the decision.
Unless otherwise provided in this Act, what is provided in chapter 7 of the Social
Welfare Act and in the Administrative Judicial Procedure Act applies to appeals.

Section 91 – Implementation of decisions not yet legally valid
(1)

(2)
(3)

Decisions concerning taking a child into care, termination of care, substitute care,
emergency placement, restrictions on contact and restrictive measures referred to in
section 89(4) may be implemented regardless of appeals if the implementation
cannot be postponed without endangering the child’s health or development and an
authority or a court has ordered the decision to be implemented promptly.
Provisions concerning implementation of authorization to carry out an examination of
a child are laid down in section 28(3).
When an appeal has been submitted, an appeal authority may prohibit
implementation of a decision or order the implementation to be interrupted.

Section 92 – Appeals to Supreme Administrative Court
(1)

Decisions by administrative courts concerning emergency placement referred to in
sections 38 and 39 of this Act, taking a child into care and substitute care referred to

32

(2)
(3)
(4)

(5)

in section 43, termination of care referred to in section 47, restrictions on contact
referred to in section 63, authorization to examine a child referred to in section 28,
safeguarding means of support and accommodation referred to in section 35, aftercare referred to in sections 75 and 76, prohibitions referred to in section 81(5) and
the provision and cost responsibility between municipalities referred to in section 16
may be appealed to the Supreme Administrative Court as provided in the
Administrative Judicial Procedures Act. Decisions by administrative courts
concerning the provision and cost responsibility between municipalities referred to in
section 16 of this Act may be appealed to the Supreme Administrative Court if the
Supreme Administrative Court grants leave to appeal the case.
The authority making an application or a decision may appeal administrative court
decisions in cases referred to in subsection 1 to the Supreme Administrative Court.
Decisions by administrative courts concerning anything other than child- or familyspecific child welfare referred to in subsection 1 may not be appealed.
Decisions made by administrative courts during processing in order to forbid or
interrupt implementation of an appealed decision may not, however, be appealed to
the Supreme Administrative Court.
Interlocutory orders issued by administrative courts referred to in section 83 may not
be appealed separately.

Chapter 16 – Special provisions
Section 93 – Further provisions
Further provisions on the implementation of this Act may be given by Government
decree.
Chapter 17 – Entry into force provisions
Section 94 – Entry into force
(1)
(2)
(3)

This Act enters into force on 1 January 2008. Measures necessary for the
implementation of this Act may be undertaken before the Act’s entry into force.
This Act repeals the Child Welfare Act (683/1983) adopted on 5 August 1983
including later amendments to it.
If the Child Welfare Act of 1983 is referred to elsewhere in legislation, this Act applies
instead.

Section 95 – Transitional provisions
(1)

(2)

The maximum number of children cared for in a residential unit of a children’s
institution referred to in section 59(1) of this Act, the minimum number of personnel
per residential unit in a children’s institution referred to in subsection 2 of the same
section and requirements concerning the professional qualifications of the director
responsible for an institution’s care and upbringing duties referred to in section 60(2)
are to be applied in all child welfare institutions at the latest 3 years from the entry
into force of this Act.
This Act does not apply to appeals or submissions concerning decisions made before
the entry into force of this Act or to processing of such cases in a higher appeal
authority.

33
Entry into force and application of amendments:
1390/2007
This Act enters into force on 1 January 2008.

