Strasbourg, 2 April 2004

MIN-LANG/PR (2004) 1

EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES

Second Periodical Report
presented to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe
in accordance with Article 15 of the Charter

GERMANY

SECOND REPORT
submitted by the

FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY
under Article 15, paragraph 1, of the

EUROPEAN CHARTER
FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES

2003

SECOND REPORT
submitted by the

FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY
under Article 15, paragraph 1, of the

EUROPEAN CHARTER
FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES

2003

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Table of Contents
Nos.

Part A

General Situation and General Framework

1 - 104

Part B

Recommendations of the Committee of Ministers

105 - 117

Part C

Protection of Regional or Minority Languages under 118 - 207
Part II (Article 7) of the Charter

Part D

Implementation of the obligations undertaken with
regard to the various languages

208 - 1385

D.2.1 Danish

Danish in the Danish speech area in SchleswigHolstein

252 - 357

Art. 8
Art. 9
Art. 10
Art. 11
Art. 12
Art. 13
Art. 14

D.2.2 Sorbian

Sorbian (Upper Sorbian and Lower Sorbian

(Wendish)) in the Sorbian speech area in the

252 - 278
279 - 282
283 - 302
303 - 337
338 - 347
348 - 353
354 - 357

358 - 514

Länder of Brandenburg and Saxony

Art. 8
Art. 9
Art. 10
Art. 11
Art. 12
Art. 13

D.2.3 North
Frisian

North Frisian in the North Frisian speech area in
Schleswig-Holstein
Art. 8
Art. 9
Art. 10
Art. 11
Art. 12
Art. 13
Art. 14

D.2.4 Saterland Saterland Frisian in the Sater Frisian speech area
Frisian
in Lower Saxony
Art. 8
Art. 9
Art. 10
Art. 11
Art. 12
Art. 13

-1-

358 - 424
425 - 432
433 - 457
458 - 482
483 - 505
506 - 514

515 - 625
515 - 551
552 - 555
556 - 570
571 - 594
595 - 616
617 - 620
621 - 625

626 - 702
626 - 642
643 - 646
647 - 664
665 - 679
680 - 696
697 - 702

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

D.2.5 Romany

The Romany language in the speech area of the
Federal Republic and the various Länder
Art. 8
Art. 9
Art. 10
Art. 11
Art. 12
Art. 13
Art. 14

D.2.6 Low
German

Low German in the various Länder

Acts to implement the Charter, and Declarations notified
by the Federal Republic of Germany
Act of 9 July 1998
Declarations of 23 and 26 January 1998;
Additional Declaration
Act of 11 September 2002, and Declaration

Annex 2

Text of the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages
(Regional/Minority Language Charter; the Charter)

Annex 3

848 - 1006
1007- 1010
1011 - 1090
1091 - 1184
1185 - 1355
1356 - 1378
1379 - 1385

page:

Comments by the minorities/language groups
Comments by the Danish minority ...............................................
Comments by the Frisian Council (Frasche Rädj) ......................
Comments by Domowina - Bund Lausitzer Sorben e.V. ............
Comments by the Zentralrat deutscher Sinti und Roma ............
Comments by the Sinti Allianz Deutschland e.V. ........................
Comments by the Low German speakers' group ........................

Annex 1

703 - 770
771 - 775
776 - 786
787 - 812
813 - 844
845 - 846
847 - 847

848 - 1385
Art. 8
Art. 9
Art. 10
Art. 11
Art. 12
Art. 13
Art. 14

Part E

703 - 847

List of minority/language group organizations

-2-

E-1
E-7
E-13
E-19
E-28
E-33

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part A
A.1

Part A

General Situation and General Framework
General Situation

1.
The Federal Republic of Germany attaches great importance to the protection of regional or minority languages. On 5 November 1992, it signed the European
Charter of Regional or Minority Languages (in the following: "the Charter"). By the Act
(to implement the Charter) of 9 July 1998 (Annex 1), the German Bundestag, with the
consent of the Bundesrat ["Federal Council": Chamber of the Länder], approved the
Charter. That Act was promulgated in the Federal Law Gazette on 16 July 1998, and
the instrument of ratification was deposited with the Council of Europe on 16 September 1998. The Charter entered into force in Germany on 1 January 1999 and was
amended by the Second Act on the Charter which entered into force on 19 September 2002. Under the Federal Act ratifying the Charter, the latter ranks in Germany as
a federal law which takes precedence over subordinate law - including Land laws and, as a matter of principle, is to be applied as the more specific law overriding other
federal laws. National compliance with the Charter is legally ensured on a comprehensive scale.
2.
In ratifying the Charter, the Federal Republic of Germany was guided by the
following considerations:
In many countries of Europe, there is a large number of traditionally spoken languages which differ from the respective official language or from the language of the
majority population, and - in relation to the entire national territory - are used by a
small portion of the population. This diversity of languages as an essential basis of
culture has shaped the cultural history of Europe. To this day, the cultural wealth of
Europe has found, and still finds, expression in its regional or minority languages.
Notwithstanding the great cultural value of regional or minority languages, however,
the insignificance of many of these languages increases to the benefit of the language of the majority population. In public life, especially in the media, and as a legal
language and as the official language, regional or minority languages are used only
on a limited scale. Many languages lose their scope of use as a result of a re-orientation of their traditional users, voluntary assimilation or the linguistic assimilation policy
of the state. Use of these languages in the private sphere is not sufficient to durably
ensure their continued existence. Throughout Europe, regional or minority languages
are, to a varying extent, threatened by extinction or by a drastic loss of their vitality.

-3-

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part A

3.
For the groups among whom these languages are spoken, their use forges
identity. Also, especially for national minorities and traditionally resident ethnic
groups, the preservation of the given language and its further development are the
basis required for preserving their culture, tradition and identity. Failure to preserve
their independent languages entails the risk of loss of the cultural identity of the
speakers of regional or minority languages. But the decline of regional or minority
languages will imply, also for the majority population, that an important traditional
cultural element of their country's society will be lost.
4.
However, preservation of this linguistic and cultural diversity does not only
mean maintenance of identity and conservation of a cultural heritage but it also
serves communication within the country and the integration of all citizens into their
country since such preservation is dependent on, and calls for, tolerance and openness for other languages and cultures. Therefore, ensuring the diversity of languages
has a mediatory function, facilitates community life and prevents ethnic exclusion. In
particular, the protection and promotion of the regional or minority languages in a
given country also provide a better starting position for an intensified dialogue with
the users of these languages in neighbouring countries. This is particularly true as
regards transborder use of languages. A widening Europe needs tolerance, acceptance and understanding for each other. The protection and the promotion of the regional or minority languages in Europe have a peacemaking function and reinforce
democratic developments.

A.2

The Charter's scope of application in Germany, and reporting requirements

5.
The Charter contains the criteria for regional or minority languages. It refers
to the languages traditionally spoken in a Contracting State. In Germany, a regional
language within the meaning of the Charter is Low German. Protected minority languages are the languages of national minorities and of other ethnic groups traditionally resident in Germany, who in the FRG come under the Council of Europe
Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities: i.e. the Danish
minority, the Sorbian people, Frisians in Germany, and the German Sinti and Roma.
These languages are Danish, Upper Sorbian [of Upper Lusatia] and Lower Sorbian
[Wendish] (of Lower Lusatia), North Frisian and Saterland Frisian [East Frisian
spoken in the Saterland], and the Romany language of the German Sinti and Roma.
6.
The Federal Republic of Germany has laid down the Charter's scope of application in Germany in Declarations made by the Federal Government to the Council of
-4-

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part A

Europe in order to ensure the admissibility of a territorially differentiating implementation of the Charter in keeping with the federal structure of Germany (cf. Annexes 2
and 1 - texts of the Charter and Declarations). Since dialects and the languages
spoken by incoming migrants are excluded from the Charter's scope of application,
the aforementioned languages cover all of those languages used in Germany which
are eligible for the protection provided under the Charter.
7.
The facilities provided by the Charter within its scope of application in Germany are open to all speakers of the listed regional or minority languages.
8.
In compliance with its reporting obligations under international law and in accordance with Article 15, para. 1, of the Charter, the Federal Republic of Germany on
7 December 2000 submitted its First State Report on the implementation measures
in Germany to the Council of Europe.
9.
The Committee of Experts of the Council of Europe in October 2001 visited
Germany and during this one-week stay had talks with representatives of the Bund
[Federation], the Länder and local governments, and representatives of the language
groups. On the basis of the information obtained on this occasion and of the information provided in Germany's First State Report, the Committee drafted a report of 5
July 2002 on the Charter's implementation in Germany (Monitoring Report - MIN-LANG
(2002) 4 final). The Report was forwarded to Germany under cover of the letter of 14
August 2002 by the Directorate of Co-operation for Local and Regional Democracy.
10.
In October 2002, Germany sent its initial comments on the Monitoring Report
to the Council of Europe.
11.
The Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe, on 4 December 2002,
made its recommendations on further measures for the Charter's implementation in
Germany.
12.
In accordance with Article 15, para. 1, of the Charter, the Federal Republic of
Germany now presents its Second State Report. In addition to generally updating
the First State Report, the present report covers the specific comments in response
to the observations and information requests contained in the Monitoring Report of
the CoE Committee of Experts and to the recommendations of the Committee of
Ministers with regard to the further implementation of undertakings in Germany. For
ease of reference, newly included information is shaded in grey. In the answers to the
comments of the Committee of Experts on those undertakings which the Committee
did not consider fulfilled, reference is made to the respective paragraph number/s of
the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final].
-5-

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part A

13.
The Federal Republic of Germany values the activities of the Committee of
Experts in the process of monitoring the implementation of the Charter and welcomes
the efforts made by the Committee of Experts in assessing the achieved level of compliance with Germany's obligations arising from the Charter. Germany notes that the
comments of the Committee of Experts show professional examination of the situation
of regional and minority languages in Germany and that the Committee has in fact paid
attention to important questions and problems. In this context, Germany draws attention
to the fact that the available human and financial resources have so far been fully utilized in carrying out the respective implementation measures, and that any extended
efforts in these fields are kept within narrow limits on account of the tight budget situation, the emerging budgetary trends and the imperative need for budget consolidation.
14.
Germany considers the fulfilment of the obligations under the Charter and the
Committee's Report as a continued pan-European process aimed at the creation of
international standards laying down the foundations for a legal regulation of relations
within a community of citizens of a particular State and thus providing for sustained
protection of the existing regional or minority languages.
15.
Germany's State Report on the implementation of the Charter, which serves
as the basis of the monitoring mechanism, is based on the principle of transparency,
and Germany considers it important to maintain an open and constructive dialogue
with the bodies responsible for monitoring the implementation of the Charter, i.e. the
Committee of Experts and the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe.
16.
The Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] and the present State Report
were discussed with the representatives of the language groups at an Implementation Conference. The written comments of the language groups are enclosed in the
present State Report [cf. Part E]. The comments have been included regardless of
whether the respective language groups call for government action - which Germany
has pledged to take - or express any wishes going beyond those undertakings.

A.3

Detailed information on the various languages:

17.
Use of, and identification with, a mother tongue are, in Germany, just as free
as identification with any of the national minorities or the other ethnic groups traditionally resident in Germany. It is everybody's individual personal decision - which is
neither registered, reviewed or contested by the [German] State - whether he/she
chooses to be considered a member of any of the these groups. There are no

-6-

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part A

statistics established on the basis of ethnic or linguistic criteria. Therefore, only estimates can be provided on the number of speakers of regional or minority languages.

A.3.1

The Danish language

18.
Danish is traditionally spoken by the Danish minority in the Land of Schleswig-Holstein to the south of the German-Danish border. The Danish minority, like the
German majority population, live in the German part of Schleswig in their traditional
settlement area, just as the German minority and the Danish majority population do
on the Danish side in North Slesvig - Sønderjylland. Germans and Danes have been
living together in this area for more than a thousand years. Today's border between
the two countries was laid down in 1920 on the basis of the results of two plebiscites
agreed upon in the Treaty of Versailles.
19.
The number of members of this ethnic group is estimated at some 50,000
persons who, for the major part, live in the Schleswig region in the Kreise [countytype administrative districts] of Nordfriesland and Schleswig-Flensburg, in the
northern part of the Kreis of Rendsburg-Eckernförde, and in the city of Flensburg.
The percentage of the members of the Danish minority in relation to the population of
the various towns and communities varies greatly, and ranges from local
communities where only a number of families of the minority live, to around 20 per
cent in the town of Flensburg and some smaller places.
20.
All members of the Danish minority understand Danish, and most of them
speak this language. In addition, all of them have a good command of German. In
rural areas, parts of the Danish minority – and of the [German] majority population as
well - speak the regional Low German language; and in the immediate border area,
the Danish minority as well as their German fellow citizens also speak Sønderjysk, a
South Jutish dialect of Danish.
21.
Most of the members of the Danish minority use the Danish language in the
private sphere. But account must also be taken of the situation in mixed-nationality
marriages where German usually prevails. Danish is spoken within the organizations
of the Danish minority. Constant use and promotion of the Danish language provide
the basis for all minority-related activities. Of particular importance for proficiency in
the Danish language are the Danish private schools, especially also for the children
from mixed-nationality marriages.

-7-

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

A.3.2

Part A

The Sorbian language (Upper Sorbian and Lower Sorbian (Wendish))

22.
The Slavic people of the Sorbs, who have a history going back more than a
millennium and a culture of their own, has mostly lived within a setting of German
statehood. In the Middle Ages, the Sorbian language was spoken in a much more
extended area than today. Sorbian is part of the West Slavonic family of languages.
From the various dialects of colloquial Sorbian, two standard languages developed:
Upper Sorbian [more precisely: the Sorbian of Upper Lusatia], and Lower Sorbian
[the Sorbian of Lower Lusatia; also called Wendish]. Today's speech area of Sorbian
covers Upper Lusatia in the northeast of the Free State of Saxony, and Lower
Lusatia in the southeast of the Land of Brandenburg. The Sorbs living in Lower
Lusatia are, until this day, also known as Wends.
23.
The number of persons considering themselves Sorbs is not known. The estimated number is about 60,000 Sorbs, of whom two thirds live in Saxony, and one
third in Brandenburg. In some local communities in the Kreis of Kamenz, they account for up to 90 per cent of the population; in some other villages of the settlement
area, the majority of inhabitants are Sorbs. They make up about 10 per cent of the
population of the overall settlement area, while in the towns they account for less
than 2 per cent. Approximately 20,000 Sorbs still have a command of Sorbian in both
its spoken and written form; all Sorbs speak German as well.
24.
Use of the Sorbian language in private depends, to a large extent, on the
Sorbian people themselves, especially on whether the language is passed on to their
children. In the central settlements with a large share, or even the majority, of Sorbs,
this is practised to a much greater extent than by Sorbian families in larger places
and towns where they constitute a dispersed minority. In the case of the Sorbs, too,
the existence of many mixed-nationality marriages has an influence on the language
spoken within the family and on the extent to which Sorbian is passed on to the
children, and thus attendance of Sorbian schools is of particular importance to these
children.
25.
Use of the Sorbian language in public is rendered difficult by the fact that the
Sorbian settlement area is not generally bilingual but that, as a rule, only the Sorbs
have a command of both languages. Therefore, apart from a number of exceptions,
greater use is being made of German than of the Sorbian language in public and also
in church.

-8-

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

A.3.3

Part A

The Frisian language (North Frisian and Saterland Frisian)

26.
Frisian, as an autonomous and ancestral language, descended from the
North Sea Germanic division of the West Germanic subfamily, distinctly differs from
Netherlandic [Dutch and Flemish] and Low German and, in terms of historical
linguistics, is closely related to Old English. It has evolved in three subgroups: West
Frisian, East Frisian, and North Frisian. West Frisian is spoken in the province of
Friesland in the Netherlands. East Frisian is native to Ostfriesland in Lower Saxony.
These two regions form the historical [geographical] centre of the Frisians. North
Frisian is spoken in the Kreis of Nordfriesland in the western coastal region of
Schleswig-Holstein.
27.
Already around the year 1500, the East Frisians replaced the Frisian language by Low German as the language used for drafting legal documents. By 1800,
for the major part, and last on one of the North Sea Islands at the beginning of the
20th century, they relinquished their ancestral Frisian language which, however, has
continued to be used as the language of everyday oral communication.
28.
East Frisian has become extinct in the meantime; only in the Saterland in the
Oldenburg region, near the border with the Netherlands, about 2,000 persons still
use Saterland Frisian [Saterfriesisch - Seelterfräisk] which forms part of the Old East
Frisian subgroup of languages. About twice as many people understand Saterland
Frisian. Despite many Low German loan words, Saterland Frisian has preserved its
linguistic independence. Saterland [East] Frisian originally had superimposed itself on
the Westphalian Low German language of the first inhabitants of the Saterland. After
Ostfriesland and the adjacent regions of the Saterland had changed over to Low German, survival of Saterland Frisian was possible only because the Saterland villages
were located in a sandy river valley surrounded by extensive fens which, up to the
20th century, provided a shield from contacts with the outside world and from its influence that penetrates and moulds all spheres of life. The use of Sater Frisian
[Seelterfräisk] by the Saterland Frisians is gradually increasing since school-children
are taking a greater interest in learning this language and children and the grandparent generation have started to communicate in Saterland Frisian again.
29.
North Frisian developed after Frisians, about a 1000 years ago, had settled
also north of the Frisians' geographical centre. North Frisian consists of two groups of
dialects with nine local varieties: six of these [so-called Continental North Frisian] are
spoken along the west coast of Schleswig-Holstein (including the holms, or Halligen
islands), and three of them [so-called Insular North Frisian] on the offshore islands of
Sylt, Föhr and Amrum, and Helgoland. Despite the linguistic diversity brought about
-9-

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part A

by the subdivision into dialects, the linguistic communality of North Frisian prevails.
Of the total number of nine North Frisian local idioms, three - which are spoken by
less than 150 persons - are acutely threatened by extinction. The other six local
idioms are not only used orally but also exist in written form. Their orthography for the
major part is based on uniform rules.
30.
The first book in the North Frisian language was published in 1809. Since
then, a large body of Frisian-language literature has been created, which covers
several hundreds of books and, in addition, several thousands of literary items in a
variety of publications. This ensures that the Frisian language also meets the requirements expected of a modern means of communication.
31.
The number of those who, on account of their origin and their sense of personal identity, consider themselves North Frisians are estimated to number as many
as 50,000 to 60,000 persons; this is one third of the population of this region. Of
these, some 10,000 persons still speak North Frisian; another 20,000 persons
understand this language.
32.
The North Frisian language still is, to a major extent, the language spoken
within the family and the language for communication in public, especially among the
Frisians living in the northern continental region (extending from the German-Danish
border to the town of Bredstedt). In mixed-language marriages, German and Frisian
are increasingly used as languages of equal status.

A.3.4

The Romany language of the German Sinti and Roma

33.
Romany is the language spoken by those German Sinti and Roma who traditionally live in Germany. It is spoken by an estimated number of up to 60,000 persons. This is an autonomous language, deriving from Sanskrit, which is spoken by
the Sinti in Western Europe, especially in the German speech area, and which differs
from the other Romany languages used in Europe. In addition, the Romany of the
German Roma is spoken by an estimated number of up to 10,000 persons.
34.
Historically, the language can be assigned to quite a number of small regions
in Germany where Sinti for centuries have been, or still are, traditionally resident. The
race policy of the despotic Nazi régime - entailing stigmatization and discrimination,
persecution and the genocide inflicted also on the Sinti and Roma - has, moreover,
destroyed the historical structure and the speech communities of some members of
the Sinti and Roma people. Nowadays the German Sinti and Roma are integrated

- 10 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part A

into society. In everyday life, however, they are still subject to private discrimination,
due to the prejudices held by some fellow citizens.
35.
The majority of German Sinti and Roma nowadays live in the capitals of the
"old Länder" of Germany [the 11 federal States that belonged to the FRG within its
territorial boundaries up to German unification], including Berlin and its environs, and
in the conurbations of the Greater Hamburg area, the Rhine/Ruhr region with
Düsseldorf and Cologne at its centre, and the Rhine/Main and Rhine/Neckar
conurbations. In some cases, major numbers of German Sinti and Roma also live in
regions of geographically close, smaller towns. Thus, German Sinti and Roma reside,
for instance, in medium-sized and small towns of Ostfriesland, Northern Hesse, the
Palatinate, Baden and Bavaria. So there is no single speech area confined to any
one Land for the Romany language traditionally spoken in Germany. Rather, the
language is spoken in most of the Länder of the Federal Republic of Germany.
36.
However, the high degree of dispersal and what often are only small
numbers of users of the Romany language in a narrowly delimited region must not be
allowed to result in any impairment of the objective scope for protection if the causes
of such dispersal have been generated, or at least been significantly influenced, by
earlier government action. In this regard, there is a particular obligation incumbent on
the state to help to reduce problems that have arisen in respect of the existence of
the language and to expand the scope for developing the language and culture. To
the extent possible at this time, account is taken of this requirement in the measures,
both applied and envisaged, for protection and promotion.

A.3.5

The Low German language

37.
Low German is spoken - mainly as a cognate, or closely related, language by large numbers of users in Northern Germany where different varieties of
Plattdeutsch (Low German or Low Saxon) have developed in the various regions.
The problem history of what formerly was the leading language of Northern Germany
began in the 17th century. Since that time, the model role of Low German has
increasingly devolved to High German. In the course of this process, the forms and
functions of Low German radically changed. Low German has the status of a
historical separate language [independent language in its own right]. However, since
there no longer is a unilingual community of speakers, the regional forms of Low
German (Low Saxon) nowadays only exist under the umbrella of High German
(standard German).

- 11 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part A

In the period between the year 800 and the end of the 13th century, written Latin was
used almost exclusively in Northern Germany. With the progressive Christianization
of the Saxon territories, however, the spoken popular language began to be rudimentarily established as a written language. Thus, the sources of Old Saxon, which
was only spoken in a small geographical area, represent the oldest attested form of
Low German. Tradition of such sources ended in the 11th century.
38.
Middle Low German represented the next linguistic stage of Low German.
The changes regarding writing and the spoken language took place in the 12th century. In the 13th century, written tradition was increasingly pursued by the clergy and
in administration. In the wake of the Germanic settlements [Germanic colonization of
Eastern Europe] in the 12th century, the territory in which Low German was used had
already been extended. The growing economic and political importance of the North
German towns and cities also resulted in the functional expansion of Middle Low
German as a language of communication and commercial language.
With the emergence of writing regarding the popular language, regional written forms
of the Middle Low German language had developed. While these regional languages
spread, an assimilated common-use language developed. For two centuries (14th 16th c.), Middle Low German is the leading language used in the Hanseatic economic
and cultural area. During the last third of the 15th century, the new medium of printing
reached the Low German speech area. Lübeck became the most important printing
centre of Northern Europe. Middle Low German left a lasting mark on the Scandinavian languages.
39.
The phase of expansion of Middle Low German ended with the changeover
to High German as the standard written language after the year 1500. Within a short
period of time, the Low German written languages were supplanted by High German,
the new standard language. By 1650, this changeover was already completed for the
major part. This was socially and functionally a top-down process, i.e. it occurred
from the upper classes, which had the decisive influence on the language used,
down to the lower classes, from the written (standard/literary) language down to the
spoken language, and from formal domains down to the private sphere of life. These
changes entailed a loss of function and prestige for this language and, as a result,
the territory and the spheres in which it was used were increasingly reduced.
40.
Since the 17th century, the High German standard/literary language and the
Low German language, in the form of plattdeutsch varieties, have been in competition with each other in a history of strained relations. Until the middle of the 19th century, Low German had continued as the spoken language of wide sections of the
population. In the course of the 19th and 20th century, however, the general bilingua- 12 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part A

lism of Northern Germany underwent marked changes as a result of the detraditionalisation process. In the course of industrialization and urbanization, there was again
a shift from one language to the other - this time affecting the spoken language. Under the influence of a democratized school and education system, it was, above all,
the majority of the urban population who changed over to High German. As a result,
either the sequence of language acquisition - Low German/High German - was reverted, or the change resulted in High German unilingualism. As Low German was
discarded in public life, it has become a private, non-formal - closely related - language of everyday communication. Particularly in rural areas of Northern Germany,
however, there are still speech communities communicating in Low German in private life and leisure-time activities as well as in some traditional professions and use
this language as a vehicle for cultural activities. In these places, bilingualism - more
or less hidden - prevails.
41.
Since the 17th century, until this date, the relation between High German and
Low German has continuously been accompanied by a commentarial history. As a
general rule, such commentaries refer to the given current constellation of linguistic
variants and, embedded in a wide economic, social and ideological reference framework, have been one of the contributing factors causing significant changes in
linguistic practice.
Against the background of the language's decline, a number of poets time and again
opposed this state of affairs with Low German poetry. In this way, they argued
against the imperilment of a cultural identity manifesting itself in the particular language. When political Romanticism in the middle of the 19th century equated language and Volksgeist ("national character", "genius of the people"), the idea developed that the Low German vernacular was of particular value in forging identity. The
emergence of a new written form of Low German in literature in the mid-19th century
therefore marks an important turning point. The impetus provided by this development continues to this day. It was on this basis that a New Low German literature
developed - with continuity, quality, and subtlety and precision as its prominent
features. Due to the mediatisation of Low German, this language also asserted itself
in other segments of cultural life: in the theatre, in the Church, in broadcasting. An
institutional network of supraregional associations and unions, theatres and publishing houses, writers' unions, teachers' associations and clergymen's unions created
the basis for a specific Low German scene that plays a widely publicized role in
Northern Germany's cultural life. The work of this network has consolidated - at least
rudimentarily - over the past three decades thanks to the moral and financial support
provided by the Länder, local governments, and other institutions.

- 13 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part A

42. Nowadays Low German is spoken in eight Länder of the Federal Republic of Germany. The traditional speech area covers the entire terrority of Bremen, Hamburg,
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Lower Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein, but only
parts of Brandenburg, North Rhine/Westphalia and Saxony-Anhalt. Language use
differs greatly, both from one region to another and in terms of rural/urban distribution. In the coastal region, the Low German dialects are of greater vitality than those
in the South, near the language border.
43.
The number of people in Northern Germany who have a command of, and
actively speak, any of the varieties of Low German is not known. The only informative
study available so far, a representative survey of 1984 covering the Low German
region in the "old" Länder [i.e. those in "West Germany"], provided the following average
figures:
-

56% of the respondents said that they could speak Low German (on a scale of
"very well", "well", or "a little");

-

43% stated that they could not speak Low German at all;

-

89% stated that they were able to understand Low German; and

-

11% stated that they could not understand Low German.

44.

For the three "new" Länder [where Low German is spoken, i.e. Mecklenburg-Western
Pomerania, Brandenburg and Saxony-Anhalt], no comparable data are available. On the
basis of an assumed similar distribution of language proficiency, the overall number
of those who claim to have a more or less good knowledge of the Low German language can be estimated to amount to some eight million individuals.
45.
Notwithstanding the cultural activities of clubs and associations, amateur
theatre groups, writers' associations and circles of poets, the number of speakers of
Low German continues to dwindle. The present state of affairs - i.e. that unregulated
passing on of this language has, for the major part, been brought to a standstill - is
due, in particular, to the fact that the Low German dialects no longer fulfil any public
functions. Therefore, at least in the medium term, Low German must be considered
moribund.

A.4

Bodies established by the Federation and the Länder

46.
The Bund [Federation; Federal Government/Administration] and the Länder have
established special bodies where regular exchanges take place between the political
- 14 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part A

level, public administration and the various language groups. As a rule, the language
groups - with the exception of the users of the Low German language - also represent a national minority or ethnic group within the meaning of the Council of Europe
Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities. Thus discussions
within these bodies cover, in addition to language-related issues, all minority-relevant
concerns of these groups. Also, functions have been established within public administration which are constantly in touch with the minorities and have direct responsibility for the protection and promotion of the groups protected under the Framework
Convention. The creation of this infrastructure had to take account of the different
needs of the various groups, and of the existing scope for government action. In addition, there are various organizations dealing with the preservation and promotion of
the protected languages.

A.4.1

Government agencies, other public authorities, and Commissioners

47.
At the federal level, the Federal Ministry of the Interior has the primary
responsibility for matters of minority-related law and for giving effect, at the national
level, both to the protection of national minorities and to the provisions of the Charter.
With the designation of a Federal Government Commissioner for Matters Related to
Repatriates and National Minorities in Germany in November 2003, national minorities can rely on an additional central point of contact at the federal level that makes it
easier for the minorities' associations to put their concerns and views to government
agencies, and thus to overcome the difficulties entailed by the division of responsibilities in the Federal Republic of Germany - both vertical (among the Bund, the Länder and local governments) and horizontal (among different Ministries). The main
tasks of this Federal Government Commissioner qua commissioner for national minorities are:
-

point of contact at the federal level for the national minorities in Germany;
representative of the Federal Government to the relevant contact bodies;
public information activities regarding the national minorities in the Federal Republic of Germany.

48.
The continuing dialogue with the national minorities and the Council of
Europe creates awareness and understanding of the concerns of national minorities
and ensures direct involvement of the persons concerned in the opinion-forming
process.
49.
As regards human rights aspects of the protection of minorities, responsibility
also lies with the Federal Ministry of Justice. In the Länder, general responsibility for
- 15 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part A

matters concerning national minorities is vested in the respective State Chancellery
or one of the Ministries (usually the Ministry of Cultural Affairs and/or of Education, or
the Ministry of Scientific Affairs).
50.
According to their specific portfolios, also other Ministries, or institutions at
the same level, deal with various aspects of the protection of minorities (usually in
connection with specific promotion tasks). At the federal level, this is the Federal
Government Commissioner for Cultural Affairs and the Media. In the Länder, there
are, in instances, several different Ministries with responsibility in this field since,
under the federal system of Germany, material support for the work of minority organizations mostly is a responsibility of the Länder.
51.
In Brandenburg Land the Ministry for Science, Research and Cultural Affairs
has a Section for Sorbian (Wendish) Matters, while the Free State of Saxony has
established a Section for Sorbian Matters at its Ministry of Scientific Affairs and Arts.
In Schleswig-Holstein, the head of a section of the State Chancellery is responsible
for minority matters. In other Länder of the Federal Republic of Germany, these tasks
are performed by units of various supreme Land authorities. Reponsibility for dealing
with the interests of the Sorbian and German/Sorbian schools in the Sorbian settlement area in the Free State of Saxony lies with the Saxon State Ministry for Cultural
Affairs and the Bautzen Regional Schools Office.
52.
In order to provide a direct point of contact to the minorities in Schleswig-Holstein, the function of a Border Region Commissioner, who reported to the MinisterPresident, was established in 1988. In April 2000, the designation was changed to
"the Minister President's Commissioner for Minorities". Inter alia, the Commissioner
[at present a woman] advises the Minister-President on matters concerning the Danish
minority in the Schleswig region of this Land and those Frisians and German Sinti
and Roma who live in Schleswig-Holstein. The Commissioner for Minorities monitors
the cultural, social and economic developments in the border region in terms of their
implications for the minorities and reviews the development and implementation of
the legislation on minorities and ethnic groups at the international level. At the same
time, she performs the function of a Commissioner for Low German.
53.
Kreise [county-type administrative districts] with larger shares of national
minorities and ethnic groups, and local authorities in the settlement areas of the latter
have, like other public-law corporations (e.g. Ostfriesische Landschaft), also provided
facilities for attending to the interests of minorities. In Brandenburg, the kreisfreie
Stadt [non-district municipality] of Cottbus and Spree-Neisse Landkreis [(rural)
administrative district] have designated full-time Commissioners for Sorbian Matters. In
the Landkreise of Oberspreewald-Lausitz [Lusatia] and Dahme-Spreewald, honorary
- 16 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part A

commissioners have been designated. The Amt [local authority union] of Jänschwalde
has designated an honorary Sorbian Affairs Commissioner, and the Amt of Burg has a
similar designation in preparation. The city of Lüneburg [in Lower Saxony Land] has an
honorary Commissioner for Low German.
54.
For election of the Commissioners, the Sorbian associations had the right of
nomination in Cottbus and in the Ämter of Jänschwalde and Burg. In Spree-Neisse
Landkreis, opinions of the Sorbian associations were taken into consideration. In Oberspreewald-Lausitz Landkreis, the associations were not involved in the selection
process but agreed to the selection and since then have pursued constructive cooperation. In the Landkreis of Dahme-Spreewald, the Sorbian associations did not
exercise the right of nomination.
55.
In the Free State of Saxony, Bautzen Landkreis and the kreisfreie Stadt of
Hoyerswerda have Sorbian Affairs Commissioners. In Niederschlesischer Oberlausitzkreis [Lower Silesian Kreis of Upper Lusatia], this function is performed by the office of
the Landrat [chief executive official of a Landkreis]. Kamenz Landkreis has laid down
the rule that a senior position in the administration shall be filled with a member of the
Sorbian people. At present, this is the post of the Head of the Department for Youth
and Social Affairs.
56.
The tasks of the Commissioners for Sorbian Matters include, for instance,
preparations for decisions of the mayor, departmental heads and town councils; coordination and co-operation with the local agencies and departments with regard to all
Sorbian matters; monitoring and supporting the public agencies in respect of the enforcement of the rights of the Sorbian people, as guaranteed by the Land Constitution;
introduction of draft bills affecting the interests of the Sorbian population; and co-operation with Sorbian institutions.
57.
The tasks of these public authorities include the protection of national minorities at the federal and Land levels, including responsibility for legislative proposals,
the implementation of minority-related law, including the pertinent international-law
instruments, promoting the work of national minorities and ethnic groups and, at the
local government level, on-the-spot assistance/counselling and direct support.
58.
The activities of public authorities relate to the minorities/language groups
living in the respective Land or region, and at the federal level, to the Danish minority,
the Sorbian people, the Frisians in Germany, and the German Sinti and Roma.

- 17 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

A.4.2

Part A

Councils, institutions, and/or round tables at the federal level

59.
- A Federation/Länder Conference with the minorities on the Framework Convention
for the Protection of National Minorities: Participants are the Federal Ministries
dealing with the protection of national minorities, the respective Land authorities
with lead responsibility, representatives of the umbrella organizations of the minorities protected by the Convention and of their scholarly institutions. One of the
Conference subjects is discussion of the implementation of the Framework Convention.
- A Federation/Länder Conference with the language groups concerned on the
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages: participants are Federal
and Land Government authorities dealing with aspects of the Regional/Minority
Language Charter, and representatives of the umbrella organizations of these
language groups and of their scholarly institutions. One of the Conference subjects
is discussion of the implementation of the Regional/Minority Language Charter.
- Consultative Committee on Issues concerning the Danish Minority, set up at the
Federal Ministry of the Interior (MOI): members are the Federal Minister of the Interior and a State Secretary of the Federal MOI; two members each of the parliamentary groups of the German Bundestag, three members of the Danish minority
in Germany, and the [Minister-President's] Commissioner for Minorities as the representative of Schleswig-Holstein Land. The Committee is chaired by the Federal
Minister of the Interior. The Committee is to ensure contacts of the Danish minority
with the Federal Government and the Bundestag. It has the task to discuss all
issues of the Federal Government's domestic policy that concern or affect the
Danish minority.
- Consultative Committee on Issues concerning the Sorbian People, set up at the
Federal Ministry of the Interior (MOI): membership of the Consultative Committee
includes, on the one hand, three members of the Sorbian people designated by
DOMOWINA [Federation of Lusatian Sorbs] and a representative of the
Foundation for the Sorbian People [Załožba za serbski lud] and, on the other
hand, representatives of the Federal Ministry of the Interior and of the
Brandenburg and Saxony governments. Members of the German Bundestag and
representatives of other federal ministries canbe invited to attend the meetings.
The Committee is chaired by the Federal Minister of the Interior.
The Consultative Committee's task is to discuss all issues of the Federal Government's domestic policy that concern or affect the Sorbian people.
- 18 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part A

- Foundation for the Sorbian People: the members of the board of trustees
[Foundation Board] are representatives of the Sorbian people, of the Bund [Federal
Government], of the Free State of Saxony and of Brandenburg Land, and local
government representatives; membership of the Parliamentary Consultative
Council includes Members of the German Bundestag, of the Saxon Landtag and of
the Brandenburg Landtag. The aim of the Foundation is the promotion, both in
terms of moral support and funding, of activities designed to preserve the Sorbian
identity and language, Sorbian institutions and Sorbian culture (the Director of the
Foundation is a member of the Sorbian people). Cf. the comments under Nos. 68 75 below for further details.
- So far, no similar bodies have been established at the federal level to attend to
matters concerning the Frisians or the German Sinti and Roma. However, leading
personalities from the spheres of politics, science and industry in Germany are
represented on the Board of Curators of the Documentation and Cultural Centre of
German Sinti and Roma.
- The German Bundestag established a "Round Table on National Minorities", which
is chaired by the chairperson of the Committee on Internal Affairs and, several
times per year, brings together Members of Parliament and representatives of the
umbrella organizations of the national minorities for joint deliberations. The President of the Bundestag, in the autumn of 2003, invited this Round Table to a discussion and promised similar future meetings once a year.
- In the autumn of 2003, an all-party initiative for regional and minority languages
was launched in the German Bundestag with the aim of taking particular care of
the language groups protected under the Charter.

A.4.3

A.4.3.1

Bodies established for the various languages (Land bodies and
organizations)
The Danish language

60.
The chief organization of the Danish minority for cultural work and thus, in
particular, for the cultivation of the Danish language is Sydslesvigsk Forening (SSF,
i.e. "Südschleswigscher Verein" - South Schleswig Association), with the Dansk
Generalsekretariat in Flensburg and a membership of 14,500; another 25 associations pursuing many and various activities are affiliated to the SSV.
- 19 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part A

61.
Sydslesvigsk Forening is committed to the promotion of "Danish work in
South Schleswig", of the Danish language and of Danish folklore. In addition, the
Association maintains lively contacts with Denmark and the other Nordic countries,
and its aim is the keeping alive of the Danish culture and the Danish way of life within
the minority. It organizes Danish theatrical performances and concerts, maintains
buildings as meeting places and assembly rooms, a museum, a school hostel in the
country [outdoor pursuit centre] as well as residences for the elderly, and operates
senior citizens' clubs with a wide range of recreational facilities and activities in the
Danish language.
62.
The programme of cultural events throughout the region also includes
lectures, movies, slide lectures, discussions and social gatherings. The yearly meetings of the Danish minority, with large open-air gatherings in various places of the
settlement area and with parades with musical accompaniment, have for some time
already developed into large public festivals. The minority and the majority have
opened up towards each other and share experiences and activities.
63.
The Danish minority also operates the historical museum of Danevirkegården
near [the town of] Schleswig, and an adult education centre in Jarplund.
64.
Sydslesvigs danske Ungdomsforeniger, SdU (Danish Youth Association for
Southern Schleswig), organizes a wide range of youth work activities. It supports
recreational centres and sports facilities. Its affiliated bodies include, inter alia, the
Danish-language amateur theatre Det lille Teater in Flensburg. Associations of a very
different structure co-operate within the Youth Association. Besides sports clubs,
these include freely organized groups and church youth groups as well as the Danish
Boy Scouts Corps in South Schleswig. For the various fields of interests, there are
numerous recreational activities offered also outside group-based activities.
65.
In addition, the Danish minority has a library system of its own, i.e. the Dansk
Centralbibliotek for Sydslesvig, or Dänische Zentralbibliothek für Südschleswig
(Danish Central Library for South Schleswig), which is the local main library for adults
and children and also comprises two mobile libraries, a bibliographic section and a
selection of audiovisual media. The Danish Central Library has two main branches
and many sub-branches in schools and nursery schools. It also comprises a research
section and archives.
66.
Of particular importance to the Danish minority, and for the preservation of
their language, is their fully developed system of private schools. The providing body
for activities related to schools and nursery schools is Dansk Skoleforening for Syd- 20 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part A

slesvig, or Dänischer Schulverein für Südschleswig (Danish Schools Association for
South Schleswig), with some 8,000 members. At present, it operates 57 nursery
schools and day-nurseries and 49 schools. These are primary schools and secondary modern schools - including remedial classes, four Realschulen [secondary
technical schools], one Gymnasium [grammar school] in Flensburg, and one
comprehensive school.
67.
The Danish minority finance their work with their own resources, with donations from private individuals and foundations and, for a significant part, with allocations from the budgets of the Schleswig-Holstein Land Government and of German
local governments in the settlement area. Also, the minority receive substantial funds
for their work from the Kingdom of Denmark and from the Danish Border Association.
These funds make it possible for the cultural work of the Danish minority to be carried
out on an extensive scale.

A.4.3.2 The Sorbian language
68.
For the duration of each legislative period, the Saxon Landtag elects a
Council for Sorbian Affairs, and the Landtag of Brandenburg a Council for Sorbian
(Wendish) Affairs. Each of these Councils has five members who, in Brandenburg
Land, must be members of the Sorbian people. In Brandenburg, Council members
are nominated by the Sorbian associations, and in the Free State of Saxony by
Sorbian associations and the communities in the Sorbian settlement area. The
Council deals with all parliamentarian matters of importance to the Sorbian people,
including legislative proposals, and submits comments/opinions from the Sorbian
point of view. In the Free State of Saxony, also the State Government shall hear the
Council on these matters.
69.
In addition, the Sorbs founded a large number of associations with widely
varying objectives. The umbrella organization of the Sorbian associations is
Domowina – Zwjazk Łużiskich Serbow, or Bund Lausitzer Sorben [Federation of
Lusatian Sorbs], to which 14 organizations of the Sorbs, with more than 6,000
members, are affiliated. These include the Sorbian Scientific Society/Maćica Serbska
and, for school and cultural matters, Sorbischer Schulverein [Sorbian Schools
Association], Bund der sorbischen Studierenden [Union of Sorbian Students],
Sorbischer Künstlerbund [Sorbian Artists' Union] and Verband sorbischer
Gesangvereine [Union of Sorbian Choral Societies]. In the field of youth work,
particular mention is to be made of the Sorbian youth organization Pawk. In addition,
there are many other associations and support/promoting associations which, partly
- 21 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part A

also from locations abroad, are committed and devoted to cultivating and promoting
the Sorbian history, language and culture.
70.
The ancestral settlement area of the Sorbs is in the Länder of Saxony and
Brandenburg. The two Länder have, mutually and with the Bund, agreed a common
promotion policy. This policy has been embodied in the Foundation for the Sorbian
People (cf. para. 59 above). It was established in 1991 as an unincorporated foundation of the Free State of Saxony, with the Bund and the Länder of Brandenburg and
Saxony as the providing bodies. This unincorporated foundation has always been understood by the interested parties as a mere interim solution. The aim was the establishment of a legally autonomous foundation which would enable the Sorbian people to
organize its interests and concerns with a large degree of self-determination. After the
structures required to this end had been developed in the meantime, the [incorporated]
foundation was established with the conclusion of a State Treaty signed by the Länder
of Brandenburg and Saxony on 28 August 1998 in Schleife/Saxony. The Treaty was
ratified on 18 December 1998 and entered into force on 1 January 1999.
71.
The institutors of the Foundation, and Contracting Parties to the State Treaty,
are the Land of Brandenburg and the Free State of Saxony. The Federal Government
(Bund), on the basis of the Agreement on the Common Funding of the Foundation, provides funding and appoints representatives to the Foundation's bodies. The principal
tasks of the Foundation are, in particular:
- promotion of institutions preserving the culture, arts and homeland of the Sorbs;
- promotion of, and participation in, projects concerning the documentation, publication and presentation of Sorbian art and culture;
- promoting the preservation and further development of the Sorbian language and
cultural identity, also in Sorbian educational and scientific/scholarly facilities and in
such institutions as serve these objectives;
- promoting the preservation of the Sorbian identity among the general public, in
professional life and in the relations and shared life of the Sorbian and non-Sorbian
populations;
- promotion of projects aimed at furthering international understanding and co-operation with other ethnic groups and national minorities in Europe, and promotion of the
historically evolved relations of Sorbs with their Slav neighbours with a view to
forging a link between Germany and Eastern Europe; and
- participation in the design of governmental and other programmes affecting Sorbian
interests.
72.
The main parameters of the Foundation's activities and its annual budget are
decided by the Foundation Board [board of trustees]. The Board is composed of 15
- 22 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part A

members, of whom six are representatives of the Sorbian people. The Foundation's
Parliamentary Consultative Council supports and advises the board of trustees. The
Consultative Council has an extensive right of access to information. It is composed
of two members each of the German Bundestag and of the Saxon and the Brandenburg Parliaments (Landtage).
73.
The Foundation is domiciled in the city of Bautzen, and has regional offices in
Cottbus and Schleife [both in Saxony], and in Hoyerswerda, Crostwitz and Bautzen
[in Brandenburg]. Its affairs are managed by the Director. The Foundation's
administration also comprises Sorbische Kulturinformation (Sorbian Cultural
Information Office) in Bautzen and the Sorbian Cultural Information Office "Lodka" in
Cottbus.
74.
For fulfilment of the Foundation's objectives, it receives annual grants from
the Bund, the Free State of Saxony and Brandenburg Land. The Bund provides half
of the Foundation's funds while the Free State of Saxony and Brandenburg Land provide one third and one sixth, respectively.
75.

The following institutions are subsidized out of the endowment funds:

- Sorbisches National-Ensemble GmbH [Sorbian National Ensemble], Bautzen;
- Domowina - Bund Lausitzer Sorben e.V. [Federation of Lusatian Sorbs, reg'd], as
the umbrella organization of Sorbian organizations that also operates the WITAJSprachzentrum [WITAJ Language Centre];
- Domowina-Verlag GmbH [Domowina Publishing House], Bautzen;
- Sorbisches Museum Bautzen [Sorbian Museum in Bautzen];
- Wendisches Museum Cottbus [Sorbian/Wendish Museum in Cottbus];
- Sorbischer Schulverein [Sorbian Schools Association, reg'd];
- Sorbisches Institut e.V. [Sorbian Institute, registered association], Bautzen, as a
scholarly institution;
- Schule für niedersorbische Sprache und Kultur [School for the Low
Sorbian/Wendish Language and Culture] in Cottbus.

- 23 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part A

A.4.3.3 The Frisian language
76.
In the Council of Europe Framework Convention for the Protection of
National Minorities, the Frisian ethnic group is accorded the same status as a
national minority. The activities of the Frisian movement are, for the major part,
organized by associations. These include Nordfriesischer Verein [North Frisian
Association], Friisk Foriining [Frisian Association] (formerly: Foriining for nationale friiske
[Association of National Frisians]), Nordfriisk Instituut [North Frisian Institute], Öömrang
Feriin [Öömrang Association, i.e. association for the dialect spoken on the island of
Amrum/Oomram], ffnr (feriin for nordfriisk radio / Ferian för en nuurdfresk radioo
[Association for a North Frisian Radio Station]) and, as a private foundation, the Fering
Stiftung [Fering Association, i.e. association for the dialect spoken on the island of
Föhr/Feer]. All of these associations are dedicated to varying priority aspects of the
preservation of the language, culture and landscape of Nordfriesland. The Verein
Nordfriesisches Institut [Association for the North Frisian Institute] is the providing body
of Nordfriisk Instituut.
77.
The umbrella organization of the Frisians is Interfrasche Rädj [Interfriesischer
Rat - Inter-Frisian Council] which comprises three Frisian Councils: Section North (in
the Land of Schleswig-Holstein), Section East (in the Land of Lower Saxony), and
Section West (in the Netherlands). Membership of the Section North of the Frisian
Council includes four representatives of Nordfriesischer Verein [North Frisian Association], two representatives of Friisk Foriining [Frisian Association], one representative of Eiderstedter Heimatbund [Eiderstedt Union for Local and Regional Traditions],
one representative of Helgoland community, and one representative of Nordfriisk
Instituut [North Frisian Institute]. The Section East brings together the associations of
East Frisians and Saterland Frisians. The main associations in the East Frisian area
are: Ostfriesische Landschaft (a public-law corporation), Landwirtschaftlicher Hauptverein für Ostfriesland [Agricultural Main Association for Ostfriesland],
Oldenburgische Landschaft (a public-law corporation) and Friesischer
Klootschiesserverband [Frisian Curling Association]. The interests of the Saterland
Frisians within this Section are represented by Seelter Buund, an association which
is dedicated, in particular, to the cultivation of the Saterland Frisian culture and
language.
78.
In addition, there are, throughout the entire East Frisian area, many local
clubs dedicated to the cultivation and preservation of Frisian customs and folklore.
79.
The Schleswig-Holstein Landtag has a "body dealing with matters concerning
the Frisians in Schleswig-Holstein Land" which is chaired by the President of the
- 24 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part A

Landtag. Usually twice per year, this body discusses matters concerning the Frisian
segment of the population in the Land, with the aim of cultivating and fostering the
Frisian language and culture. Its members are representatives of the political parties
of the Landtag, the Bundestag MPs for Nordfriesland, representatives of the Land
Government and of the Frisian ethnic group. North Frisians are also represented on
local councils. The meetings of some of these bodies are held also in the Frisian
language.
80.
Since 1950, Kiel University has the Nordfriesische Wörterbuchstelle [North
Frisian Dictionary Institute], and since 1978, the professorial chair for Frisian
philology.
81.
As a central scholarly institution in Nordfriesland, the Nordfriisk Instituut
(Nordfriesisches Institut - North Frisian Institute) in Bredstedt is of great importance to
the cultivation and promotion of, and research on, the Frisian language, culture and
history. In particular, its scholarly and journalistic activities cover the areas of the
languages, history, and study of the geography and civilization of Nordfriesland. The
Institute has a specialized library and archives, and offers seminars, courses, workshops and lectures. The Institute's providing body is the Verein Nordfriesisches Institut, with a membership of around 850, and its work is funded, in particular, by state
and local authorities.
In addition to Nordfriisk Instituut, the privately funded foundation Fering Stiftung, in
Alkersum on the island of Föhr/Feer, pursues scholarly linguistic and cultural activities especially, but not exclusively, for the island of Föhr.
82.
Research work on the Frisian culture of Ostfriesland is undertaken
sporadically by various institutions, also including corporations under public law.
83.
Research on the Saterland Frisian history, culture and language is of more
recent date. Saterland Frisian has not been handed down as a written language. A
known work is a collection of Saterland Frisian proverbs, dating from the year 1901. It
was only after World War II that the first spelling rules were laid down for this language. In 1980, a Saterfriesisches Wörterbuch [Saterland Frisian Dictionary] was
published; a revised and significantly enlarged second edition is in preparation.
Further publications are compilations of texts, such as "Saterfriesisches Volksleben"
and "Saterfriesische Stimmen". The Zentralstelle für die sprachliche Landesforschung [Central Office for Linguistic Regional Research] of Göttingen University, with
the support of Saterland Gemeinde, carried out a poll among 10 per cent of the
inhabitants of the Saterland region. The project is to provide findings regarding the
awareness of the members of this ethnic group in respect of their own history and
- 25 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part A

culture. The study of the Saterland Frisian language lies, in particular, in the hands of
a Germanist [scholar studying German/Germanic languages and literatures] of
Oldenburg University.
84.
In Lower Saxony, a Commissioner for Saterland Frisian/Low German was
appointed in 1997 to serve with the government of Weser-Ems Bezirk [District].

A.4.3.4

The Romany language

85.
To safeguard representation of their interests, members of the German Sinti
and Roma have formed (local) associations and (in line with the federal structure of
Germany) Land Associations.
86.

With the Bundestag Resolution of 26 June 1986, all parliamentary groups of

the German Bundestag confirmed the need for enhancing the living conditions of the
German Sinti and Roma and for promoting their integration into society.
87.
Since 1991, the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma and the Documentation and Cultural Centre of German Sinti and Roma have been supported by
publicly funded institution-based support. The Central Council of German Sinti and
Roma is the umbrella organization of nine Land Associations of German Sinti and
Roma and of a number of regional or local associations and institutions. Priority tasks
of the Central Council are: representation of the interests of this national minority with
regard to according them political equal status - this also includes, for instance, legislative proposals and political initiatives for protection against radical-right violent offences and outrages, and the Holocaust Memorial; enforcement of minority rights and
of indemnification claims of Holocaust victims; commemoration of the genocide victims; and supporting public prosecution of Nazi crimes at the national and international levels. Other chief activities are co-operation with the Land Associations of
German Sinti and Roma and with international minority and human rights organizations, and support for Sinti and Roma in other countries.
88.
Priority activities of the Documentation and Cultural Centre are: documentation and scholarly work regarding the history, culture and present situation of this
national minority; cultural work, education and further education; social work and
counselling; and public information/education with the aim of integrating the German
Sinti and Roma into society while preserving their cultural identity. The Centre
publishes a series of papers in several volumes, e.g. on subjects like "Sinti/Roma
Story-Telling in the Context of European Folk-Tale Traditions", "Portrayal of Gypsies
- 26 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part A

in German-Language Literature", or "Children and Adolescents as Victims of the
Holocaust". In addition, several comprehensive works were published, such as the
documentation entitled "Sinti and Roma under the Third Reich - The Programme of
Extermination Through Labour". Also, the Documentation and Cultural Centre
organizes cultural projects and, in a large permanent exhibition, shows the history
and the extent of the National-Socialist genocide of 500,000 Roma and Sinti in
Europe. A travelling exhibition on the same subject will in future tour several German
cities.
89.
In 1989, substantial public funding provided for the purchase and for interior
and exterior alteration of a building in Heidelberg for use by the aforementioned institutions. These premises house the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma, the
Documentation and Cultural Centre of German Sinti and Roma, and the "Permanent
Exhibition on the Genocide of Sinti and Roma during the Nazi Era".
90.
Public funds are provided to the Central Council for five staff posts (mainly
academic positions), and to the Documentation and Cultural Centre for 19 posts. The
budget of the Central Council is fully funded by the Bund while for the budget of the
Documentation and Cultural Centre, 90 per cent of the funds are provided by the
Bund and the remainder by Baden-Wurttemberg Land.
91.
The Lower Saxony Land Association of German Sinti, one Sinti and Roma
association in Hamburg and a number of smaller organizations of German Sinti, or of
German Sinti and Roma, or of German and foreign Roma are independent organizations.
92.
A number of organizations not affiliated to the Central Council and some elders
of family clans of German Sinti formed the Sinti Allianz Deutschland e.V. [Sinti Alliance
Gemany, reg'd]. As stated by the Alliance, it was founded in 1999/2000 by twenty representatives of tribes and is the umbrella organization of nine - previously independent Sinti organizations and one Lowara tribe. The Sinti Alliance sees itself as representing
those Sinti who feel committed to the Sinti's traditional way of life with its historically
evolved precepts and prohibitions governing the conduct of their lives, and wish to
preserve this social and cultural system. The Alliance's work priorities are the development of political concepts and supporting these concepts vis-à-vis governments, parliaments and public authorities. Other fields of activity, as stated by the Alliance, are
strengthening the Sinti culture through cultural projects and supporting Sinti families in
social matters. In addition, the Alliance provides care of elderly people and represents
the interests of victims of the Nazi regime. The Alliance seeks to establish a legal basis
to enable the Sinti to exercise their civil rights in keeping with the Sinti's taboo system.
- 27 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part A

93.
There are no specific governmental bodies and institutions dealing with the
protection and promotion of the Romany language. This is in line with the wishes of
the majority of this language group. Related to this is the objection raised by the Sinti
Alliance and the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma and other associations of
German Sinti to the introduction of the Romany language in publicly maintained
schools or to making it the subject of scholarly research. On the one hand, this objection is based on the negative experience made with Nazi language researchers.
Therefore, the Central Council and other associations take the view that, also out of
regard for the experience undergone by the survivors of the genocide, Romany
should neither be taught by non-Gypsies nor be learnt within the public educational
system. On the other hand, the reason given by the Sinti Alliance for this objection is
the Sinti's millennia-old taboo system under which nobody outside the Sinti community may be afforded access to this language. The opposite position is taken by
Roma associations which come out in favour of the inclusion of Romany in school
education and wish to support measures, like those taken in European neighbouring
countries, for the development of a written form of this language. Thus, going by
those German Sinti and Roma as are represented by their relevant organizations, the
vast majority of German Sinti and Roma are against inclusion of their Romany language in the State-run education system, and emphasize their right to cultivate their
language and to pass it on to future generations exclusively within the family and
family clans.
In the meantime, Sinti families have addressed a large number of individual requests
and initiatives to the Land Associations of German Sinti and Roma in order to enforce
their wish that teachers of this minority be employed for supplementary lessons for
Sinti and Roma schoolchildren (outside regular classes, in the afternoon and in classrooms made available for the purpose) with a view to improving the children's
linguistic competence. Another objective to be achieved by such supplementary
lessons is to enhance the children's school performance by dealing with school subjects and offering homework assistance - in the minority language - (and/or going
over the regular classroom lessons again for better understanding of the subjectmatter). The Documentation and Cultural Centre of German Sinti and Roma offers to
co-ordinate such initiatives.
For adult education, groups have already been set up - in Mainz, for example, young
fathers of Sinti families discuss job-related, family and other subjects in regular meetings of a working group and go on educational trips in order to improve and keep up
their proficiency in the minority language. In the field of adult education, the Land
Associations of the Central Council - e.g. those of Baden-Wurttemberg, Bremen,
- 28 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part A

Schleswig-Holstein, Rhineland-Palatinate and Bavaria - organize educational trips
every year with members of the Sinti and Roma to the KZ (concentration camp)
memorial sites of Neuengamme, Bergen-Belsen, Natzweiler-Struthof, Flosenbürg
and Dachau. The Central Council and the Documentation and Cultural Centre of
German Sinti and Roma several times per year organize educational trips, mainly for
Holocaust survivors among the Sinti and Roma, to the KZ memorial sites of Auschwitz, Sachsenhausen, Buchenwald and Mauthausen, and every year trips to Evangelische Akademien ["Protestant Academies" - educational centres of the German
Protestant Church] or other educational establishments. These educational trips also
serve the purpose of communicating in the minority language and of the resultant
enhancement of the linguistic competence of the participating adults.

A.4.3.5

The Low German language

94.
Specific promotion of Low German has, for a number of years, been regularly
discussed or co-ordinated within political bodies.
95.
In Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, a Low German Consultative Council,
chaired by the Minister for Education, Scientific and Cultural Affairs, co-ordinates all
pertinent activities.
96.
The Schleswig-Holstein Landtag in 1992 set up the Consultative Council for
Low German. This Council deals with all matters concerning the cultivation of the
Low German language. Also in 1992, the office of the Minister-President's Commissioner for Low German was established. The Commissioner is the contact person for
Low German clubs, associations and organizations.
97.
In early 1999, a Working Group on the Implementation of the European
Charter for Regional or Minority Languages was set up in Lower Saxony. Representatives of various Ministries, of Niedersächsischer Heimatbund [Lower Saxony
Union for Local and Regional Traditions] and of the various parliamentary groups of
the Landtag work together within this Group.
98.
At present, the Universities of Bielefeld, Flensburg, Greifswald, Göttingen,
Hamburg, Kiel, Münster, Magdeburg and Rostock have firmly established research
and teaching capabilities (professorial chairs, departments, lectureships) for various
college/university degrees. In addition, courses of study are offered, for instance, by
the Universities of Bremen, Paderborn, Potsdam, Oldenburg and Osnabrück; also, a
number of workshops for regional Low German dictionaries have been established.
- 29 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part A

99.
Also, the existing clubs dedicated to the preservation of local/regional traditions and the unions of such clubs traditionally perform an important share of the related tasks. The following institutions and centres were founded in more recent times
for specific tasks; their establishment has been the wish of community action groups
and government agencies alike, and they are financed fully or to a large extent with
government funds:
- the Institut für niederdeutsche Sprache [Institute for the Low German Language] in Bremen;
- the Regionalsprachliche Fachstelle [Regional Language Specialist Centre] of [the
public-law corporation] Ostfriesische Landschaft in Aurich, Lower Saxony; and the
Ostfälisches Institut [Eastphalian Institute] in Helmstedt, funded by the regional local
authority Deuregio Ostfalen [Deuregio Eastphalia] working across Land borders - a
co-operation project of formerly five, now three Kreise in Lower Saxony and
Saxony-Anhalt;
- the Niederdeutsch-Zentren [Low German Centres] for the Land regions Schleswig (in
Leck) and Holstein (in Ratzeburg), both established by Schleswig-Holstein Land;
and in Bremen, re-assignment of two half positions of teachers for Low German
courses offered at schools;
- the Volkskulturinstitut Mecklenburg-Vorpommern [Institute for Folk Culture of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania] in Rostock, which formerly was government-sponsored,
but now its providing body is the Kulturbund.

A.5

Participation of the Bund, Länder and language groups

100.
Within the Federal Government, the Federal Ministry of the Interior has the
overall responsibility for ensuring the implementation of the European Charter for
Regional or Minority Languages. To support implementation of the Charter, measures have been, and continue to be, taken to elucidate the contents of this international-law instrument, and its implications in practice, by means of lectures and other
inputs at conferences and seminars, in which both government officials responsible
for the protection of languages and representatives of the language groups concerned participated or participate. One of the permanent tasks is implementation
counselling for the various Länder and government departments, especially also
through sharing practical experience gained in other Länder and foreign countries,
studying the requirements of the minorities concerned, and advising Länder and
language groups.
101.
In June 1999, the first Implementation Conference regarding the Charter took
place; it brought together representatives of the Federal Ministries responsible for the
- 30 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part A

protection of languages, representatives of the competent agencies of the German
Länder, as well as representatives of the language groups protected under the
Charter, and scholars. The subjects of the Conference were the implementation
status of the Charter in Germany, the deficits still encountered in this respect, and
development of the German State Report. An Implementation Conference is held
every year. Also, the Council of Europe instruments on the protection of minorities
(Framework Convention and Charter) and their implementation status regularly are
the subject of discussions of relevant bodies where Parliamentarians, government
representatives and representatives of the minorities/ language groups co-operate.
102.

Before its final endorsement at the national level, the State Report was sent

to the central organizations of the groups concerned for their comments and was discussed with these organizations during an Implementation Conference attended also
by a representative of the Council of Europe. The 'feedback' comments of these
groups are attached to the present State Report as Part E. After its submission to the
Secretariat of the Council of Europe, this State Report will be published in Germany.

A.6.

Public information regarding the Charter

103.
Following its entry into force, the Charter has continued to be the subject of
intensive media reporting both at the supraregional level and in the central settlement
areas of the language groups concerned. On the occasion of the Charter's ratification, during a ceremony with representatives of the groups concerned, the Federal
Ministry of the Interior provided information on the Charter. With reference to the Act
ratifying the Charter, a detailed Memorandum providing information on the background and contents of the Charter was developed and has been widely disseminated. The text of the Charter was published, inter alia, in the collection of texts compiled by the Federal Centre for Political Education (BpB) and entitled "Human Rights
- Documentation and Declaration". The Länder, too, have drawn attention to this international-law instrument in various publications (brochures, press releases, Minority
Report, etc.). The language groups, in particular, have informed their members in
many and various ways.
104.
As part of the public information/education activities of the Federal Government Commissioner for Matters Related to National Minorities in Germany, a comprehensive information brochure is being developed on the situation of the national
minorities and language groups and is planned to be widely distributed. The organizations of the national minorities provide inputs to the brochure's contents.
- 31 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

- 32 -

Part A

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part B

Part B Recommendations of the Committee of Ministers
B.1

Main recommendations of the Committee of Ministers

105.
The Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe has made the following
recommendations with regard to Germany. These recommendations prompted the
Federal Government to discuss the feasible implementation measures and requirements with the Bund, the Länder and language groups. The specific measures are
stated in Parts C and D in connection with the reports on the implementation of the
relevant provisions. A summary is given below:
The Committee of Ministers,
In accordance with Article 16 of the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages;
Having regard to the instrument of ratification submitted by Germany on 16
September 1998;
Having taken note of the evaluation made by the Committee of Experts on the
Charter with respect to the application of the Charter by Germany;
[Having taken note of the comments made by the German authorities on the
contents of the Committee of Experts' report;]
Bearing in mind that this evaluation is based on information submitted by Germany
in its initial periodical report, supplementary information given by the German
authorities, information submitted by bodies and associations legally established in
Germany and on the information obtained by the Committee of Experts during its
"on-the-spot" visit,
Recommends that the German authorities take account of all the observations of
the Committee of Experts and, as a matter of priority:
1. adopt specific legal provisions, where these are still lacking, in order to
implement the undertakings which Germany has entered into under the
Charter;
106.
In the opinion of the Federal Republic of Germany, the respective national
law is the authoritative reference when answering the question as to the extent and
the effects of direct national application of the accepted undertakings. In this respect,
the Federal Republic of Germany points out that, under the Federal Act ratifying the
Charter, the latter ranks in Germany as a federal law which takes precedence over
subordinate law - including Land laws - and, as a matter of principle, is to be applied
as the more specific law overriding other federal laws to the extent that the respective
- 33 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part B

provisions of the Charter are by themselves self-executing. Thus, the pertinent accepted obligations under the Charter are directly binding upon the judiciary and the
administration and must be complied with in administrative action. Accordingly, the
legality of any specific administrative action must be verified on the basis of the
standards constituted by these obligations. In this respect it is pointed out that Germany - through deregulation and strictly in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity - endeavours to reduce the enormous number of statutory regulations and thus
to give citizens a better idea of the situation as regards the applicable laws. This also
means that the requirement for new legal provisions is subject to rigid assessment
criteria, especially with regard to redundant provisions.
107.
To give an example of the direct applicability of the provisions, reference is
made to the closing of a Sorbian class in Crostwitz in the Free State of Saxony as
mentioned in para. 431 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final]. By a
Decision of 16 March 2001, the Ministry of Culture of the Free State of Saxony had,
on account of the lack of pupils registered for that class, revoked the participation of
the Free State of Saxony in the maintenance of the 5th-grade class of the Sorbian
secondary technical school in Crostwitz for the 2001/2002 school year which started
on 10 August 2001. The reason given by the Ministry for this measure was that,
under the Schools Act and the School Regulations, in view of ensuring the required
differentiation as regards the relevant educational offers and on account of the resources required for the purpose, at least two classes per year-group must be established at a given school (in order to avoid "mini" age-classes). On this basis, each
class must as a rule comprise 25 pupils; as a minimum, however, it must consist of
20 pupils. For the 2001/2002 school year, only a total of 17 pupils had been enrolled
for the 5th-grade class, instead of the 40 registrations required per age-class at Mittelschulen [secondary technical schools].
108.

Crostwitz Municipality took legal action against that Decision. The Dresden

Administrative Court considered the revocation of the participation in maintaining this
age-class by the Ministry of Culture to be lawful since continuation of the school was
in contradiction to the Schools Act. For its decision, the Court also thoroughly weighed the functioning of the public educational system against the particular need for
protection of the national minority of the Sorbs. In particular, the Court also examined
the extent to which the administrative authorities comply with the provision of Article
8, para. 1 (c) (iv), of the Regional/Minority Language Charter, which applies in the
Free State of Saxony; in the last analysis, however, the Court did not establish any
violation of the Charter.

- 34 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part B

109.
In particular, the obligations undertaken under Articles 9 and 10 (e.g. Article
9, para. 1 (b) (iii) - allowing documents and evidence to be produced in the regional
or minority languages, or Article 10, para. 3 (c) - allowing requests to be submitted in
the regional or minority language) are self-executing provisions which must be complied with by the judiciary and the administration in their action and which establish a
definite legal framework. The Federal Republic of Germany takes the view that further legal regulations would not provide any additional legal advantage regarding the
implementation of the relevant provisions, but instead, in most cases, would only
create redundant rules of law and consequently - not last in the interest of stemming
the flood of legal rules - should be done without. On this basis, the Federal Republic
of Germany sees only very little scope, if any, for the implementation of the recommendation regarding adoption of legal provisions in Germany ("where these are lacking").
On the other hand, organizations of the linguistic minorities call for the adoption of
specific legal provisions to implement the accepted undertakings, in line with the
recommendations of the Committee of Experts.
110.
Thus, the focus of the process of the Charter's implementation in Germany is
not on legal considerations, but for the major part on practical issues concerning the
actual implementation or invocation of the relevant undertakings - a subject brought
up in para. 5 of the Recommendations, i.e. "establish a structural policy for making it
practically possible to use regional or minority languages in dealings with the administration and, where relevant, in the courts". The Federal Republic of Germany will
continue to accord high priority to this implementation process.
2. establish specific planning and monitoring mechanisms and ensure adequate resource allocation in the field of education;
111.

The Federal Republic of Germany is aware of how important the educational

system is for preserving and fostering the regional and minority languages. The Länder - which under the federal structure of Germany are responsible for educational
policies - make intensive efforts to provide an adequate framework to the benefit of
the regional and minority languages. To this end, the different situations in the various speech areas - as regards the numbers of speakers and varying language use must be reconciled, on the one hand, with the availability of financial resources and,
on the other hand, with the scope for administrative action. In this regard, cf. also the
comments in Nos. 515 and 516 below.
3. take urgent action to strengthen education in North Frisian, Sater Frisian
and Lower Sorbian, whose survival is particularly endangered, and in
- 35 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part B

particular ensure continuity in educational provision in these languages
throughout the school system;
112.
Brandenburg, Lower Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein, as the Länder responsible for the above measures, are already making considerable efforts - provided that
the relevant undertakings have been accepted - in order to ensure educational provision in the aforementioned languages on an adequate scale. When structuring the
school system along these lines, it is indispensable to take account of the actual
situation of the various languages (cf. the observation on this point in No. 111
above). Language policy must in particular, on the basis of the lessons and classes
offered, bring the requirements and demand - as notified by the language groups
themselves - into relation to the adequate administrative measures. Also in this
respect, Germany is well aware of how instrumental an adequate school infrastructure is in preserving and vitalizing languages. It is just as important, however, to
achieve a balance in general cultural work so as to increase the awareness of their
own language among the given language group, especially the younger generation
as the target group of school education - seeing that it is this very awareness that will
create demand for such school education. Our experience so far shows that, in instances, demand lags behind the actual educational offers. In planning school curricula, the relevant authorities must take account of the synergy effects between cultural promotion and school education measures, on the one hand, and of the resultant 'field of tension'. The Charter, too, recognized this 'field of tension' [conflicting requirements and conditions] and, in the provisions relevant in this context, called for
appropriate educational provision in those cases where the number of pupils is considered sufficiently large. The German authorities will continue their efforts to strike a
balance between the measures taken in the two fields and to respond to emerging
developments.
4. improve basic and further teacher training for all regional and minority
languages;
113.
The issue of teacher training also must be assessed in the light of the 'field of
tension' [conflicting requirements and conditions] described in No. 112 above with
regard to the 3rd recommendation. The Länder continue their efforts aimed at further
developing the available capacities adequately within this framework.
5. establish a structural policy for making it practically possible to use
regional or minority languages in dealings with the administration and,
where relevant, in the courts;

- 36 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part B

6. make the speakers of the regional or minority languages more aware that
they have the possibility to avail themselves of the right to use their
language before administrative and, where relevant, judicial authorities;
114.
In Germany's view, the possibility to use regional or minority languages before administrative and judicial authorities is an important element in preserving and
promoting these languages. The Bund and Länder widely agree that for creating adequate awareness among all groups concerned improved public information activities
of state agencies are desirable. Specific measures are being developed.

7. take a more active approach towards promoting the presence of the
regional or minority languages in the media.
115.
Given that freedom of broadcasting and freedom of the press are guaranteed
under the German Basic Law, Germany accepted - exclusively for the "to encourage"
part - the obligation under Article 11 of the Charter referring to the media sector. The
recommendation of the Committee of Ministers prompted the Bund and Länder to renew the discussion on an appropriate contribution by state agencies. Cf. the comments in Part D, Nos. 226 to 239 below, referring to Article 11.

B.2

Adjustment of the accepted untertakings

116.
A basic problem arises for Germany from the comments of the Committee of
Experts in the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] with regard to the acceptance of redundant undertakings. In No. 453 of the Monitoring Report, the Committee
rightly points out that the obligation accepted by the Free State of Saxony under
Article 10, para. 3, sub-para. c (submission of requests in regional or minority languages) is already included in the obligation accepted under Article 10, para. 3, subpara. b (requesting and receiving a reply in these languages) and thus is redundant.
Also, in Nos. 213 and 214 of the Monitoring Report, the Committee states that
Schleswig-Holstein, while fulfilling the - not accepted - obligation under Article 14,
para. b (cross-border co-operation) in its administrative practice, did not fulfil the accepted obligation under Article 14, para. a (transfrontier exchanges: bilateral and
multilateral agreements). In both cases, Germany considers it necessary to withdraw
acceptance of, or to exchange, the respective obligations; it cannot, however,
respond to this perceived requirement since the Charter does not provide for such
adjustment of undertakings. Germany therefore considers it necessary to have a
policy discussion on the issue of adaptation of treaty provisions, also in view of any
- 37 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part B

problems arising in future, and requests the Committee of Experts to clarify the matter accordingly.

B.3

Relevant legislation

117.
The legal instruments and provisions essential to the Charter's
implementation in Germany are annexed to the present State Report [cf. Annex 1].

- 38 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part C

Part C

Protection of Regional or Minority Languages under Part II
(Article 7) of the Charter

118.
In a number of Declarations (cf. Annex 1), the Federal Republic of Germany
has, in the context of ratification, defined the scope of application of the Charter as
regards the regional or minority languages spoken in Germany.
119.
The languages covered by the Charter are primarily "territorial languages",
i.e. languages which traditionally are used in a specific geographic area. The reason
for this is that most of the measures provided under the Charter call for the determination of a geographic scope of application differing from the territory of the country
as a whole. Therefore, in addition to the obligations under Part II of the Charter, the
Federal Republic of Germany notified the Council of Europe of the specific provisions
of Part III of the Charter, which are complied with by Germany in respect of the
regional or minority languages Danish, Upper Sorbian and Lower Sorbian, North
Frisian and Saterland Frisian, and Low German (in the following Länder: Free Hanseatic City of Bremen, Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western
Pomerania, Lower Saxony, and Schleswig-Holstein) and the Romany language (in
Hesse Land). The separate specification of these provisions for the territories of the
various Länder is in keeping with the federal structure of the Federal Republic of
Germany and takes account of the situation of each of these languages in the respective Land/Länder where they have their geographic basis.
120.
As regards the protection and promotion of the minority language Romany
(on the entire federal territory, with the exception of the Land of Hesse where
Romany is protected under Part III) and of the regional language Low German (in the
Länder of Brandenburg, North Rhine/Westphalia and Saxony-Anhalt), the legislation
in force in Germany and Germany's administrative practice meet the general
objectives and principles laid down in Article 7 of the Charter and, at the same time,
individual requirements under Part III of the Charter. The pertinent details are
discussed in the comments to Part III of the Charter [cf. Part D below]. Therefore, this
description of implementation measures taken under Part II is confined to the
essential features and aspects.

- 39 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part C

Article 7
Objectives and Principles
Paragraph 1
In respect of regional or minority languages, within the territories in which such
languages are used and according to the situation of each language, the Parties shall base
their policies, legislation and practice on the following objectives and principles:
Art. 7, para. 1, sub-para. (a)
(a) the recognition of the regional or minority languages as an expression of
cultural wealth;
121.
Compliance by the German system of law with this provision is documented
by the notification of the two Declarations on the Charter's scope of application [cf.
Annex 1] and by the extensive measures taken for its implementation.
Art. 7, para. 1, sub-para. (b)
(b) the respect for the geographical area of each regional or minority language in
order to ensure that existing or new administrative divisions do not constitute an
obstacle to the promotion of the regional or minority language in question;
122.
With reference to No. 52 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final],
the Länder took up the suggestion of the Committee of Experts that co-operation between the Länder should be intensified with the aim of promoting the use of Low German. To this end, the competent Land officials meet for consultations.
123.
In Germany, there are, on principle, no governmental or other measures
which would alter the proportions of the population in the settlement areas of the
language groups concerned. However, changes in the population figures of the
various communities and regions are entailed by general mobility which, in particular,
is also due to the economic structure in some regions - involving out-migration to
conurbations or the arrival of new residents - or by the incoming migration of "late
repatriates" (i.e. persons who formerly belonged to German minorities, especially in
States of the former Soviet Union, and who resettled in Germany). These movements
to a certain extent also affect the proportions of the various language groups as a
percentage of the respective local population. This, however, neither is directed
against the exercise of the rights of these groups nor does it have an influence on the
participation of their members in decision-making on matters affecting them.
124.
The changes regarding the borders and areas of local-government administrative districts entailed by the general territorial reorganization of local government
in the Free State of Saxony and in Brandenburg Land, have, however, also reduced
- 40 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part C

the Sorbian inhabitants' portion of the population in some Kreise and Gemeinden. In
the context of the territorial reorganization, it was not possible to take account of all of
the concerns and interests of the affected communities, associations and Sorbian
minority organizations. In some cases, the local self-administration units designated
Commissioners.
125.
In connection with alterations of the population structure, one of the subjects
of public discussion was the legally regulated dissolution of Horno Gemeinde and, as
a corollary, the resettlement of the German-Sorbian population of this community in
Lower Lusatia in Brandenburg, which had to yield its place to brown coal mining (cf.
No. 54 of the Monitoring Report [(MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final]).
126.
Lignite mining and the energy industry relying on it are important key industries
of Brandenburg, which substantially contribute to the economic development of this
Land. In Brandenburg Land there are no economically exploitable lignite beds or deposits outside built-up areas and thus outside settlements. Consequently, decisions regarding brown coal open-cast mining require prior discussion of the problem of any
resettlement entailed by mining.
The main lignite coal mines in Brandenburg Land are in Lower Lusatia. This is the
traditional settlement area of the Sorbian (Wendish) people. Due to the one-sided focus
of the power-supply industry of the former GDR [German Democratic Republic] on the
use of brown coal, many people during that period had to leave their home villages
since these were claimed for purposes of open-cast lignite mining. This also affected
many Sorbs. Without any regard for their ethnic origin and identity, the inhabitants of
these places were resettled - often even dispersed - in other places, mainly in the city of
Cottbus and its suburbs. In these places, it was rather difficult to preserve the traditional
identity. Society's pressure for assimilation set in, or was substantially increased.
127.
Opting for a deliberate departure from this policy, Brandenburg Land pursues
the aim of avoiding any further losses of Sorbian (Wendish) identity. The legal bases for
resettlement in connection with brown coal open-cast mining are the Brandenburg
Town and Country Planning Act of 20 July 1995 and the Brandenburg Act on Lignite
Mining Policy of 07 July 1997. The principle enshrined in Section 3, para. 2, no. 8, of the
Brandenburg Town and Country Planning Act - requiring that the concerns of the Sorbian (Wendish) population in Lusatia and their history, language and culture be considered in all plans and measures - is implemented in town and country planning without
any restrictions. This principle also was adopted in the Regional Policy Plan. This ensures, also in conformity with the Act to regulate the substance of the Sorbs' (Wends')
rights in the Land of Brandenburg [SWG - Sorbs (Wends) Act], that the concerns of the

- 41 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part C

Sorbian (Wendish) population in Lusatia will have to be taken account of in all plans
and measures.
128.
In addition, the Brandenburg Act on Lignite Mining Policy contains a number of
general provisions on brown coal mining and, in particular, on the social sustainability of
resettlements that cannot be avoided. In this respect, however, resettlement is not a
measure that exclusively affects the affairs and interests of the Sorbian (Wendish) minority but has the same impact on the majority population as well, for instance on the
inhabitants of Kausche, a community outside the Sorbs' settlement area. But if such use
of a Sorbian or German-Sorbian settlement cannot be avoided, special account must
be taken of the requirements of minority protection, as defined in legal provisions.
Therefore, if a Sorbian or German-Sorbian settlement must be used for mining purposes, the aim is to resettle the affected inhabitants, as a body, in the traditional settlement area and thus to maintain the life environment in which the persons concerned
can preserve their folklore and ethnic traditions and can, to the greatest extent possible,
avoid the assimilation pressure exerted by an unfamiliar environment. In each individual
case, an attempt is made to find solutions by mutual agreement. In order to ensure consideration of the Sorbs' (Wends') interests also in practice within the framework of lignite-mining and rehabilitation/renewal planning, Section 1, para. 3, no. 6, of the Ordinance on the Establishment of the Brown Coal Committee of Brandenburg Land of 05
April 1992 provides that one representative of Domowina [Federation of Lusatian
Sorbs], the umbrella organization of Sorbian associations, shall be delegated, as a
voting member, to the Brown Coal Committee of Brandenburg Land and shall
participate actively in all decisions of this Committee. Moreover, the Sorbian (Wendish)
associations/unions are involved in the development of lignite-mining and
rehabilitation/renewal plans. Also, the Sorbs (Wends) shall be involved in all decisionmaking by the institution/agency responsible for regional planning. Representatives of
Domowina are advisory members of the Regional Assembly of the Lusatia-Spreewald
Regional Planning Association.
129.
The resettlement issue became a matter of topical interest especially in connection with open-cast mining in Jänschwalde. Continuation of these open pit mines
requires use of the area of Horno Gemeinde. Under the Act on Lignite Mining Policy
and the relevant Lignite-Mining Plan, German and Sorbian inhabitants - who object(ed)
to relocation - were offered possibilities of being jointly resettled within the traditional
Sorbian settlement area. Under the relevant law, Hormo Gemeinde was dissolved and,
under local-government law, was incorporated in Jänschwalde Gemeinde on 27 September 1998; the inhabitants were expected to resettle in the period 2000 - 2002. The
legally prescribed hearing of the inhabitants on the prospective site of resettlement took
place in the meantime. The hearing showed that the majority of the Horno citizens pre- 42 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part C

ferred the town of Forst (Lusatia) over Jänschwalde as a resettlement site. Forst is
located within the traditional settlement area of the Sorbs (Wends). The preparations for
resettlement in this town are underway.
130.
The Act on Lignite Mining Policy, Article 2 of which regulates the dissolution of
Horno Gemeinde, was the subject of five legal proceedings before the Brandenburg
Land Constitutional Court. These were an avoidance petition [for judicial review of
statutes or administrative acts] submitted by a parliamentary group of the Brandenburg
Landtag, and constitutional complaints [complaints of unconstitutionality] filed by
Domowina as the umbrella organization of Sorbian (Wendish) associations, by the
Council for Sorbian (Wendish) Affairs established at the Brandenburg Landtag, by
Horno Gemeinde, and by an inhabitant of Horno. However, in its decision of
18 June 1998, the Land Constitutional Court found that - in view of the special
importance of lignite mining for structural improvements, job security and energy supply
- the legislator's decision to dissolve Horno Gemeinde and to use its area for open-cast
lignite mining is constitutional - notwithstanding the great importance attached by the
Court to the State's aim as stipulated in Article 25, para. 1, 1st sentence, of the Land
Constitution, namely the protection, preservation and cultivation of the Sorbs' (Wends')
settlement area. The Court's decision took special account of the supplementary
provisions of this Act, calling for a maximum of considerate treatment of the inhabitants
of this town, in particular the offer to provide for joint resettlement within the Sorbian
settlement area. In this context, the Land of Brandenburg strives to avoid any
detrimental impact on the Lower Sorbian language.
Art. 7, para. 1, sub-para. (c)
(c) the need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in order
to safeguard them;
131.
For all persons speaking a country's official language as their native
language it is a matter of course to learn their language, be taught in that language
and to use it. For a much smaller group within the nation's population, the requisites
for the preservation of an autonomous language can be ensured only by means of an
appropriate infrastructure. Therefore, government measures serving the cultivation of
regional or minority languages are aimed at placing the speakers of the given language on an equal footing with the majority population using the official language as
their native language. Thus, such measures do not constitute a violation of the principle of equality; rather, they comply with it by ruling out discrimination and unequal
treatment. The state may take adequate measures to promote the equality of speakers of regional or minority languages with the speakers of the generally spoken official language in those cases where such measures are necessary and appropriate.
- 43 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part C

Such measures must take account of the specific conditions existing for the given
language and its users.
132.
In keeping with the federal structure of the Federal Republic of Germany,
responsibility for the implementation of measures to promote and preserve the languages protected by the Charter primarily lies with the Länder. The Constitutions of five
Länder of the Federal Republic of Germany contain provisions relating to national
minorities and ethnic groups, or to national and ethnic minorities. In part, these provisions also relate directly to the language/languages spoken by the latter. There is
one constitutional provision protecting the Low German language. Such constitutional
provisions form the basis for legislative measures or for administrative action taken
for the benefit of these languages.
133.
Article 25 of the Constitution of the Land of Brandenburg paraphrases the
rights of the Sorbs (Wends) as follows:
"(1) The right of the Sorbian people to the protection, preservation and fostering
of their national identity and of their ancestral settlement area is guaranteed.
The Land, local governments and local authority associations will promote the
fulfilment of this right, especially the existence of the Sorbian culture in its own
right and effective political participation by the Sorbian people.
(2) The Land will work towards ensuring the cultural autonomy of the Sorbs
across the Land borders.
(3) The Sorbs have the right to the preservation and promotion of the Sorbian
language and culture in public life and to having these imparted in schools and
child day-care centres.
(4) In the settlement area of the Sorbs, marking of public identification signs for
buildings and places shall include the Sorbian language. The Sorbian flag has
the colours 'blue, red, white'.
(5) A law will lay down the details of the rights of the Sorbs. That law shall
ensure that Sorbian representatives will participate in matters of the Sorbs,
especially as regards legislation."
134.
The Constitution of the Land of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, in its Article 16, para. 2, refers to the Low German language:
"The Land shall protect and promote cultivation of the Low German language."
Further, the Constitution of the Land of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania says in its
Article 18:

- 44 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part C

"The existence, in its own right, of the culture of ethnic and national minorities
and of ethnic groups of citizens of German nationality is afforded specific
protection by the Land."
135.
Article 5, para. 2, of the Constitution of the Free State of Saxony reads as
follows:
"The Land guarantees and protects the right of national and ethnic minorities of
German nationality to the preservation of their identity and to the cultivation of
their languages, religion, culture and tradition."
Several Articles of the Constitution of the Free State of Saxony refer to the Sorbs:
Article 2, para. 4, says that:
"In addition to the colours and the coat of arms of the Land, the colours and
coat of arms of the Sorbs may be deployed, on an equal footing, in the
settlement area of the Sorbs, and the colours and coat of arms of Lower Silesia
in the Silesian region of the Land."
Article 5, para. 1, reads as follows:
"(1) Citizens of German, Sorbian or other ethnic origin belong to the people of
the Free State of Saxony. The Land recognizes the lex patriae [right to live in
one's native country]."
Article 6 reads as follows:
"(1) The citizens of Sorbian ethnic origin living in the Land are a segment of the
state's population who enjoy equal rights. The Land guarantees and protects
the right to the preservation of their identity and to the cultivation and development of their traditional language, culture and tradition, especially by schools,
preschool facilities and cultural institutions.
(2) Within the framework of Land and local-government planning, account shall
be taken of the necessaries of life of the Sorbian people. The German-Sorbian
character of the settlement area of the Sorbian ethnic group shall be preserved.
(3) The co-operation, across Land borders, among Sorbs - especially in Upper
and Lower Lusatia - is in the interest of the Land."
136.

The Constitution of the Land of Saxony-Anhalt lays down that:
"The existence, in its own right, of the culture of ethnic minorities and their
political participation are afforded protection by the Land and local governments." (Article 37, para. 1)
- 45 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part C

137.
Article 5 of the Constitution of the Land of Schleswig-Holstein reads as
follows:
"(1) Everybody is free to declare that he or she belongs to a national minority;
such declaration does not release the given individual from his or her general
civic duties.
(2) The existence, in its own right, of the culture of national minorities and
ethnic groups and their political participation are afforded protection by the
Land, local governments and local authority associations. The national Danish
minority and the Frisian ethnic group are entitled to protection and promotion."
Article 9, para 2, of the Constitution of the Land of Schleswig-Holstein reads as follows:
"The Land shall protect and promote the cultivation of the Low German language."
As regards the State's aim (laid down in the Land Constitution) as defined above, it is
pointed out that the statement made by the Committee of Experts in No. 57 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] - that, with the exception of
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, no other Land Constitution contains a provision
devoted to Low German - is not correct.
138.
A further basis for the rights of the Danish minority is provided by the Bonn
Declaration of 29 March 1955, which was preceded by the Declaration of 26 September 1949 by the Land Government of Schleswig-Holstein (Kiel Declaration).
With regard to the Sorbian people, a protocol note to Article 35 of the Treaty on the
Establishment of German Unity of 31 August 1990 states the following:
"Regarding Article 35 of the Unification Treaty, the Federal Republic of Germany
and the German Democratic Republic declare the following:
1. Everybody is free to declare his or her affiliation with the Sorbian ethnic community and with the Sorbian culture.
2. The preservation and further development of the Sorbian culture and of
Sorbian traditions are guaranteed.
3. Members of the Sorbian people and their organizations enjoy the freedom to
cultivate and preserve the Sorbian language in public life."
139.
Section 8 of the Act to regulate the substance of the Sorbs' (Wends') rights in
the Land of Brandenburg [SWG] explicitly states that the Sorbian language,
- 46 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part C

especially Lower Sorbian, shall be protected and promoted. Regulations similar to the
above provisions of Brandenburg Land are to be found in Article 6, para. 1, of the
Constitution of the Free State of Saxony and in Section 2, para. 3, of the Saxon
Sorbs Act [SächsSorbG].
140.
On 10 September 1997, the Federal Republic of Germany ratified the Council
of Europe Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities which for
Germany entered into force on 1 February 1998. The Framework Convention also
comprises a number of language-related provisions under international law. The constitutional stipulations regarding the protection of the national minorities and of the
other ethnic groups traditionally resident in Germany, and the provisions under international instruments or treaties are put into concrete terms by laws, ordinances,
statutes, and administrative action. Thus, federal legislation such as the Federal
Electoral Act, and a number of Land Acts contain provisions designed to ensure
scope for the participation of national minorities in public policy affairs and within
society, and aimed at protecting national minorities and promoting their identity and
thus, in particular, their language/s. The Land Acts which are also aimed at the protection and promotion of the given language/s refer to national minorities who live, as
a group, in their traditional settlement areas. There are no laws referring directly to
the Low German language.
141.
In Section I of the Declaration by the Government of the Federal Republic of
Germany on the Rights of the Danish Majority (Bonn Declaration) of 29 March 1955,
it was made clear that the members of the Danish minority, like all German nationals,
enjoy the rights guaranteed by the Basic Law of the Federal Republic of Germany of
23 May 1949. These constitutional rights are listed under paras. 1 to 12 of the Declaration. The Bonn Declaration of 29 March 1955 was preceded by the Kiel Declaration
by the Schleswig-Holstein Land Government on the Status of the Danish Minority of
26 September 1949.
142.
In addition to the legal protection existing already prior to the entry into force
of the Charter in Germany, mention must be made of a large variety of governmental
promotion measures relating directly to, or benefiting, the regional or minority languages. For details, cf. the comments below in Part D of the Report regarding Part III
of the Charter.
Art. 7, para. 1, sub-para. (d)
(d) the facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of regional or minority
languages, in speech and writing, in public and private life;

- 47 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part C

143.
The right of the members of national minorities to use their language in daily
life is protected by Article 2, para. 1, of the Basic Law, which guarantees the right to
free development of personality. This freedom is also ensured in the context of the
freedoms of expression, of the press and of broadcasting [reporting by means of
broadcasts] as guaranteed under Article 5, para. 1, of the Basic Law. Accordingly,
there are no restrictions in the Federal Republic of Germany as regards the use of a
minority language in private or public life.
144.
However, as regards the citizens' dealings with public administration, German is the official language under Section 23 of the [Federal] Administrative
Procedure Act. The Administrative Procedure Acts or Public Administration Acts of
the Länder also lay down German as the official language. German also is the official
language in court. In accordance with the obligations notified for the various regional
or minority languages, a number of individual regulations have been laid down for
these languages, under which a minority language may be used in specified cases in
the citizens' relations with local and regional administrative authorities.
145.
In addition to the freedoms guaranteed by the Basic Law for the entire
territory of Germany, Section 8 of the Act on the Specification of Rights of the Sorbs
(Wends) in the Land of Brandenburg (SWG) explicitly reaffirms the right freely to use
the Sorbian (Wendish) language. Pursuant to the Saxon Constitution and Section 8
of the Act on the Sorbs' Rights in the Free State of Saxony [SächsSorbG] and a
number of other laws and ordinances, the Sorbs in the Free State of Saxony have
the right to communicate, orally and in writing, in their language in private and in
public.
146.
The use of the protected languages in public is largely accepted by the German population. Languages other than German are used to a far greater extent by
the large numbers of foreigners living in Germany; such use does not meet with any
problems within society, with the exception of some right-wing extremists.
For details, cf. the comments below in Part D of the Report regarding the obligations
specifically entered into.
Art. 7, para. 1, sub-para. (e)
(e) the maintenance and development of links, in the fields covered by this Charter,
between groups using a regional or minority language or other groups in the
State employing a language used in identical or similar form, as well as the
establishment of cultural relations with other groups in the State using different
languages;

- 48 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part C

147.
The right to maintain and develop contacts is one of the fundamental
freedoms guaranteed by the Basic Law and is protected under Articles 2, para. 1,
(general freedom of action; freedom to leave the country) and 11, para. 1, of the
Basic Law (freedom of movement within the federal territory; freedom to enter the
country). The State does not interfere with these rights, but instead welcomes
contacts among the members of the language groups within the nation and in other
countries. Often such activities are included in governmental promotion schemes.
Examples are the contacts of organizations of the Sorbian people with groups of
Sorbs living abroad who are also members of Domowina, the umbrella organization
of the Sorbian organizations. Another example is the state-funded, close cooperation of the Central Council of the German Sinti and Roma with the Kulturverein
Österreichischer Roma [Cultural Association of Austrian Roma] in Vienna. Also,
public funds are provided for the co-operation of Frisians in Germany with Frisians in
the Netherlands, who have a common umbrella organization with headquarters in
Germany. There is particularly close co-operation of the Danish minority with many
and various organizations in Denmark, and intensive private and cultural contacts
exist between members of the Danish minority and the nationals of the Kingdom of
Denmark.
148.
The members of the language groups are united in various organizations and
actively participate in the work of many non-governmental organizations. The organizations of minorities and ethnic groups in Germany co-operate on a non-committal
basis, and all of them are members of the Federal Union of European Nationalities
(FUEN), an umbrella organization of national minorities and traditional (autochthonous) ethnic groups in Europe. FUEN has its seat in Flensburg where it is co-located
with the headquarters of the Danish minority's main organization. FUEN is supported
with institution-based funding by Schleswig-Holstein Land and also by a number of
regional governments in other countries where national minorities have their settlement areas. Like other governments of Central and North European countries, the
German Federal Government subsidizes individual FUEN projects. The youth associations of minorities in Germany are members of the Youth of European Nationalities
(YEN), an umbrella organization, which receives Federal Government subsidies for
individual projects.
149.
The language groups in Germany are also members of the European Bureau
for Lesser Used Languages (EBLUL) which is funded by the European Union. Their
EBLUL member organizations are united in a Committee for the Federal Republic of
Germany, whose activities are supported by the Federal Government.

- 49 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part C

150.
With reference to the concern expressed by the Committee of Experts in No.
61 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] as regards the lack of an
umbrella organization for Low German speakers, it is pointed out that in
September 2002 a Bundesrat für Niederdeutsch (Bundesraat för Nedderdüütsch Federal Council for Low German) was established to represent the joint interests of
the various organizations.
151. – 159.

[blank]

160.
The Federal Republic of Germany welcomes the fact that the language
groups in Germany co-operate, and also jointly with other national minorities and
groups represent their interests at the international level. This helps with the
development and practical implementation of the policies regarding minorities in
Europe, taking account of the needs of those concerned. In Germany, FUEN and the
German EBLUL Committee also participate in the implementation of the European
instruments relating to the protection of minorities.
161.
As regards the suggestion of the Committee of Experts in No. 62 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that a Commissioner for Minorities might
also be designated at the federal level, reference is made to the comments in No. 47
above of the present State Report.
Art. 7, para. 1, sub-para. (f)
(f) the provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of
regional or minority languages at all appropriate stages;
162.
The freedom of the individual to learn a language of his/her choice, free of
any outside influence, especially without interference by public authorities, is
generally protected by Article 2, para. 1, of the Basic Law. In Germany,
implementation of the obligations under the Charter is incumbent on the Länder. The
legal situation and legal practice as well as the governmental promotion measures for
the teaching of, and instruction in, the protected languages meet the requirements
stipulated by the Charter.
163.
According to the language proficiency of school-children and youngsters, and
in accordance with the parents' wishes, different school structures have been developed for the teaching of, and in, the protected languages. While the Danish privateschool system and the Sorbian publicly maintained schools have a long tradition of
such language teaching, the teaching of the Frisian languages is still in an initial
stage and its integration into instruction is based on different concepts. In this respect, the present Report can only provide information on the current state of affairs.
- 50 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part C

Inclusion of the Romany language in the instruction offered at schools to Roma
children is at present confined to pilot measures, depending on the wishes expressed
by parents to this effect. However, use of the Low German language within school
education is, for the major part, still in the initial stages of development; the essential
conditions for this development include adequate interest shown by parents and
pupils, in addition to the basic requirements such as curricula, etc., and teachers
proficient in that language.
For details, cf. the comments below in Part D of the Report regarding the obligations
specifically entered into.
Art. 7, para. 1, sub-para. (g)
(g) the provision of facilities enabling non-speakers of a regional or minority
language living in the area where it is used to learn it if they so desire;
164.
This obligation refers to the wishes of non-speakers of a regional or minority
language who live in an area where such a language is used. As a general policy
matter it is to be pointed out that the offers for learning the respective language - cf.
the detailed comments on Article 8 of the Charter (Education) in Part D below - are
available to all persons, irrespective of whether or not they are members of the given
language group. In addition, depending on the respective circumstances, special
offers for learning such languages are available on a limited scale (e.g. at many adult
education centres in the settlement areas, or in the form of activities and offers by
clubs and associations of the language groups).
165.
Since measures taken in the interest of regional or minority languages under
Article 7, para. 4, shall take account also of the wishes expressed by the speakers of
such languages, the provision of sub-paragraph (g) cannot be applied to the Romany
language since, according to the wishes frequently expressed by the members of this
language group, outsiders must not be taught this language.
Art. 7, para. 1, sub-para. (h)
(h) the promotion of study and research on regional or minority languages at
universities or equivalent institutions;
166.
Under the federal structure of the Federal Republic of Germany, implementation of this provision is incumbent on the Länder, in particular. In the field of research,
several Länder of the Federal Republic of Germany already established state-run
research institutions with the pertinent terms of reference, or on a continuous basis
support private research institutions of the minorities.
- 51 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part C

167.
The pertinent details - especially with reference to the suggestion of the
Committee of Experts in No. 72 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final]
regarding the availability of study and research of the languages - are given in Part D
of the present report in the comments on the accepted untertakings.
Art. 7, para. 1, sub-para. (i)
(i) the promotion of appropriate types of transnational exchanges, in the fields
covered by this Charter, for regional or minority languages used in identical or
similar form in two or more States.
168.
In this respect, reference is made to the observations regarding para. 1, subpara. (e), in Nos. 147 - 161 above.

Article 7, para. 2
Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake to eliminate, if they have not yet done so, any unjustified distinction,
exclusion, restriction or preference relating to the use of a regional or minority language
and intended to discourage or endanger the maintenance or development of it. The
adoption of special measures in favour of regional or minority languages aimed at
promoting equality between the users of these languages and the rest of the population or
which take due account of their specific conditions is not considered to be an act of
discrimination against the users of more widely-used languages.
169.
Equality before the law and the prohibition of factually unwarranted unequal
treatment (discrimination) are the keystones of a democratic body politic and, at the
same time, of the protection of national minorities and language groups which aims at
the peaceful living together of various ethnic groups in a state community in which
tolerance prevails. The principle of equality before the law and the ban on discrimination are enshrined in the Basic Law of the Federal Republic of Germany and in the
Constitutions of the Länder, as well as in various subject-specific laws, and comply
with the obligations under paragraph 2.
170.
For the speakers of regional or minority languages, special importance attaches to the right to free development of one's personality under Article 2, para. 1, of
the Basic Law, which inter alia leaves the option regarding use of the respective minority language, conservation of the relevant autonomous culture, and preservation of
one's own identity to each individual. Article 3, para. 3, 1st sentence, of the Basic Law
stipulates that no person shall be favoured or disfavoured because of sex, parentage,
race, language, homeland and origin, faith, or religious or political opinions.

- 52 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part C

171.
In some of the Land Constitutions, additional safeguards have been included
to enforce the ban on discrimination - e.g. in Articles 1 and 134 of the Hessian Constitution, Article 6 of the Constitution of the Free State of Saxony, Article 12 of the
Constitution for the Land of Brandenburg, Article 1 of the Constitution of the Land of
Schleswig-Holstein, and Article 2, para. 1, of the Constitution of the Land of BadenWürttemberg. In the Constitution of Berlin, in Article 10, para. 2, an overarching nondiscrimination clause has been included, under which "nobody shall be prejudiced or
favoured because of their sex, parentage, race, language, national or social origin,
faith, religion or political opinions, or sexual identity". Article 4, para. 1, of the Land
Constitution of North Rhine/Westphalia, also expressly prohibits discrimination on the
grounds of belonging to a national minority in that Land. In Bremen, the ban on discrimination is enshrined in Article 2 of the Land Constitution.
172.

Germany does not have a "state culture" regulated by legal provisions. Rather,

Article 2, para. 1, of the Basic Law guarantees everybody the right to free development
of his/her personality. This, inter alia, protects the individual's self-realization according
to his/her own ideas. Legal protection does not merely cover the right to free development within a spiritual and cultural core sphere of the individual as a mental/spiritual
and ethical being; rather, entirely without reference to any specific values, the object of
legal protection is a general form of freedom of action in a broad sense - and thus covering language as well. This right, however, is only guaranteed to the extent that the
rights of others or the constitutional order or the moral law are not violated.
173.
Apart from the fundamental objective of achieving, in sociopolitical terms, the
integration of all groups of society, the Federal Republic of Germany regards the cultural diversity of its regions and of the groups of its population as an enriching asset.
Consequently, the policies concerning the national minorities are not oriented towards
assimilation, but are aimed at preserving and further developing their respective identity. The measures taken by the Bund, the Länder and local authorities, which are mentioned, or are covered by examples given, in the present Report, serve to vigorously
promote the initiatives of the organizations of national minorities and ethnic groups for
the preservation of the given language and culture. The general public in the Federal
Republic of Germany supports this policy.
174.
Complaints by members of minorities concerning assimilation efforts or any
measures aimed in this direction have not become known.
Article 7, para. 3
Paragraph 3
- 53 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part C

The Parties undertake to promote, by appropriate measures, mutual understanding
between all the linguistic groups of the country and in particular the inclusion of respect,
understanding and tolerance in relation to regional or minority languages among the
objectives of education and training provided within their countries and encouragement of
the mass media to pursue the same objective.
1.

General framework

175.
Tolerance, intercultural dialogue, and mutual acceptance are indispensable
elements of the peaceful co-existence, based on mutual respect and understanding,
of people from different cultural backgrounds. This objective is one of the most important tasks of domestic politics in Germany. It is only in this way that a positive
social climate can be created, which will also benefit the situation of national minorities and ethnic groups. The Federal Republic of Germany has a Federal Government
Commissioner for Matters Relating to Aliens [as of 2003: "Federal Government Commissioner for Migration, Refugees and Integration"], whose office is provided for in
the Aliens Act of the Federal Republic of Germany. She has, inter alia, the task to
further the conditions for foreigners and Germans, as well as various groups of nonnationals, living together in a setting which is as free of tensions as possible, to
promote their mutual understanding, and to prevent and counteract xenophobia.
176.
The tasks of the Land Commissioners for Matters Relating to Aliens include
the analysis of conflicts between Germans and foreigners, and the development of
measures to encourage tolerance and acceptance. This is achieved by wide-ranging
and diversified public information/education activities, by supporting the self-organization of migrants' and refugees' associations, and by local Aliens Advisory Councils
(to the extent that provision has been made for such bodies in the legislation of the
various Länder).
177.
In Germany, education in tolerance and solidarity is also part of the educational mandate of schools providing general education, and of political education, and
ranks high in these fields. In addition, many non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
and private initiatives are dedicated to this goal, which is also supported by the political parties, and to the practical implementation of the intercultural dialogue.
178.
In the areas of education, culture and the media, the aforementioned principles are embodied in laws and implementing statutes. The Bund and the Länder
implement these regulations by means of many and various measures. For one part,
such measures are aimed at education in tolerance and at promoting understanding
for other cultures and languages as well as acceptance of people with a different
language and culture who live in the neighbourhood or belong to the local community
or to the nation's society. Other measures are aimed at increasing, among the gen- 54 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part C

eral public, the knowledge concerning the existence of national minorities and ethnic
groups and at familiarizing the majority population with the culture of those groups
and the related traditions. In this field, the efforts concerning information in schools
and political education will have to be increased outside the central settlement areas
of the groups protected under the Framework Convention, so as to ensure a broader
information base in society (cf. the comments in No. 104 above). For this purpose and with the support of the Federal Ministry of the Interior and the Bündnis für Demokratie und Toleranz [Alliance for Democracy and Tolerance - Against Extremism and
Violence] - the German EBLUL Committee on 16 and 17 November 2001 organized
the Berlin Congress on Sprachenvielfalt und Demokratie in Deutschland ["Linguistic
Diversity and Democracy in Germany"] which was attended by all groups protected
under the Regional/Minority Language Charter as well as by noted politicians active
at the federal and Land levels, representatives of the Council of Europe, German and
foreign linguists, and officials reponsible for specific projects. That congress occasioned the publication of an anthology entitled Wanderer in zwei Sprachen. Unbekannte Sprachen Deutschlands ["Wanderers between two languages. Germany's unknown languages"] and containing prose and poetry written in Danish, Low German,
North and Saterland Frisian, and Lower and Upper Sorbian. Also, a documentation
was published about the congress (Brussels 2002).

2.

Political education and schools

179.
The Federal Centre for Political Education (BpP) has the task, through
political education activities, to promote the understanding of political facts and
processes, to strengthen democratic consciousness, and to encourage greater
readiness for political involvement. The Centre also has the particular task of
providing well-balanced and scientifically substantiated information on political key
issues, strengthening the democratic basic consensus and, on these foundations,
promoting the development of a culture of (democratic) political dispute on the basis
of a rational dialogue. This also includes information on the co-existence of the
various cultures represented in Germany, and on the reduction of prejudice and
xenophobia.
In order to achieve an ever greater focus on these tasks, the BpB on 1 December
2000 set up two project groups on "Right-Wing Extremism" and "Migration/EU", respectively.
180.
A German-Turkish and a German-Russian edition of the Basic Law of the
Federal Republic of Germany are now available. In addition, the following activities

- 55 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part C

and projects against racism and for tolerance, inter-ethnic understanding and
humaneness were carried out in the years 2002 and 2003:
–

Sprechbaukasten 'Train the Trainer' [interactive video module 'Train the Trainer']
Racism and xenophobia violate the fair play rules in sports in the same way as
they infringe upon the rules of democracy. This prompted the Federal Centre
(BpB) to ally with sports clubs - which in Germany have, after all, around 27 million members. Actually, sport trainers/coaches are now and then confronted with
discriminating remarks made in their presence and often do not know how to
react. They are provided assistance by the BpB and Deutsche Sportjugend [DSJ German Sport Youth] with the interactive programme Sprechbaukasten Train the
Trainer which was developed in 2001. This video programme in seven CD-ROM
parts presents to viewers situations showing discriminating behaviour. By choosing from a range of response options, the programme enables the learner to find
out how he/she him/herself would react to the respective situation. Aim: enabling
coaches/trainers to repress, promptly and effectively, any racist or xenophobic
behaviour already in the initial stages.

-

Schule ohne Rassismus ["Schools without racism"]
A project carried out with various partners; pupils, on their own initiative, plan and
implement a variety of individual projects against racism, right-wing extremism
and xenophobia.

-

Discussion series Weltreligionen im Diskurs ["World religions in discussion"]
The BpB, in co-operation with the Interkultureller Rat in Deutschland e.V. (IKR Intercultural Council in Germany, reg'd) and the Bündnis für Demokratie und Toleranz [Alliance for Democracy and Tolerance], has since October 2002 organized the
discussion series "Bekenntnisse: Weltreligionen im Diskurs" [Creeds: Discoursing
on world religions]. At these events, a team of representatives of the Christian
Churches, of the Jewish communities and of Islam and Buddhism as well as of
the Föderation der Aleviten [Federation of Alawite Communities in Germany, AABF]
and the Nationaler Geistiger Rat der Bahá'í [National Bahá'í Spiritual Council] comment on key issues of politics and sociology. The focus of these events is on the
question of the form peaceful co-existence of religions might take in keeping with
our society's values.
After a short presentation of the various religious communities, a discourse
among participants and lecturers looks at everyday problems encountered in
dealing with a culture of foreign origin. The aim of this discussion series is to
reduce existing prejudices and unease and to strengthen people's will to support
integration.

-

Purchase of important publications on the subject of Islam as a world religion and
on the situation of Muslim believers in Germany.

-

Supporting material for political education in "inter-religious learning".

181.
Since the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001, Islam-related discussions
have increased. However, notwithstanding the fact that more than 3 million inhabi- 56 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part C

tants of our country are of Muslim faith, many remarks in discussions show that Islam
still is a largely unknown religion in Germany. Discussions are often governed by "opposite camps" thinking dividing the world into forces of "evil" and "good". The "good"
side most often will lay claim to owning values such as civilization and enlightenment.
182.
It is not only since 11 September 2001 that an inter-religious dialogue has
been an important prerequisite to unprejudiced and tolerant side-by-side existence of
religions and cultures. It is true, however, that those terrorist attacks emphatically
brought home the need for such a dialogue. Political education and inter-religious
learning are faced with a particular challenge in this respect since thinking along the
lines of "good", "evil", "we" and "others" is in contradiction with an open democratic
society. The point is not to banish religion to the private sphere of life, but to have all
citizens make their contribution to a peaceful and tolerant co-existence in a diversified and modern society.
With these supporting materials, the Federal Centre for Political Education (BpB)
wishes, on a multidisciplinary basis, to give an impulse to the development of learning/instruction projects enabling learners to develop strategies and skills for a profitable inter-religious dialogue.
Also, a Werkstatt Religionen und Weltanschauungen [Workshop 'Religions and Ideologies/Beliefs'] is offered. Participants of different religious affiliation talked about the
subject of "death and dying" which plays a central role in all religions and, in people's
reflections on this theme, reveals central tenets regarding life. Interesting minutes
were developed, documenting this process and faithfully conveying the dialogue that
took place. The Workshop also raised existential questions of meaning and, together
with the material previously developed, the interpretations found during the dialogue
are intended to enable instructors to prepare such dialogues with members of different religions and to have their learning groups engage in profitable dialogues of
this kind.
183.
The Centre (BpB) hopes that these aids will encourage the use of the workshop method and dialogue-based work also in in-school and out-of-school political
education.
-

Setting up of the website www.bpb-aktiv.de in 2001 as an information platform for
individuals and initiatives to fight right-wing extremism and xenophobia. Also,
www.fluter.de [presented by BpB] succinctly and informatively presents current
sociopolitical subjects. "fluter Sprache" ["floodlight on language"] deals with the role of
language as a gateway to the world and a means for achieving integration.

-

Organization of cinema seminars on Kino gegen Gewalt ["Anti-violence cinema"].

- 57 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part C

-

Co-operation with industry and the sports sector for poster campaigns against
anti-foreigner hostility. For example, posters showed a well-known soccer team
composed only of players of German nationality, and thus it was made quite clear
that the team would have little chance of succeeding without their foreign team
mates.

-

An exhibition in 2003 - Zuhause ist, wo ich lebe ["Home is where I live"] - about
young foreigners in Germany.

Also, the BpB makes intensified efforts to support organizations of minorities as
providing bodies.
The Documentation Centre of German Sinti and Roma and the Land Associations of
Sinti and Roma launched initiatives in various Länder and developed materials for
schools and educational institutions. These materials deal with discussing and analyzing racism and with with the existing patterns of clichés and prejudices regarding
the Sinti and Roma. They also serve for analyzing and assessing the history of the
Sinti and Roma genocide perpetrated by National Socialism. The Baden-Wurttemberg Land Association of German Sinti and Roma, both on its own initiative and in
co-operation with schools and other institutions, carried out projects for analyzing and
assessing "anti-tsiganism" (anti-Gypsy hostility) - comparable to anti-Semitism.
184.
All Länder of the Federal Republic of Germany have established Land Centres
for Political Education which carry out similar tasks in their respective Land. One Land
Centre for Political Education, for instance, regularly sponsors associations dealing with
the co-existence of, and mutual understanding between, different religions and nationalities. As part of the "Rechtsextremismus und Gewalt" [Right-Wing Extremism and
Violence] Programme, activities to further mutual understanding between young people
of different nationalities are promoted and guidance is given with regard to personal
courage in standing up for one's convictions when faced with conflicts and violence.
This is achieved, inter alia, by the following activities:
- assistance for the "Jews and Muslims in Germany" activity organized by Katholische
Akademie ["Catholic Academy"], with the support of the Federal Centre for Political
Education (BpB) and Orient-Institut Hamburg;
- promotion of round-table talks, discussions and reports sponsored by Brücke Mittelmeer ["Mediterranean Bridge"], which brings together scientists/scholars and representatives of very diverse associations wishing to foster and advance the intercultural
dialogue between Europe and the various Mediterranean riparian states, especially
about Islamism and education in tolerance.

- 58 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

3.

Part C

Culture

185.
The Länder - which, on account of the federal structure of Germany, have
responsibility for cultural and educational affairs - and local authorities include the
culture of groups other than the German majority population in supraregional, regional and local cultural events and activities. This is also exemplified by large-scale
Land festivals ["days" dedicated to the special character of the respective Land] such
as Schleswig-Holstein-Tag, Hessen-Tag, Tag der Sachsen and Brandenburg-Tag.

4.

Media

186.
Jurisdiction over broadcasting also lies with the Länder. Under constitutional
law, the State may not exert an influence on the contents of broadcasting
programmes.
187.

The broadcasting programming principles embodied in the various Land

Broadcasting Acts and State Treaties explicitly lay down, inter alia, that international
understanding shall be promoted, and programmes shall help to reduce xenophobia
and to protect and promote minorities (cf. for example: Section 7 of the State Treaty
on the Broadcasting Corporation NDR (Norddeutscher Rundfunk), Section 20 of the
Lower Saxony Land Broadcasting Act, or Section 24 of the Schleswig-Holstein Land
Broadcasting Act).
188.
Compliance with the programming principles is monitored, for public service
broadcasting, by the supervisory bodies (Sound Broadcasting Board, Television
Board) which have a pluralistic membership and, for private broadcasters, by the independent Land Supervisory Authorities for Private Broadcasters.

5.

Government initiatives

189.
For a number of years, xenophobia [anti-foreigner sentiment] on the part of a
small segment of the German population, including younger members of fringe
groups, has become a problem in society. It increasingly emerges in the "new Länder" [i.e. those of the former East German GDR], and has ranged from verbal attacks
to outrages, even violent acts involving loss of life, directed primarily against
foreigners of non-European origin who live in Germany. So far, the members of the
language groups considered in this Report have, as a rule, not been targeted by
xenophobic aggression. In a number of cases, however, there have been attacks
against German Sinti and Roma. The fight against racism and xenophobia is an
- 59 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part C

important concern of German politics, with particular importance attaching to the
aspect of prevention through intellectual/political analysis and discussion.
190.
In addition to the protection provided under the Penal Code, political
education and intellectual/political discussion of extremism, xenophobia and violence
are of major significance in view of eliminating the breeding ground of extremist
ideology and thus helping to prevent politically motivated acts of violence. Political
education, school education and prevention-directed public information help the
public to understand the values of our free democratic order, and people are made
aware that violence never can, and never must, be a means of settling political
differences of opinion.
191.
On account of the federal structure of the Federal Republic of Germany,
primary responsibility for these aspects lies with the Länder in the fields of culture and
education.
192.
A central instrument of intellectual/political discussion is provided by the extensive public information/education activities of the Bund and the Länder, which in
terms of their form and contents are geared to specific target groups. This includes
brochures on the subjects of extremism and xenophobia; seminars for teachers, for
contributors to school magazines, journalists and multipliers in adult education;
specialist conferences on sociopolitical issues; awareness-raising campaigns against
extremism, xenophobia and violence; and also the initiation, monitoring and support
of sociologic research activities in the field of internal security; and evaluation and
application of analyses and research findings by means of publications.
193.
Various public-oriented measures which met with good response and proved
successful already in the past are being continued. Pertinent examples are the publication of brochures in the series "Texte zur Inneren Sicherheit" [Texts on Internal
Security] and the annual edition of the Report on the Protection of the Constitution
which provides an information basis for assessing the threats posed to the democratic constitutional state by racism, xenophobia and other factors.
194.
Scientific research on the causes of, and motives for, racism and xenophobia
helps to further develop and optimize concepts for sustained preventive measures.
Therefore, the Federal Ministry of the Interior analyses current studies on these
phenomena or, in instances, initiates its own research projects such as the project
carried out in co-operation with Volkswagen-Stiftung on right-wing extremist offenders, either suspected or proven guilty; the findings of this project were published in
December 2001 as a brochure in the series "Texte zur Inneren Sicherheit" [Texts on
- 60 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part C

Internal Security], entitled "Fremdenfeindlichkeit, Antisemitismus, Rechtsextremismus." ["Xenophobia, Anti-Semitism, Right-Wing Extremism"]. In the spring of
2000, Erlangen University completed another research project commissioned by the
Federal Ministry of the Interior on the violence phenomenon of hooliganism. This
study also probes the extent to which anti-foreigner or right-wing extremist motives
play a role in connection with the specific "hooligan" category of offenders. This study
was also published in the series "Texte zur Inneren Sicherheit".
195.
Public debate on, and analysis of, racism, xenophobia and anti-Semitism is a
task for society as a whole to tackle. Therefore, the Federal Government continues
the dialogue taken up in the context of the "European Year against Racism and
Xenophobia" (1997) between the Government and non-governmental organizations
(NGOs). The Forum gegen Rassismus (FgR - Forum against Racism) was constituted in 1998 as a follow-up to the "European Year against Racism". It has by now
become an established platform for discussion between state agencies and civil
society on all issues concerning the fight against racism, xenophobia and anti-Semitism. The FgR is, at the same time, the National Round Table established in keeping
with the principles of the Vienna-based European Monitoring Centre on Racism and
Xenophobia (EUMC) which took up its functions in 1998. As an important follow-up
project to the 2001 UN World Conference in Durban, a National Action Plan on
Fighting Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Forms of Intolerance is being developed in consultation with civil-society initiatives. For this purpose,
the Forum (FgR) set up a working group to introduce the ideas of civil society in the
consultations with the Federal Government. Enactment of the Anti-Discrimination
Directives of the European Union in national law is publicized by an awareness campaign launched by a FgR working group.
The Forum at present has 80 members, including 50 NGOs operating nationwide or
at a supraregional level. The chairmanship and the Secretariat are assigned to the
Federal Ministry of the Interior.
196.
However, if the fight against extremism, xenophobia and violence is to be
successful on a sustained basis, the socially relevant forces (families, schools,
churches, sports associations, trade unions, employers, etc.) will have to be involved
on a substantially larger scale. This is the aim of the Alliance for Democracy and
Tolerance - Against Extremism and Violence which was initiated by the Federal Government and set up on 23 May 2000. The aim is to provide, on the broadest scale
possible, for the information and mobilization of the general public and for awareness-raising regarding these issues, with a focus on public information/education
and, above all, on providing a set of values. If this Alliance is to succeed in its efforts,
- 61 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part C

the multifarious measures and action concepts developed at various levels to fight
racism and xenophobia must be efficiently co-ordinated and brought into focus. The
governmental measures are widely supported by the media in the Federal Republic of
Germany (press and broadcasting media) and community-based groups (civil society)
as well as by the majority of the population. In the meantime, more than 900 initiatives
and individuals have joined the Alliance.
197.
The specific anti-xenophobia concepts developed and implemented by the
Bund are matched by similar measures taken by the Länder. An example is furnished
by Brandenburg Land, one of the traditional settlement areas of the Sorbs (Wends). In
1998, the Brandenburg Land Government presented an action concept against
violence, right-wing extremism and xenophobia; its key elements are the following:
-

an alliance for action against violence, right-wing extremism and xenophobia (this
project, which is supported with substantial Land funds, is to mobilize society for
tolerance, solidarity and internationality; the Alliance's projects are very heterogeneous);

-

condemnation of violence, by intensified public discussion in the media and schools;
establishing counselling bureaus for the victims of offences committed by right-wing
extremists and of offences of suspected anti-foreigner motivation;
support for counselling services sponsored by local authorities;
support for the development of local structures for the integration of new inhabitants;
qualification of professional educators for handling and managing violence and rightwing extremism;
preventive work with youngsters already having a record of offences in this regard
and with youth groups;
establishing suitable police mechanisms to repond to xenophobic violence
(example: setting up "Mobile Einsatztrupps gegen Gewalt und Ausländerfeindlichkeit" (MEGA) [Mobile Units against Violence and Hostility towards Foreigners]).

-

-

-

-

The above measures are designed to prevent or punish all forms of discrimination
against persons belonging to other ethnic groups. This also applies to the Sorbian/
Wendish minority. It must be noted, however, that acts of violence against persons
belonging to the Sorbian (Wendish) ethnic group have so far not become known. Isolated cases of verbal attacks on representatives of the Sorbs, or posters containing
insulting or discriminatory/racist statements were acts committed by individual offenders.
198.
The Federal Office of Criminal Police (BKA) recorded 21,690 politically motivated criminal offences in 2002 (2001: 26,520); of these, 12,933 (2001: 14,725) including 940 violent offences (2001: 980), i.e. a percentage of 7.3 % (2001: 6.7 %)
- 62 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part C

come under the heading of "politically motivated crime - right-wing". Thus, as compared to 2001, the total number of right-wing politically motivated offences dropped
by 12.2 %; for right-wing acts of violence, the number dropped by 4.1 per cent.
10,902 (2001: 10,054) of right-wing politically motivated offences were classified as
extremist; these included 772 (7.1 %) violent offences (2001: 709, i.e. 7.1 %); this is
an increase of offences of right-wing extremist motivation by 8.4 %, and of right-wing
extremist act of violence by 8.9 %. Of all crimes with a right-wing extremist background,
however, 86.4 % (2001: 84.1 %) were either so-called "propaganda offences" [i.e.
dissemination of propaganda by unconstitutional organizations] (7,294; 2001: 6,336) or
incitement to hatred and violence against individuals or certain segments of the
population (2,122; 2001: 2,121).
The Central Council of German Sinti and Roma, during talks held in January 2001,
presented the Federal Minister of the Interior with a documentation on the
desecration of, and outrages against, KZ (concentration camp) memorial sites in
Germany. One of the subjects of these talks was the Central Council's demand for a
special "Protection Zone Act" for these memorial sites which, like similar legislation in
Poland, the Central Council sees as a possible instrument to fight such outrages
effectively and as a grave crime.
199.
The fight against right-wing extremism is based on a comprehensive overall
concept. Apart from repressive measures, the focus is on preventive approaches, as
documented in detail by the Report on the Federal Government's Current and
Planned Measures and Activities to Combat Right-Wing Extremism, Xenophobia,
Anti-Semitism and Violence presented to the German Bundestag on 14 May 2002.
Article 7, para. 4
Paragraph 4
In determining their policy with regard to regional or minority languages, the Parties shall
take into consideration the needs and wishes expressed by the groups which use such
languages. They are encouraged to establish bodies, if necessary, for the purpose of
advising the authorities on all matters pertaining to regional or minority languages.
200.
Paragraph 4 contains two different obligations. On the one hand, the Contracting Parties, in determining their policy with regard to regional or minority languages, undertake to take account of the needs or wishes expressed by groups
using such languages. Since the Charter grants the Contracting Parties the right to
make their own decisions regarding the various measures to implement the objectives and principles of the Charter, the provision in paragraph 4 does not imply that
the Contracting Parties would, without being able to make their own decisions, have
to accept the wishes of the users of such languages with regard to the nature and
- 63 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part C

scope of the pertinent measures; rather, it means in particular that measures to
implement the obligations under the Charter should not be taken against the explicit
wish of the users of regional or minority languages. Thus, this provision does not affect measures taken in keeping with the general legal order, provided that these will
not jeopardize, or impair, the preservation and development of the given regional or
minority language.
201.
Sometimes it is difficult for the competent public authorities to establish what
actually are the wishes of the users of regional or minority languages since, in instances, the needs and wishes expressed by umbrella organizations, regional organizations or independent associations of a language group or by the language users
concerned, e.g. parents, differ widely. A single association, union or initiative group
cannot generally claim to reflect the view of all members of a language group. If the
needs and wishes differ, the only choice left to the authorities is to meet them in a
reasonable way and within the limits of what is possible.
202. The divergence of views on the protection duties is a topical issue as regards
the Romany language of the German Sinti and Roma. During the ratification procedure, the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma, with its nine Land Associations,
and other associations and institutions affiliated with the Council pleaded for inclusion
of the Romany language in the Charter's scope of application and for its protection
under Part III of the Charter. The Federal Republic in part complied with this wish and
notified the Romany language for protection under Part II of the Charter. At the time
of the Charter's ratification, it was not possible to notify Romany for protection under
Part III since the Bund and the Länder could not, in this respect, assume the required
minimum number of 35 obligations. This is due to the dispersed settlement of the
German Sinti and Roma and to the fact that knowledge of the Romany language is
confined to the members of the traditional minority (refusal to have the language
studied by outsiders). Since, however, the prevailing law and the existing administrative practice in Germany meet individual provisions of Part III of the Charter, Germany has opted for a compromise rejected by the Central Council, by notifying the
Council of Europe, in a Declaration [of 26 January 1998, cf. Annex 1], of the attained
number of obligations (18 for the entire Federal territory, a total of up to 31 for the
territories of various Länder), as a voluntary commitment of the Federal Republic
of Germany, and by including these obligations in the procedure relating to the
federal act ratifying the Charter.
203.
After Hesse Land had accepted additional undertakings for Romany, the conditions were met for notifying the Romany language for protection under Part III of the
Charter. An Act to this effect entered into force as of 19 September 2002. Romany
- 64 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part C

was notified to the Council of Europe for protection under Part III. The Central
Council of German Sinti and Roma continues to encourage other Länder as well to
enter into similar obligations. To this end, the Central Council and its Land Associations had talks with a number of Länder and presented their wishes to the latter. At
present, none of these Länder feels in a position to accept any further undertakings
regarding protection of Romany.
204.
Associations and tribes of German Sinti, which co-operate within the Sinti Allianz Deutschland e.V. ("Sinti Alliance Germany, reg'd"), see themselves as a Sinti
ethnic group within the German people, who - without discrimination and, at the same
time, without reliance on the protective provisions of the Charter - wish to be integrated and to cultivate the traditional language at the private level, without any governmental action in this sector. These Sinti reject inclusion of the Romany language
in the scope of application of the Charter, Part III, providing for promotion of the use
of Romany in public life, and in this context point out that this is in keeping with the
centuries-old legal order exacting that this language, which is governed by the taboo
system, must not be made accessible to anybody outside the Sinti community. Consequently the Sinti language required special protection in order to prevent any
abuse in this respect by persons not feeling bound by the traditional legal order. The
government side responded to this by explaining that protection and promotion of the
Romany language, as pursued by Germany, solely is an offer to this language group
and that it is up to every individual concerned to avail him/herself of this offer or not to
make any use of it.
205.
The second obligation under paragraph 4 encourages the Contracting Parties
to establish bodies, if necessary, for advising the authorities on all matters pertaining
to regional or minority languages. Within the meaning of the Explanatory Report, this
provision is to be taken to mean that establishment of such bodies is not required
only in those cases where they do not already exist. However, the Contracting
Parties are only encouraged, and not placed under the obligation, to establish bodies
for this purpose.
206.
In the Federal Republic of Germany, bodies looking after the interests of
regional or minority languages already exist in the form of advisory committees or
consultative councils, foundations or a board of trustees (cf. the detailed comments in
Part A, paras. 47 - 59, above). Given the considerable differences regarding the
situation of the various languages in the regions or Länder of the Federal Republic of
Germany, a uniform structure for related advisory tasks would not seem a promising
approach. Therefore, the Bund and the Länder share the view that, as a first step,
use should be made of the existing bodies and that experience should be gained as
- 65 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part C

to the ways in which these bodies might help with the practical implementation of the
Charter. In this regard, particular mention is to be made of the regular conference on
the implementation of the Charter (cf. the comments in Part A, No. 59, above).
Article 7, para. 5
Paragraph 5
The Parties undertake to apply, mutatis mutandis, the principles listed in paragraphs 1 to 4
above to non-territorial languages. However, as far as these languages are concerned, the
nature and scope of the measures to be taken to give effect to this Charter shall be
determined in a flexible manner, bearing in mind the needs and wishes, and respecting the
traditions and characteristics, of the groups which use the languages concerned.
207.

The Contracting Parties are obliged to apply, mutatis mutandis, the principles

listed in paras. 1 to 4 to non-territorial languages. The nature and scope of these
measures designed to give effect to the Charter must be determined in a flexible
manner, while bearing in mind the needs and wishes of the users of such languages
and respecting their traditions and characteristics. As evidenced by the foregoing
sections and by the explanatory comments in Part D below regarding Part III of the
Charter, this provision is only of little practical relevance to the situation prevailing in
the Federal Republic of Germany.

- 66 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D

Part D Measures to Promote the Use of Regional or Minority Languages
in Public Life in accordance with the Obligations under Part III of
the Charter, entered into under Article 2, paragraph 2
D.1

General policy remarks regarding the various Articles of the Charter

208.
For ease of reference, all of the protected languages are covered in the comments below; i.e. in accordance with the [German] Declaration regarding Part II of the
Charter [cf. Annex 1], the various obligations being met are listed also for the
Romany language in the entire Federal territory, and for Low German in the Länder
listed in the Declaration.
To begin with, the following general policy remarks referring to the various Articles
describe the overall conditions applying to all of the protected languages in all of the
Länder.

re: Article 8
Education
209.
On account of the federal structure of the Federal Republic of Germany, the
Länder have jurisdiction over educational matters. Therefore, implementation of the
provisions of this Article is, in particular, a responsibility of the Länder.
210.
In the field of education in the Länder, promoting the knowledge of the culture, history, languages and religion of the respective minorities/language groups as
well as of the majority population is part of the curricula of publicly maintained and
private schools.
211.
An important role in imparting knowledge of the language groups' culture, in
and outside schools, is also played by the state institutions for political education - i.e.
the Federal Centre and the Land Centres for Political Education (cf. the comments in
Part C, Nos. 179 - 184 above).
212.
The language groups regard the [education/information] activities carried out
so far outside their central settlement areas as insufficient and, in particular, miss a
nation-wide survey concerning the five language groups. The Federal Government
and the Länder endeavour to further improve the available educational and information offers regarding the language groups concerned.

- 67 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D

re: Article 9
Judicial Authorities
213.
Section 184 of the Organisation of the Courts Act lays down that the official
language in court is German. An exemption applies in the case of the Sorbian language (cf. the comments in No. 426 below).
214.
As regards the legal consequences of legal documents, German procedural
law does not distinguish between documents drafted in German and those drawn up
in any other language. Under Section 142, para. 3, of the Code of Civil Procedure,
the court may order a translation to be produced of documents drafted in a foreign
language. However, the constitutional stipulations regarding fair trial and due process
of law (Article 20, para. 3, of the Basic Law, confirmed as a constitutional right by
Article 2, para. 1, of the Basic Law) entail the obligation for courts also to take note of
declarations made by parties to a lawsuit in a foreign language. If the court hearing is
attended by persons who do not know the German language, an interpreter must be
called in (Section 185 of the Organisation of the Courts Act).
215.
Similarly, during preliminary investigation by the public prosecutor, the accused must be informed, in a language he/she understands, of the offence with
which he/she is charged and must be given an opportunity to present his/her view [in
that language] on the alleged offence. As soon as it becomes obvious that communication is not possible for language reasons, involvement of an interpreter is mandatory also in this case. Articles 5, para. 2, and 6, para. 3, litt. a, of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR) also
stipulate this right. Article 9 of the Charter does not contain any obligations going
beyond the provisions of the ECHR, and thus in Germany is already part of the (established) law in force. Apart from a few exceptions, however, the members of the
language groups understand German so that these problems do not arise in practice.

re: Article 10
Administrative Authorities and Public Services
216.
Under German law, the official language is German. The obligation under
Article 10 is confined to areas which are inhabitated, traditionally or in substantial
numbers, by members of the language groups, and in Germany applies in particular
to the settlement areas of the Danish minority, of the Sorbian people and of the North
Frisians and Saterland Frisians. The German Sinti and Roma are dispersed more or
less throughout Germany, while no major number of them - in quantitative terms
- 68 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D

comparable to those of the aforementioned groups - is known to live in one particular
place or region. As regards Low German, cf. the comments in No. 42 above.
217.
On account of the mostly small number of members of minorities as a percentage of the given local population, it is not possible, in general, to use the minority
language in relations with the administrative authorities; rather, such use is confined
to special regulations. However, where the legal and practical scope for using the
minority or regional languages in relations with administrative authorities does exist,
the major part of the members of the language groups scarcely avail themselves of
this possibility.
218.
However, in the view of the Danish minority, the Sorbs, the Frisians and the
speakers of Low German, further widening of the existing practical scope for such
use would be desirable because this would increase public awareness as regards the
existence of minority/regional languages and would provide additional incentives to
the subsequent generation to retain the given language.
219.
The language groups suggest that for better minority language communication on the part of the staff of local and regional administrations, local authorities
might encourage participation in language courses and that, in the recruitment and
professional activity of staff members, their proficiency in the minority/regional language might be particularly taken into account as an additional qualification.
220.
For all protected languages, the obligation under Article 10, para. 5, i.e. to
allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or minority languages, is
regulated by a federal act as follows:
221.
The Act of 22 July 1997 Ratifying the Council of Europe Framework Convention of 1 February 1995 for the Protection of National Minorities contains, as its Article 2, the Act to implement Article 11, paragraph 1, of the Framework Convention
(Act on Name Changes by Minorities (MindNamÄndG)). With the entry into force of
the Act Ratifying the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities
on 23 July 1997, this obligation has thus become applicable law in the Federal
Republic of Germany with regard to the members of the Danish minority, the Sorbian
people, the Frisian ethnic group and the German Sinti and Roma.
222.
The members of national minorities and of other ethnic groups traditionally
resident in Germany to whom the Framework Convention and the German law governing names apply, may assume the minority-language version of their names by
making a pertinent declaration before the Registrar [of the Civil Registry Office]. With
the 13th General Regulatory Order Amending the General Regulatory Order to Im- 69 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D

plement the Act on Civil Status ("Standing Instructions for Registrars and Their
Supervisory Authorities with regard to the Act on Civil Status") of 2 June 1998 (Supplement to the Bundesanzeiger [Official Gazette of the Federal Republic], no. 107),
which entered into force on 1 July 1998, account was taken of the Framework Convention by including the provisions of the Act [on Civil Status] in Section 381a of the
Standing Instructions for Registrars and having them applied in registry office practice. Adaptation of a name may be effected by translation of the name into a minority
language if the name also denotes a specific term and thus is translatable from one
language into another. If the name cannot be translated, it may be adapted to the
phonetic particularities of the given minority language. Members of national minorities
whose former names in the respective minority language were given a German form
or were changed to some other name, may again assume those original names. A
pertinent declaration before the Registrar suffices for adapting a name to the special
features of the given minority language.
223.
The Standing Instructions for Registrars and Their Supervisory Authorities
take account of the orthographic particularities of the names of members of national
minorities by providing that the diacritics (graphic accents, hooks, etc.) in names or
other words shall be retained unchanged. The change of a person's surname at birth
will affect the married name of the person making such declaration only if the spouse
also makes such a name-change declaration before the Registrar. Extension of such
name changes to the children of the person making the declaration or to their
spouses is governed by the provisions of the Civil Code of the Federal Republic of
Germany.
224.
Section 3 of the Act on Name Changes by Minorities [MindNamÄndG] provides that no fees shall be charged for acceptance of a declaration to this effect and
for its certification or judicial recording [authentication].
225.
The number of persons making use of the right to have their names changed
is not covered by the statistics of the Civil Registry Offices. There are no provisions
laying down any general obligation of Civil Registry Offices to report such information
to any registry supervisory bodies.

re: Article 11
Media
226.
In Germany, general freedom of expression is extensively guaranteed under
Article 5, para. 1, 1st sentence, of the Basic Law and under Article 10 of the European
Convention on Human Rights (ECHR). The Basic Law safeguards the right freely to
express and disseminate one's opinions in speech, writing, and pictures, as well as
- 70 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D

the right to withhold one's personal opinion ("negative freedom of expression").
Opinions thus protected are all types and forms of [personal] judgments or of behaviour; the notion of "opinion" must generally be understood in its broadest sense
and, in addition to value judgments, also covers allegations of fact where these are a
prerequisite for forming opinions. Thus - within, of course, the limits prescribed by
Article 5, para. 2, of the Basic Law (i.e. violation of the provisions of general laws;
legal provisions on the protection of young persons; and the right to inviolability of
personal honour) - protection also extends to false, reprehensible and rating expressions of opinion as an input to, and basis for, analysis and discussion. Freedom of
expression is accorded to all German nationals and thus, of course, to the members
of the language groups protected under the Charter, and to foreigners.
227.
The basic right to free speech primarily provides protection against government interference. But in addition, it places the State under the obligation to safeguard this freedom. Article 5, para. 1, 1st sentence, of the Basic Law also guarantees
freedom of information - the right to inform oneself [without hindrance, from generally
accessible sources] - as a particular basic right. Such protection extends both to the
active procurement of information and to merely receiving information. Especially the
Danish minority in Schleswig-Holstein make - transfrontier - use of the broadcasting
programmes and press products from the Kingdom of Denmark in their traditional
settlement area.
228.
The right to freedom of expression is also particularly manifested in the freedom to create and use media (press, broadcasting, and other communications
media). In its para. 1, 2nd and 3rd sentences, Article 5 of the Basic Law guarantees
freedom of the press and freedom of reporting by means of broadcasts and films,
without censorship. Freedom of the press and of broadcasting particularly implies the
principle of governmental non-intervention, which prohibits any state interference
which is not compatible with the freedom of the press and of broadcasting or which is
not warranted by the limitations of such rights as provided under Article 5, para. 2, of
the Basic Law.
229.
For the press, these constitutional guarantees have been developed in detail
and confirmed by the judicial decisions (rulings) of the Federal Constitutional Court
and by the various Land Press Acts. This provides the basis for the free and economically autonomous development of the press in the Federal Republic of Germany.
230.
Freedom of broadcasting, like freedom of the press, is an essential factor in
the public opinion-forming process and in the articulation of the political will. Like the
press, broadcasting has institutional autonomy. For compliance with the constitutional
- 71 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D

mandate of broadcasting, it will not suffice for the State to refrain from any interference whatsoever and, in all other respects, to leave broadcasting for the social
actors to deal with. Rather, the requirement is for some regulatory structure. The
Federal Republic of Germany has the so-called dual broadcasting system - i.e. the
existence of public-service and private broadcasters side by side - by which the State
guarantees that, through the overall offer by all broadcasters, programmes meet the
requirements stipulated in the Constitution for balanced diversity, i.e. promoting the
individual's freedom to form his/her own opinion and depiction of cultural diversity.
231.
The federal structure of Germany assigns responsibility for broadcasting, and
thus for ensuring diversity of opinions, to the Länder. The legal basis for broadcasting
is provided by the Broadcasting State Treaties concluded between the Länder, which
lay down the minimum requirements according to which the Länder, within their respective jurisdiction, issued detailed regulations in their Land Media Acts. Article 5,
para. 1, 2nd sentence, of the Basic Law (freedom of broadcasting) does not require a
Land to adopt a specific organizational form of broadcasting. However, the Land is obliged to make certain provisions to ensure freedom of broadcasting. As a matter of public interest, broadcasting must be operated above party lines and in full independence
and must be protected against any biased intervention. The public-service broadcasters, in particular, must furnish comprehensive information within their overall
programme and allow full pluralism of opinions. As regards private broadcasting, the
legislator also must ensure that such private operators meet the constitutional requirements and, in particular, that a maximum of balanced diversity is achieved. The existing
regulations regarding licensing of broadcasters are based exclusively on objective
criteria. The licensing conditions are laid down in the various Land Media Acts.
232.
In all cases, the applicant must have his/her residence or the domicile of his/her
company in the area to which the Basic Law applies (in some of the Länder, this may
also be a location in the EU Member States). Granting of a licence also depends on
whether the applicant has the qualification for lawful provision of broadcasting
programmes, i.e. meets the financial and legal requirements with regard to programming. Moreover, programmes must be in accordance with the general programming
principles as laid down in the Broadcasting State Treaty concluded between the Länder;
these include, inter alia, conformity with the constitutional order and respect for human
dignity. In addition, the Land Media Acts lay down various requirements to be met by
private broadcasters which, however, are also based exclusively on objective criteria.
233.
If an application for licensing is refused, an objection may be filed, or an
action be brought, in accordance with the general legal provisions.

- 72 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D

234.
Article 3, paras. 1 and 3, of the Basic Law prohibits any discrimination with
regard to access to the media so that also the language groups may have access on
the same conditions as the majority population. In this regard, particular mention
must be made of the supervisory and control bodies which have to safeguard diversity of opinions and ensure compliance with the broadcasting programming principles.
The relevant major political, ideological and social groups are granted adequate participation in the supervisory bodies of public-service broadcasters and of the Land
Supervisory Authorities for Private Broadcasters [Land Broadcasting Institutions], i.e. the
Broadcasting Board and the Broadcasting Commission/Media Council. Membership
of these bodies is so diversified that all socially relevant groups are provided sufficient opportunity to have their say. In addition to representing the interests of their
associations or groups, the members of these bodies also contribute comprehensive
and multi-faceted views on socially important issues to the deliberations of these
bodies.
235.
The issue of representation of national minorities on these media boards was
the subject of an action brought by the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma.
Controlling the public-service broadcasters primarily is the broadcasters' internal
responsibility and is incumbent on the supervisory bodies, i.e. the Broadcasting
Board and the Board of Administration. Responsibility for controlling private broadcasters lies with the Land Supervisory Authorities [Land Broadcasting Institutions].
According to the judicial decisions of the Federal Constitutional Court, the task of
these supervisory bodies is not, however, to represent the interests of the
groups/organizations delegating the respective members, but rather is to act as a
trustee for the public interest and thus to prevent any biased interference and biased
programming and to ensure that appropriate and fair account is taken, within the
overall programme, of all major political actors and groups. Accordingly, the Federal
Constitutional Court did not invest any socially relevant group - including, for
instance, a national minority - with the right to be included in the membership of
supervisory bodies, and consequently did not regard a group's non-inclusion as an
act of discrimination.
The Central Council of German Sinti and Roma appealed to the European Court of
Human Rights (Eur. C.H.R.) to lodge a formal protest (file ref.: 46665/99) against the
decision of the Federal Constitutional Court (BVerfG); the Eur. C.H.R. has not yet
heard, and decided on, this case. This was a request to the Court to determine that
the complete exclusion of representatives of the German Sinti and Roma from the
supervisory bodies for public service broadcasting and from the state supervisory
bodies for private broadcasters constituted a violation of freedom of broadcasting as
guaranteed by Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) and
- 73 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D

thus violated freedom from discrimination as defined and guaranteed by Article 14 of
the ECHR. Among the reasons given was the view that such exclusion of the Sinti
and Roma amounted to unequal treatment as compared with the other recognized
national minorities (see No. 236 below). Unequal treatment [of Sinti and Roma] also
existed in comparison with Jewish Land Associations and communities which - on
account of the [state's] "particular responsibility stemming from past" (as recognized
also in specific State Treaties) - are represented on the various controlling bodies
since such historical responsibility applied also to the Sinti and Roma who in the
same way had fallen victim to the holocaust.
236.
Some representatives or members of national minorities/language groups
were elected to broadcasting bodies. Also, one (female) member of the Television
Board of Zweites Deutsches Fernsehen (ZDF - Second German Television, or
Channel II) belongs to the Danish minority. In accordance with the Act on Private
Broadcasting in Saxony of 18 January 1996, a Sorbian representative nominated by
the associations of the Sorbs is a member of the Assembly of Sächsische
Landesanstalt für privaten Rundfunk und neue Medien [Saxon Land Institution for
Private Broadcasting and New Media]. The Saxon Landtag delegated a
representative of the Sorbian umbrella organization Domowina to the Broadcasting
Board of Mitteldeutscher Rundfunk (mdr). In Brandenburg, too, a representative of
Domowina is a member of the Broadcasting Board of Ostdeutscher Rundfunk
Brandenburg (ORB) and of the Media Council of Landesmedienanstalt BerlinBrandenburg [Land Supervisory Authority for Private Broadcasters, BerlinBrandenburg].
237.
On account of the actual overall conditions regarding freedom of the press as
guaranteed by the Constitution, which provide for a large number of independent
press products which, in terms of political orientation or worldview/ideology, compete
with each other, no comparable legally regulated supervisory bodies exist in the print
media sector.
238.
The aforementioned freedoms may, as a matter of principle, also be
exercised by the language groups in their respective language.
239.
Like in the case of press products, creation of a group's own media in the
field of broadcasting (radio and television broadcasting) depends on the size of the
protected group and its economic capacity. Where creation of own broadcasting
media is not expedient or not feasible, "Open Channels" are usually available. These
are used for local and regional dissemination of non-commercial broadcasting items.
In this way, individuals, social groups/citizens groups, organizations, associations,
- 74 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D

unions and institutions can, independently and on their own responsibility, produce
broadcasting items and have them aired. These items must conform to the general
programming principles, must not contain any commercial advertisements, must be
on a non-profit basis and must not be provided for remuneration.

re: Article 12
Cultural Activities and Facilities
240.
Promotion of measures required to cultivate and further develop the culture
of members of the language groups concerned and to preserve their protected languages and identity is accomplished in Germany through the law in force and the
promotional activities of public authorities.
241.
In accordance with the distribution of responsibilities within the federal
system of Germany, cultural promotion is, on principle, subject to the Länder's
autonomy in cultural matters. Within the framework of local self-government under
the Statutes enacted by the Länder concerning the organization and powers of local
governments [Local Authority Statutes], e.g. Section 10, para. 2, of the Local
Authority Code of Baden-Wurttemberg Land, local authorities are called upon to
promote the common weal of their inhabitants through the citizenry's selfmanagement. This also covers the requirement for attending to the inhabitants' social
and cultural needs. Included in this are the needs of those inhabitants who are
members of the language groups protected under the Charter because the definition
of "inhabitant" leaves the person's nationality, language, cultural heritage, and
religion out of consideration.
242.
Of particular significance to the members of these language groups are the
right to free development of personality, as guaranteed by Article 2, para. 1, of the
Basic Law, which inter alia leaves the use of the relevant language, maintenance of
the relevant autonomous culture, and preservation of the ethnic identity to each individual; and Article 4, paras. 1 and 2, of the Basic Law, guaranteeing freedom of
faith, conscience, and to profess a religious or philosophical creed, as well as the undisturbed practice of religion.
243.
To create the conditions for focused governmental promotion of the culture
and thus of the languages of these groups, the State has established bodies where
regular exchanges can take place between the political community, public administration and minorities/language groups so that the needs of such groups will be
taken account of in governmental promotion. Also, functional areas have been established in public administration, which are in constant touch with the minorities and
- 75 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D

have direct responsibility for protection and promotion. The creation of this infrastructure had to take account of the different needs of the various groups, and of the existing scope for government action.
244.
The language groups in Germany differ in terms of their regional distribution,
their proficiency in the given language, the infrastructure of cultural institutions and
associations established and maintained by the groups themselves, and their respective concepts for the maintenance of their cultural and linguistic identity. In instances, this even applies within a given particular language group which is represented by various organizations with different objectives. Also, the respective situation, together with the historic development, has - in conjunction with the varying
financial resources of the Länder, and taking account of the respective number of the
members of national minorities and ethnic groups in a Land - had an influence on
governmental promotion policies. Accordingly, the reports on the obligations entered
into with regard to the various languages are of varying length and detail.

re: Article 13
Economic and Social Life
245.
In Germany, freedom to use one's own language - in private and in public - is
ensured by Article 2, para. 1, of the Basic Law, which guarantees the right to the free
development of one's personality. This freedom is also ensured in the context of the
freedoms of expression, of the press and of broadcasting as guaranteed under Article 5, para. 1, of the Basic Law.
246.
In addition to the freedoms guaranteed by the Basic Law for the entire territory of Germany, Section 8 of the Act on the Specification of Rights of the Sorbs
(Wends) in the Land of Brandenburg (SWG) explicitly reaffirmed the right freely to
use the Sorbian (Wendish) language. Pursuant to the Saxon Constitution and
Section 8 of the Act on the Sorbs' Rights in the Free State of Saxony [SächsSorbG]
and a number of other laws and ordinances, the Sorbs in the Free State of Saxony
have the right to communicate, orally and in writing, in their language in private and in
public.
247.
Use of the minority languages in public, also in the business sphere and
social life, is generally accepted by the German population. Much wider use is made
of languages other than German by the large numbers of foreigners living in
Germany, and this fact does not raise any problems in society - with the exception of
the attitude of only a few far-rightist individuals.
- 76 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D

248.
The undertaking, under Article 13, para. 1, sub-para. (c), to oppose practices
designed to discourage the use of regional or minority languages in connection with
economic or social activities has been fully accepted for all of the languages. In the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], the Committee of Experts generally
stated that it had received no information which would enable it to judge whether or
not the undertaking was fulfilled (e.g. in No. 168 of the Report). In response it is
pointed out that no such practices exist in Germany and consequently no information
on this matter can be provided. Accordingly, there is in Germany no need for specific
action to implement this undertaking.
249.
With regard to the undertaking under Article 13, para. 1, sub-para. (d) - to
facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by means other
than those specified in sub-paragraphs (a) to (c) - the Committee of Experts in its
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] very often (e.g. in No. 250 of the Report)
stated that it had received no information which would enable it to conclude that the
undertaking was fulfilled. In response the information is provided that this matter was
discussed with the Länder during an Implementation Conference on the implementation of the recommendations of the Committee of Experts. The measures taken by
Schleswig-Holstein Land to implement this undertaking - considered fulfilled by the
Committee of Experts (cf. No. 169 of the Monitoring Report) - were considered good
policy also by the other Länder and have been included in further planning of implementing measures.
250.
As regards Article 13, para. 2, sub-para. (c) (ensuring use of the regional or
minority language in social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and
hostels), the Committee throughout its Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] (e.g. in
No. 170) considers a systematic policy approach necessary to ensure fulfilment of
the undertaking. For all of the Länder which accepted this obligation, it can generally
be said that the competent authority sees to it that, as a matter of principle, the possibility to communicate in the given regional or minority languages is offered to persons who so wish in the mentioned publicly funded social care facilities. So far, this
has been ensured without any specific measures. As before, no concrete needs have
been notified by the relevant persons in need of care. Therefore, in view of this
supply-and-demand situation, the competent authorities do not envisage any special
additional measures. However, if demand should change, they will reconsider the
scope for such measures. Generally, in addition to the specific information provided
in respect of the various languages, it is pointed out with regard to the wording in
Article 13, para. 2: "in so far as the public authorities are competent", that in the view
of the Federal Republic of Germany, the term "competence" means "power of administration" [administrative jurisdiction] which restricts the scope for administrative ac- 77 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D

tion, especially in the private social care sector. An appraisal of the implementation of
the given undertaking under the Charter will - what the Monitoring Report failed to do
- have to take account of the activities of the churches which, in interaction with the
measures that can be taken by public authorities, ensure broadly based and comprehensive implementation.

re: Article 14
Transfrontier Exchanges
251.
The right to maintain and develop contacts as part of transfrontier exchanges
is one of the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the Basic Law and is protected
under its Articles 2, para. 1 (general freedom of action; freedom to leave the country)
and 11, para. 1 (freedom of movement within the federal territory; freedom to enter
the country).
For further details, cf. the comments in Part C, Nos. 147 - 161, above.

- 78 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Danish

D.2

Implementation of the obligations undertaken with regard to
the various languages

D.2.1

Danish in the Danish speech area in Schleswig-Holstein

Article 8
Education
252.
As regards the school system in general, it is to be noted that the Danish
minority have the right, in all of Schleswig-Holstein Land, to instruction in the Danish
language (Declaration by the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany of 29
March 1955 [Bonn Declaration]). Article 8 of the Constitution of the Land of
Schleswig-Holstein leaves it to the parents/guardians to decide whether their children
should attend a school of a national minority. The pupils coming from the Danish
minority are thus given the opportunity to learn and use the Danish language. The
details are regulated by the Schools Act.
Article 8, para. 1
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such
languages are used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without
prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (a) - Pre-School Education (i) to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
(ii) to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or
(iii) to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to
those pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered
sufficient; or
(iv) if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school
education, to favour and/or encourage the application of the measures
referred to under i to iii above;
Schleswig-Holstein has accepted the obligation under sub-paragraph (a) (iv).
253.
As part of pre-school education, Danish language offers exist in day-care
centres in the Schleswig region of Schleswig-Holstein Land.
254.
Dansk Skoleforening for Sydslesvig [Dänischer Schulverein für Südschleswig
- Danish Schools Association for South Schleswig] is the providing body for activities
of the Danish minority with regard to nursery schools. During the school year
- 79 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Danish

2002/03, it operated 57 nursery schools and day-nurseries which were attended by
1881 children, of whom 511 were peschoolers. With a few exceptions, all of these
children will then go on to a Danish school. These institutions have their own admission regulations.
255.
The Danish Schools Association is supported with funds of Schleswig-Holstein Land. Subsidies for the educators employed in day-care centres are granted
under Section 25, para. 4, of the Children's Day-Care Centres Act.
256.
There are also some German nursery schools offering the Danish language.
Since 1998, Danish has been offered, as part of a Language Encounter Concept, in
seven nursery schools by Arbeitsgemeinschaft Deutsches Schleswig [Working Group
"German Schleswig Region"], one of the four German Border Associations.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (b) - Primary Education (i) to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
(ii) to make available a substantial part of primary education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or
(iii) to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant
regional or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
(iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to
those pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered
sufficient;
Schleswig-Holstein has accepted the obligation under sub-paragraph (b) (iv).
257.
Under Article 8, para. 4, of the Land Constitution, the parents/guardians decide whether their children should attend a school of a national minority.
258.
In the 2002/2003 school year, 48 primary schools or comprehensive schools,
Realschulen [secondary schools, with lower secondary grades (i.e. secondary
education stage I)] or secondary modern schools with a primary education section,
and a Gymnasium are operated by the Danish Schools Association in the Schleswig
region of the Land. The Danish schools are subsidized with Land funds. Under the
Schleswig-Holstein Schools Act, the Danish Schools Association had until 1998 been
entitled to a subsidy per pupil which, irrespective of actual requirements, was fixed at
100 per cent of the costs incurred, as a Land average, for a pupil at a comparable
publicly maintained school. Under Article 10 of the Budget Support Act
(Haushaltsbegleitgesetz) of 23 January 1998, the respective subsidy was fixed on the
basis of the cost-per-pupil rates for the year 1998.

- 80 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Danish

259.
Article 2 of the 2002 Budget Support Act (Haushaltsbegleitgesetz) newly
regulated the funding of substitute (private) schools provided by voluntary bodies.
This Act provides that, for schools of the Danish minority, without verification of the
requirements a subsidy will be paid (per pupil) which corresponds to 100 per cent of
the costs incurred, on a Land average, for a pupil at a comparable publicly
maintained school in 2001, plus an increase in personnel costs corresponding to the
percentage by which the salaries of teachers employed in the civil service are
annually increased. This regulation will apply in full from the year 2004 onwards. A
transitional provision applies for the years 2002 and 2003, which already in 2002 led
to an increase in the grant per pupil and will result in a further improvement in 2003.
260.
At a number of publicly maintained schools, foreign language teaching was,
within the framework of a model project, introduced already at the primary school
level. At a number of publicly maintained schools in the Schleswig region of the Land,
Danish is offered as a foreign language. The target groups are the 3rd and 4th grades.
261.
A Working Group set up in 2002 provides the forum for the dialogue between
the Land Government, the Minister-President's Commissioner for Minorities and the
Danish Schools Association (Dansk Skoleforening for Sydslesvig). The task of this interdepartmental working group under the lead responsibility of the Land Ministry of Education, Science, Research and Cultural Affairs is to study issues of financial support
available to the schools of the Danish minority and to submit suggested solutions (cf.
No. 135 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final]).
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (c) - Secondary Education (i) to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
(ii) to make available a substantial part of secondary education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or
(iii) to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant
regional or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
(iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to
those pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number
considered sufficient;
Schleswig-Holstein has accepted the obligations under sub-paragraph (c) (iii) and
(iv).
262.
In Schleswig-Holstein, especially in the Schleswig region, many publicly
maintained secondary schools of all types offer Danish as a foreign language. Danish
is also offered by some schools outside the traditional Danish speech area. In the

- 81 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Danish

2002/03 school year, a total of some 4,200 pupils took part in Danish language instruction offered at publicly maintained schools.
263.
In addition, the school system of the Danish minority also comprises secondary modern schools, Realschulen, one comprehensive school and one Gymnasium
(in Flensburg). These schools admit pupils after the "orientation stage" (5th and 6th
grades) which in Danish schools is tied in with primary education; this course of education is completed after the 9th or 10th grade for secondary modern schools, after the
10th grade for Realschulen and the comprehensive school, and after the 13th grade
for the Gymnasium. Apart from the compulsory major subject "German", taught at the
native language level, the teaching language generally is Danish. In the final-year
classes and courses, however, it is ensured that also technical terms, especially in
the fields of mathematics/natural sciences and economics, are taught in German so
as to prepare pupils sufficiently for their future professional training in Germanlanguage enterprises and at university. The final examinations of all schools are
recognized in both Germany and Denmark.
Art. 8, para 1, sub-para. (d) (iii) - Technical and Vocational Education (iii) to provide, within technical and vocational education, for the teaching of
the relevant regional or minority languages as an integral part of the
curriculum; or
264.
At (part-time) vocational schools, Danish is offered as an optional-subject
foreign language, as part of general-education courses. At the specialized Gymnasium, Danish is taught as an optional foreign language. In addition, Danish is an integral part of the basic training of the Flensburg professional fire brigade.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (e) (ii) - University and Other Higher Education (ii) to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher
education subjects; or
265.
Danish is offered as a course of studies in Nordic philology at Kiel University
(CAU - Christian-Albrechts-Universität), and as a course of studies for the teaching
profession, at Flensburg University (UF - Universität Flensburg).
266.
In addition, the Dansk Centralbibliotek for Sydslesvig (Dänische Zentralbibliothek für Südschleswig - Central Library for South Schleswig) in Flensburg has a research unit which prepares scholarly articles/essays on the Danish minority. The general public in the German-Danish border region, and the Danish minority in particular,
also make use of the research findings of Danish institutions, e.g. of Danish universi- 82 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Danish

ties and especially of the Institut für Grenzregionsforschung [Institute for Border
Region Research] in Åbenrå/Aabenraa/Apenrade in Denmark.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (f) - Adult Education (ii) to offer such languages as subjects of adult and continuing education; or
(iii) if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult
education, to favour and/or encourage the offering of such languages as
subjects of adult and continuing education;
Schleswig-Holstein has accepted the obligations under sub-paragraph (f) (ii) and (iii).
267.
Danish language courses are offered by the adult education centres of
Schleswig-Holstein Land and by Jarplund Højskole, the Danish residential adult education college in South Schleswig. In 2002, 412 Danish language courses attended
by 4,269 participants were held at 75 adult education centres in Schleswig-Holstein
Land. For adult education among the Danish minority, 486 courses attended by
5,011 participants were held in fiscal year 2002 in 43 places of the Schleswig region
of the Land.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (g) - Teaching of the History and Culture Education (g) to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture
which is reflected by the regional or minority language;
268.
In Schleswig-Holstein, the curricula for primary education and the lower
secondary grades [secondary education stage I] - in addition to the curricula for
Danish instruction where the regional history, geography and civilization play an
important role - provide for a wide scope for dealing also with the problems of
minorities. For instance, the curriculum for the 8th grade covers the subjects "The
German-Danish Conflict over the Schleswig-Holstein Question, 1864" and "The
Danes of North Slesvig in Imperial Germany".
269.
The materials mentioned in No. 272 below have been patterned closely on
the subjects listed in the curricula, and thus substantially support classroom
treatment of the Danish language and of specific cultural aspects.
270.
The undertakings entered into by Schleswig-Holstein ensure that also
persons who do not speak Danish have access to this language.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (h) - Basic and Further Training of Teachers (h) to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement
those of paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;
- 83 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Danish

271.
In Schleswig-Holstein, further and continuous training is offered for teachers.
These latter have a say in the selection of subjects. A specialized adviser for Danish
is available to schools in matters of further and continuous training. Teachers of the
Danish Schools Association for South Schleswig can take part in follow-up and advanced training offered by the Institut für Qualitätsentwicklung an Schulen (IQSH Institute for Quality Development at Schools).
272.
The teachers of the private schools of the Danish minority are/were trained
either in Denmark or in Germany. Their in-service (follow-up) training is either in the
hands of institutions of the Danish minority or is provided by Danish institutions. In
Schleswig-Holstein, a course of studies in Danish is offered (for details, cf. the comments under paras. 265 - 266 above). The Danish private schools primarily use textbooks published by Danish educational publishing companies, but also educational
materials developed by these schools themselves to take account specifically of the
Danish minority's situation and history, as well as German textbooks. The development, entailed by the Bonn/Copenhagen Declarations of 1955, of transfrontier promotion of minorities on the basis of the reciprocity principle has ensured that for the
minorities on both sides of the border - Danes in Germany, and Germans in Denmark
- adequate opportunities exist for teacher training and for access to textbooks.
273.
With the specific aim of ensuring recruitment of teachers belonging to the
Danish minority who are able to teach all subjects included in the curriculum in the
Danish language, Section 5, para. 3, of the Federal Educational Grants Act (BAFöG)
grants members of the Danish minority unrestricted subsidized educational advancement for attending a training institution located in Denmark if such training is not
available in Germany. This applies, for instance, to teacher training since in the Federal Republic of Germany the subjects included in the curriculum are, as a rule,
taught in the German - but not in the Danish - language. As stated by the Danish
Schools Association, recognition, by statutory health insurance funds, as a "regular
course of studies" presents difficulties.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (i) - Supervisory Bodies (i) to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures
taken and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of
regional or minority languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their
findings which will be made public.
274.

For supervision of the measures taken in primary schools, secondary modern

schools and Realschulen [secondary technical schools], responsibility lies with the
supervisory school authorities of the Kreise [administrative districts] or kreisfreie
- 84 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Danish

Städte [non-district municipalities]. For Gymnasien, comprehensive schools and
vocational schools, responsibility for supervision lies with the Land Ministry for
Education, Science, Research and Cultural Affairs.
275.
Also as regards the schools of the Danish minority, legal supervision [i.e.
supervision limited to the question of legality of administrative activities] lies with the
Ministry for Education, Science, Research and Cultural Affairs.
276.
In the view of the Schleswig-Holstein Land Government, supervision is ensured through interaction of school supervision (incumbent on the Ministry of Education), expert (administrative/legal) supervision, and the respective supervisory school
authorities [schools offices] of Kreise and kreisfreie Städte [non-district municipalities].
Current information on the activities of the Danish minority as regards day-nurseries
and schools is provided in one of the chapters of the Land Government's Minority
Report. Once per legislative period - last in December 2002 - the Land Government
regularly submits this Report on Minorities to the Schleswig-Holstein Landtag. Also, a
working group consisting of representatives of the Danish Schools Association, the
Commissioner for Minorities, staff members of the State Chancellery and of the
Ministry for Education, Science, Research and Cultural Affairs was set up in 2002 for
a limited period of time. This group's task is to look into issues of financial support
available to the schools of the Danish minority and to submit suggested solutions (cf.
No. 142 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final]). In the autumn of 2003, the
Land Government submitted to the Schleswig-Holstein Landtag a Report on the
Implementation of the Charter in Schleswig-Holstein.
Article 8, para. 2
Paragraph 2
With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the
regional or minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number
of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide
teaching in or of the regional or minority language at all the appropriate stages of
education.
277.
Danish, a minority language in Germany, is the national language of the
Kingdom of Denmark, the northerly neighbour of Schleswig-Holstein. Therefore, the
need to learn this language is felt not only among the Danish minority, but by the
majority population as well. To meet this need, Schleswig-Holstein Land offers
courses in Danish as a foreign language at publicly maintained schools of all types.
Several of these schools are in the Holstein region of the Land - i.e. outside the
language area [Schleswig region] of the Danish minority - in the Kreise of
Ostholstein, Plön and Dithmarschen, and in the Hanseatic City of Lübeck.
- 85 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Danish

278.
As regards colleges and universities, the obligation - in the sense of "undertake ... to allow" - is met for the entire territory of the Federal Republic by virtue of
Article 5, para. 3, of the Basic Law (autonomy of institutions of higher education#).
#

"(3) Art and scholarship, research, and teaching shall be free. The freedom of teaching ..."

Article 9
Judicial Authorities
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of
residents using the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below,
according to the situation of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the
facilities afforded by the present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the
proper administration of justice:
Art. 9, para 1, sub-para. (b) (iii) - Civil Proceedings in civil proceedings:
(iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;
279.
With the proviso that documents and evidence drafted in a minority language
must be presented in a form obviating misunderstandings or errors with regard to
their translation, this obligation is met by the legal situation prevailing in Germany.
Therefore, no special measures have been taken.
Art. 9, para 1, sub-para. (c) (iii) - Proceedings before Courts concerning Administrative
Matters in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
(iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;
280.
With regard to this undertaking accepted by Schleswig-Holstein, cf. No. 279
above.
281.
As regards this branch of the judiciary, it should be pointed out that administrative courts are obliged to conduct ex officio investigations and, where necessary
and appropriate, will on their own initiative rely on the services of interpreters. Thus,
the members of the language group suffer no prejudice by the use of their language.
Art. 9, para. 2, sub-para. (a) - Validity of Legal Documents The Parties undertake:
(a) not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely
because they are drafted in a regional or minority language; or
- 86 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Danish

282.
With regard to this undertaking accepted by Schleswig-Holstein, cf. Nos. 279
and 281 above.

- 87 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Danish

Article 10
Administrative Authorities and Public Services
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are
users of regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and
according to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is
reasonably possible:
Art. 10, para. 1, sub-para. (a) (v) - Submission of Documents (v) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a
document in these languages;
283.
The legal basis for accepting this obligation is Section 82a, para. 2, of the
Land Administration Act. This discretionary regulation provides for the general possibility to submit applications, petitions, records, deeds or other documents in a foreign language, i.e. a language other than the official language.
284.
According to a non-representative survey carried out among subordinate
agencies of the Ministry of the Interior of Schleswig-Holstein Land, use is made of
this possibility, inter alia, by land survey offices [cadastral offices] and by the Land
Statistical Office.
285.

As regards the criticism expressed in No. 148 of the Monitoring Report [MINLANG (2002) 4 final], the following additional information is provided.
286.
So far, no complaints regarding the application of this provision have been
submitted to the Schleswig-Holstein Ministry of the Interior. The practical application
of this provision would seem to be of minor importance.
287.
In the Land Government's view, the broader criticism expressed by the Committee [ No. 148 (MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final)] - that the Danish minority has never been encouraged to use Danish in public matters - goes beyond the requirements stipulated
in Art. 10, para. 1, sub-para. (a) (v). Nevertheless, in its information brochure "Sprache ist Vielfalt" ["Language is diversity"], the Land Government pointed out both the
respective possibilities and limits ensuing from the Charter. For example, items 12 to
15 of the brochure deal specifically with questions regarding relations with administrative authorities. The brochure was distributed free of charge to all Land authorities, Kreise, Ämter, and local authorities, and to the organizations of the language
minorities.
288.
With a sticker campaign advertising the language proficiency of its staff
members, the Land Government seeks to reduce inhibitions regarding use of regional
- 88 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Danish

or minority languages. As part of the keynote theme "Sprache ist Vielfalt in Schleswig-Holstein" ["Language is diversity in Schleswig-Holstein"], the campaign was presented in May 2002 by the Minister-President. In the meantime, around 650 stickers have
been sent to agencies and other institutions of the Land.
289.
This criticism is rather difficult to understand also in view of the fact that the
Committee had an opportunity to discuss these matters with the City of Flensburg.
According to information provided by the City of Flensburg on the current state of
affairs (Jan. 2003), little use is made of the possibility to submit applications, certificates and other documents in the Danish language. Almost every department has
Danish-speaking staff for translations or oral communication. To reduce inhibitions on
the citizens' side, more than fifty staff members have informative signs on their office
doors. The same can be said for use of Low German.
290.

Given its location in the border zone, this 'stronghold' of Danish in Schleswig-

Holstein has for some time already sought to adjust its services to the fact that the
staff's knowledge of Danish is of great importance to a client-oriented municipal administration. Danish courses for beginners are offered, and financial grants are available for employees taking part in Danish courses outside the municipal further training facilities. For advanced learners, workshops in Danish have been on offer once
per week for a number of years already. Danish is an integral part of the basic training of the Flensburg professional fire brigade. Finally, an EU project (INTERREG III
A) for transborder qualification of prospective executive personnel (Løver 2002) is
carried out with the Kreise of Nordfriesland and Schleswig-Flensburg and with Sønderjylland Amt with the aim of improving language proficiency on both sides of the
border.
Article 10, para. 4
Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by
them, the Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
Art. 10, para. 4, sub-para. (c) - Appointment of Public Service Employees having a
Knowledge of a Regional or Minority Language (c) compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees
having a knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the
territory in which that language is used.
291.
With a view to implementing this obligation, an announcement to this effect
was made at the Personalreferentenkonferenz (PRK - Conference of Personnel Officers) in 1999 and again in 2003. The PRK brings together the personnel officers of
- 89 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Danish

the supreme Land authorities at regular meetings with the aim of co-ordinating and
harmonizing the essential cross-departmental decisions in the field of personnel
management.
292.
If a staff member within the Land Administration expresses a wish regarding
such an appointment, the scope for complying with the request will be examined. So
far, however, there have been no requests to this effect at the Land Government
level.
293.

With reference to the criticism expressed in No. 149 of the Monitoring Report
[MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] concerning the lack of a structural approach, the following information is provided:
294.
The Land Government considers this obligation to be fulfilled. This
undertaking means that the wishes of public service employees shall be complied
with whenever possible. Essentially the only implementation option open to the Land
Government therefore is to make the employees concerned aware of this possibility,
as was done at Conferences of Personnel Officers (PRK) in 1999 and 2003 (cf.
No. 291 above).
295.
An example referring to the police forces: Of the overall number of
employees (around 800) of the Polizeidirektion [regional police headquarters] SchleswigHolstein Nord - responsible for the Kreise of Nordfriesland and Schleswig-Flensburg
and for the City of Flensburg - at least 200, i.e. around 25 per cent, have a basic
knowledge of Danish, allowing them to answer questions and to read documents in
that language. The larger agencies, at least, have staff members with a good
command of the Danish language; it should be noted in this context that a number of
police officers serving with Schleswig-Holstein Nord regional police headquarters are
ethnic Danes of German nationality.
296.
Police forces in general endeavour to improve their staff's language proficiency. For example, two training programmes are funded through the EU promotional programme INTERREG; in the years 2001 - 2003, 350 staff members of the
regional police headquarters Schleswig-Holstein Nord and Schleswig-Holstein Süd
attended Danish language courses of several weeks' duration and varying learning
intensity levels.
297.
In 2000, a parliamentary debate took place on the requirement that decisions
on the recruitment of staff for Land service positions should, as a matter of principle,
include the applicants' knowledge of the regional or minority languages as a qualification criterion. The Land Government had welcomed this practice if and where such
- 90 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Danish

language proficiency was required for the specific post. In such cases, knowledge of
these languages may be included in the assessment of the applicants' aptitude,
qualifications and professional achievements.
298.
A survey conducted throughout the Land administration showed that so far
no cases have become known where knowledge of any of the minority languages
Danish, Frisian and Romanes or of the regional language Low German would have
been a prereqisite for appointment to a post. In individual cases, however, knowledge
of any of these languages was included as a criterion in the selection decision.
299.
Flensburg Finanzamt [Revenue Office] stated that, in view of the geographic
proximity to Denmark, particular care was being taken to accommodate the needs of
resident taxpayers from the Danish speech area. Thus, the criteria for selection of
staff for the Preliminary Turnover Tax Return office include having a command of the
Danish language. It is this unit of Flensburg Finanzamt that has the most frequent
contacts with Danish companies.
300.
Within the area of responsibility of the Ministry for the Environment, Nature
Conservation and Agriculture, knowledge of the Frisian language was considered a
positive factor in the selection procedure for recruitment of field staff of the Tönning
National Park Office. Favourable note is taken of knowledge of the Danish language
in the selection of applicants for professorships at Flensburg University. For appointments to professorships for Frisian, Danish or Low Germany studies, adequate
knowledge of these languages is, of course, an indispensable prerequisite.
301.
Given its location in the border zone, [Flensburg as] the 'stronghold' of Danish
in Schleswig-Holstein has for some time already sought to adjust its services to the
fact that the staff's knowledge of Danish is of great importance to a client-oriented
municipal administration. Danish courses for beginners are offered, and financial
grants are available for employees taking part in Danish courses outside the municipal further training facilities. For advanced learners, workshops in Danish have been
on offer once per week for a number of years already. Danish is an integral part of
the basic training of the Flensburg professional fire brigade. Finally, an EU project
(INTERREG III A) for transborder qualification of prospective executive personnel
(Løver 2002) is carried out with the Kreise of Nordfriesland and Schleswig-Flensburg
and with Sønderjylland Amt with the aim of improving language proficiency on both
sides of the border.

- 91 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Danish

Article 10, para. 5
Paragraph 5
The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or
minority languages, at the request of those concerned.
302.

Cf. the comments in Part D, Nos. 220 - 225 above.

- 92 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Danish

Article 11
Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the
territories in which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each
language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent,
have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence
and autonomy of the media:
Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (b) (ii) - Broadcasting of Radio Programmes (ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
303.
As regards use of broadcasting media, a particular situation prevails in the
settlement area of the Danish minority in the northern part of Schleswig-Holstein
Land. As the settlement area borders directly on Denmark, the members of this minority can receive the entire broadcasting programme of the Kingdom of Denmark.
Consequently, no special need for developing their own broadcasting media has
arisen so far. Nevertheless, the wish has been expressed that, in particular, Danishlanguage news and information about the Schleswig region of the Land be included
in the [German] programmes.
304.
In 1999 and again in 2003, the Minister-President of Schleswig-Holstein Land
has encouraged the radio and TV station programme directors of Norddeutscher
Rundfunk (NDR), Zweites Deutsches Fernsehen (ZDF - Second German Television,
or Channel II), DeutschlandRadio, Radio Schleswig-Holstein (RSH), NORA
(NordOstseeRAdio), delta radio and POWER RADIO Nord as well as the
Unabhängige Landesanstalt für Rundfunk und neue Medien (ULR - Independent
Land Supervisory Authority for Broadcasting), the TV stations RTL and SAT1, the
Gesellschaft zur Förderung audiovisueller Werke in Schleswig-Holstein mbH (MSH Limited Liability Company for the Promotion of Audiovisual Works in SchleswigHolstein) and Kulturelle Filmförderung [Cultural Film Promotion, Schleswig-Holstein]
to integrate "linguistic particularities which are among the features determining the
specificity of our Land" in their programmes; intensification of first action already
taken in this respect would be welcomed. In the spirit of the Regional/Minority
Language Charter, the Minister-President urged that "further avenues should be
explored for integrating contributions in the minority languages and in the regional
language Low German into their programmes, as a service for the citizens and in
support of this element of the culture of Schleswig-Holstein".
305.

In addition, the following regulations apply:
- 93 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Danish

• The broadcasting corporation under public law (Norddeutscher Rundfunk - NDR)
has the legal mandate to report on the cultural diversity and the special features of
the respective Land and to give its support to the protection of minorities.
• Adequate room must be given in the programme to the North German region, its
culture and language.
• Programming principles for private broadcasting: Broadcasting programmes shall
contribute (...) to the protection and promotion of minorities (...).
• Protected minorities have access to the media, and scope for participation, on the
same conditions as other groups of society. The provisions of the Land Broadcasting Act promote programming diversity and the variety of broadcasters.
• The Land Broadcasting Act was amended in 1999. It replaced the Assembly of the
ULR [Independent Land Supervisory Authority for Broadcasting] by a Media
Council. Any socially relevant group, organization or association of supraregional
standing is entitled to make nominations for the election of the Media Council.
Sydslesvigsk Forening (Südschleswigscher Verein - South Schleswig Association)
does not consider this sufficient.
• In addition, the ULR operates two radio broadcasting "Open Channels" in Schleswig-Holstein. Through these Open Channels, anybody who is not a broadcaster
himself/herself, can disseminate his/her own contributions via radio broadcasting.
306.
Legal Bases:
Inter-State Treaty on Norddeutscher Rundfunk [NDR State Treaty] (of 26 February
1992): Section 3, para. 3, Section 5, para. 2, 1st sentence, Section 7, para. 2, 3rd
sentence;
Inter-State Agreement on the Public Corporation Zweites Deutsches Fernsehen
(ZDF) (of 15 December 2000): Section 5, para. 2;
Land Broadcasting Act (of 22 May 2002): Section 17, para. 2, nos. 1 and 2, Section 24, para. 3, Section 34, para. 1, 1st - 3rd sentences, Section 54, para. 3.
307.
Facts and Examples:
Both in its Aktuell current affairs reporting and in the programmes of the Heimat, Kultur und Wissenschaft Desk [Our Region, Culture, and Science] as part of
newsfeature and magazine programmes, the radio broadcasting programme of
NDR 1 Welle Nord reports on events in the German-Danish border region, on books,
stage productions and exhibitions, on regional co-operation and economic and
political developments.
308.
Radio Schleswig-Holstein (R.SH) disseminates a daily Danish-language
news programme on weekdays (at 17:55) for the Schleswig region of the Land. Radio

- 94 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Danish

Schleswig-Holstein is a private broadcaster (cf. No. 152 of the Monitoring Report [MINLANG (2002) 4 final]).
309.
In addition, there are a TV model test project of Norddeutscher Rundfunk
(NDR) in Danish and programmes of the Danish regional TV stations for Sønderjylland (South Jutland, or North Slesvig) on subjects concerning the Danish minority.
310.
In Flensburg and the surrounding region it is now possible again to receive,
over cable, the broadcasts of the Danish station Danmarks Radio P2. This makes it
possible, for instance, to listen to Danish-language church services.
Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (c) (ii) - Broadcasting of Television Programmes (ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in
the regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
311.

In this regard, cf. the comments above in Nos. 303 - 310 above.

312.

[deleted: paragraph contained in the 1st State Report]

313.
Zweites Deutsches Fernsehen (ZDF - Second German Television/Channel
II), via its regional programmes, also airs broadcasts on the Danish minority on
special occasions or when events of particular importance occur.
314.
The criticism expressed by the Committee of Experts in the Monitoring
Report (No. 153, MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final) prompted the Minister-President to inform, in
writing, the directors and managers of public-service and private broadcasting
institutions of the Committee's findings (letter of 9 January 2003). At the same time,
she encouraged the addressees "to support, to the best of their ability, the presence
of minority languages in TV and radio broadcasts, in the print media and in promoting
audiovisual works, and to focus their programming on new lines".
315.
The supervisory authority ULR provides considerable funds for a project actively supporting both the Danish minority and the Frisians with their own production
of TV and radio broadcasts. A pertinent contract was signed with a private media office in December 2002. The contract covers development of a strategy for activating
the minorities (the Danes as regards television, and the Frisians as regards radio
broadcasting) in order to design and produce contributions for the citizens' media. It
is planned to air these programmes on Offener Kanal Flensburg und Westküste
[Open Channel 'Flensburg and Western Coast']. No provisional results are yet available.
Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (d) - Audio and Audiovisual Works - 95 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

(d)

Part D: Danish

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and
audiovisual works in the regional or minority languages;

316.
The programming principles embodied in the Land Broadcasting Act provide
an indirect incentive to public service broadcasting and to private broadcasting: the
Act lays down that the broadcasting programmes shall contribute, inter alia, to the
protection and promotion of minorities.
317.
In addition, subsidies may be granted. The relevant provision reads as
follows:
"The Unabhängige Landesanstalt für das Rundfunkwesen (ULR) is entitled to
provide financial support to non-profit organizations with cultural (...) aims,
especially in the audiovisual sector (...)."
Additional support is provided by the Gesellschaft zur Förderung audiovisueller
Werke in Schleswig-Holstein mbH (MSH - Limited Liability Company for the
Promotion of Audiovisual Works in Schleswig-Holstein). MSH obtains funds
from the NDR broadcasting corporation and from ULR [the Schleswig-Holstein
supervisory authority for private broadcasters]. These funds are used (...) for the
promotion of commissioned productions and coproductions in the cinema
sector, television and sound broadcasting, which are made by producers who
are native to, or resident in, Schleswig-Holstein."
318.
Legal Basis:
Land Broadcasting Act of 22 May 2002: Section 24, para. 3, Section 53, para. 2, Section 54, para. 3, Section 73, para. 2.
319.
Otherwise, it is left to the Danish minority, on the basis of the cultural promotion by the Land and the principle of self-government, to decide on pertinent measures and to implement these within the limits of the overall funds available.
320.
The Schleswig-Holstein Land Government does not share the view
expressed by the Committee of Experts in Nos. 155 and 156 of the Monitoring Report
[MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that acceptance of this undertaking necessarily calls for
specific provisions. The obligation here is "to encourage" and/or "facilitate". With her
letter of 9 January 2003 (cf. No. 314 above), the Minister-President provided for
encouragement and facilitation also with reference to the production of audiovisual
works.
Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (e) - Newspaper Articles (iii) to encourage and/or facilitate the publication of newspaper articles in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
- 96 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Danish

321.
There is little scope for [state] intervention on account of freedom of the press
as guaranteed by the Constitution (in this respect, cf. the comments in Part D, Nos.
226 - 239 above).
322.
The Danish minority in the Schleswig region of the Land publishes the bilingual (German/Danish) newspaper Flensborg Avis (with a circulation of some 6,600
copies). According to a scientific analysis, this newspaper is read every day by
15,000 people in the Schleswig region. A Press Service which is affiliated to Sydslesvigsk Forening (SSV - South Schleswig Association) supplies information, in German
and Danish, about the Danish minority to the media in Germany and Denmark.
323.
In 1999 and again in 2003 in letters addressed, inter alia, to the Zeitungsverlegerverband Schleswig-Holstein e.V. [Schleswig-Holstein Association of
Newspaper Publishers, reg'd], the Minister-President of Schleswig-Holstein Land
encouraged the addressees to integrate "linguistic particularities which determine the
specificity of our Land" in their publications; intensification of first action already taken
in this respect would be welcomed.
[324 - 332: blank]
Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (f) (ii) - Financial Assistance for Audiovisual Productions (ii) to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual
productions in the regional or minority languages;
333.
Direct financial assistance by the state is problematic, due to freedom of
broadcasting guaranteed by the Constitution (in this respect, cf. the comments in Part
D, paras. 226 - 239 above).
334.

Promotion may be provided in the following ways:

The Unabhängige Landesanstalt für das Rundfunkwesen (ULR) is entitled to provide
financial support to non-profit organizations with cultural aims, especially in the audiovisual sector.
Additional support is provided by the Gesellschaft zur Förderung audiovisueller Werke in Schleswig-Holstein mbH (MSH - Limited Liability Company for the Promotion of
Audiovisual Works in Schleswig-Holstein). MSH obtains funds from the NDR
broadcasting corporation and from ULR [the Schleswig-Holstein supervisory authority
for private broadcasters]. These funds are used, inter alia, for the promotion of
commissioned productions and coproductions in the cinema sector and in television
- 97 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Danish

and sound broadcasting, which are made by producers who are native to, or resident
in, Schleswig-Holstein.
335.

Legal Basis:

Land Broadcasting Act of 22 May 2002: Sections 53, para. 2, and 73, para. 2
336.
The supervisory authority ULR provides considerable funds for a project actively supporting the Danish minority with their own production of TV and radio broadcasts. A pertinent contract was signed with a private media office in December 2002.
The contract covers development of a strategy for activating the Danish minority as
regards television in order to design and produce contributions for the citizens'
media. It is planned to air these programmes on Offener Kanal Flensburg und Westküste [Open Channel 'Flensburg and Western Coast']. No provisonal results are yet available (referring to No. 58 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final]).
Art. 11, para. 2 - Freedom of Direct Reception of Broadcasts, and Freedom of Expression
Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to
a regional or minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and
television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language. They further
undertake to ensure that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and
free circulation of information in the written press in a language used in identical or
similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of the above-mentioned
freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such
formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are
necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity
or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or
morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for preventing disclosure of
information received in confidence, or for maintaining the authority and impartiality of the
judiciary.
337.

Retransmission of existing broadcast programmes over cable systems is

regulated in the Land Broadcasting Act. For instance, priority is given in cable systems to the "Open Channels" and to the feed-in of locally available programmes,
depending on the existing technical capacity. In addition, the Unabhängige Landesanstalt für das Rundfunkwesen (ULR) decides on window programmes on the basis
of diversity aspects. Thus, equality of minority programmes is ensured.

- 98 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Danish

The aforementioned obligation is included in Sections 50, para. 3, and 50a, para. 2,
of the Land Broadcasting Act, thus implementing the provisions of the EU Television
Directive.*
Equal treatment is covered, in particular, by Section 50, para. 1, 2nd sentence. In the
area of the Danish minority in the Schleswig region of the Land, it is possible to receive radio and television broadcasts from the neighbouring country Denmark.

*

full title: "Council Directive on the coordination of certain provisions laid down by law, regulations or
administrative action in Member States concerning the pursuit of television broadcasting activities",
of 3 October 1989

- 99 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Danish

Article 12
Cultural Activities and Facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities - especially libraries, video libraries,
cultural centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary
work and film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the
culture industries, including inter alia the use of new technologies - the Parties undertake,
within the territory in which such languages are used and to the extent that the public
authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this field:
Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (c) - Access to Works Produced in Other Languages c)
to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other
languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation
and subtitling activities;
338.
The institutions of the Danish minority - such as Sydslesvigsk Forening (SSF,
South Schleswig Assocation) and Dansk Centralbibliotek (Danish Central Library) can rely on promotional funds provided by Schleswig-Holstein Land for translation,
dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling into, or in, the Danish language.
Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (d) - Taking Account of the Regional or Minority Language in
Cultural Activities (d) to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural
activities of various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the
knowledge and use of regional or minority languages and cultures in the
undertakings which they initiate or for which they provide backing;
339.
With the help of promotional funds provided by Schleswig-Holstein, the institutions of the Danish minority and/or bodies appointed by them and responsible for
the cultural autonomy of the Danish minority ensure that the knowledge and use of
the Danish language and Danish culture are appropriately incorporated in their cultural activities.
The exhibits of many museums in the Schleswig region of the Land are inscribed in
Danish. The City of Flensburg, for instance, provided the information that it had received promotional funds from the EU Interreg II Programme for the improvement of
German-Danish public sign-boards and information in the museum. Also, a Danish
version of a German-language museum guidebook is now available. The Flensburg
Shipping Museum already has German and Danish incriptions and signposts. Other
pertinent examples are to be found also in Nordfriesland Kreis (the Foundationowned museum Roter Haubarg; the Eiderstedt Region Museum of Local History and
Culture in St. Peter-Ording).

- 100 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (e) - Employment of Staff Proficient in
Concerned (e) to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible
supporting cultural activities have at their disposal staff
command of the regional or minority language concerned,
language(s) of the rest of the population;

Part D: Danish

the Language(s)
for organising or
who have a full
as well as of the

340.
Activities regarding the Danish culture and language are, for the major part,
offered by Danish minority organizations on the basis of the cultural autonomy of
national minorities in Germany, and in part are supported with public funds of Schleswig-Holstein. These subsidies also include funds used for meeting payroll costs. The
full-time staff employed in the field of Danish cultural work speak Danish and German; some of them also speak Low German. Subsidizing of this staff provides for implementation of this provision of the Charter.
Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (f) - Participation of Representatives of the Group Speaking the
Given Language in Cultural Activities (f) to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given
regional or minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural
activities;
341.
As part of the World Exhibition EXPO 2000 [in Hanover], Sydslesvigsk
Forening [South Schleswig Association] was a partner in the project Kulturen,
Sprachen, Minderheiten: Die dänische Grenzregion - Beispiel einer Konfliktlösung
("Cultures, Languages, Minorities: The Danish Border Region - An Example of
Conflict Management"). Also within the framework of EXPO 2000, a total of more
than twenty Danish, German and Frisian libraries had jointly developed a one-week
programme as part of the region-specific EXPO events in order to give a picture of
the cultural and library scene of the region, which in this form is unique in Germany
and Denmark, by organizing many and diversified activities varying locally and in
terms of their contents.
342.

As a central cultural event, Schleswig-Holstein-Tag [a day dedicated to the special
character of this Land] is organized every two years in different places of this Land. The
organizations of the Danish minority are also invited to participate in this event and to
take part in arranging and organizing it. In 2002, Schleswig-Holstein-Tag took place
in Bad Segeberg, in the Holstein region of the Land. The (language) minorities
presented themselves jointly at that event. The 2004 Schleswig-Holstein-Tag will take
place in Flensburg. As stated by the Board Landeskuratorium Schleswig-HolsteinTag, one of the reasons for selecting Flensburg as the venue was to give the minorities the opportunity to present themselves adequately.
- 101 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Danish

The Danish minority is also invited or encouraged to take part in local cultural events,
such as town festivals and town anniversaries, in which different organizers co-operate. Thus, there are various activities in which direct participation by representatives
of the Danish language groups in the cultural life of the Land is encouraged.
Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (g) - Creation of Archive Bodies (g) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for
collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the
regional or minority languages;
343.
The Dansk Centralbibliotek [Danish Central Library] and its affiliated
institutions are available for collecting, keeping copies of, or publishing works
produced in the Danish language, and for these purposes can rely also on
promotional funds provided by Schleswig-Holstein. Stage productions of works
produced in Danish are organized and financed, also with the use of promotional
funds provided by Schleswig-Holstein, by Sydslesvigsk Forening [South Schleswig
Association] and its affiliated institutions and by action groups of other associations.
On these occasions, Danish state theatres and touring theatre companies are invited
to give guest performances. Also the Danish-language amateur theatrical society Det
lille Teater in Flensburg gives Danish performances.
Article 12, para. 2
Paragraph 2
In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are
traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority
language justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities
and facilities in accordance with the preceding paragraph.
344.
In Germany, cultural activities keeping complying with the law in force are not
subject to any permit procedure or restrictions. Thus, the above obligation is already
fulfilled by the system of law in the Federal Republic of Germany. The Länder will
have to decide, on a case-by-case basis, on more extensive implementation of this
obligation by encouraging or providing such activities.
345.
Also outside the Danish language area (in the Schleswig region of
Schleswig-Holstein Land), the offers of Danish cultural activities and facilities are left
exclusively to the decision-making of the autonomous cultural providing bodies,
especially the organizations of the Danish minority. Thanks to the broad definition of
the specified purposes for which the public promotional funds of Schleswig-Holstein

- 102 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Danish

Land may be used in the context of the Danish minority's cultural work, it is also
possible to stage events outside the immediate language area.

- 103 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Danish

Article 12, para. 3
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy
abroad, for regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.
346.
This obligation is to be implemented by providing state support for making it
possible for cultural groups of the Danish minority - e.g. choirs, orchestras, ensembles, the amateur dramatic group - to give performances abroad where they
present and represent the culture and language of the Danish minority of German
nationality - and thus part of cultural life in Germany. A beginning has already been
made, e.g. with the performance by a vocalist ensemble of the Danish minority during
Deutscher Tag ["German Day"] in Tinglev/Denmark (with financial support provided
from German public promotional funds to the organizer of the event).
347.

The instruments for promoting cultural programme activities within the frame-

work of our cultural and educational policies abroad are, on principle, available to all
groups of society in Germany and, of course, to the national groups speaking a
regional or minority language. Consequently, groups can apply for grants for guestperformance tours abroad if they intend to give their performances in a regional
language.
For example, in 2003 the Federal Office sponsored a performance of the Roma
theatre Pralipe in Sevilla/Spain. This theatre group has over the past few years also
received support for many guest-performance tours abroad.
Also, a project with the working title "Platt in den USA" ["Low German in the U.S."]
was under discussion, but ultimately was not realized.
The Foreign Office seeks to achieve an even greater number as before of performances abroad also for the other minority languages. Whether - within the framework
of language instruction at schools abroad, and through many cultural activities of
German intermediary organizations - additional scope for giving publicity to the
regional and minority languages spoken in Germany exists, is a question that will
have to be considered on a case-by-case basis.

- 104 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Danish

Article 13
Economic and Social Life
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake within the whole
country:
(a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without
justifiable reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents
relating to economic or social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in
technical documents such as instructions for the use of products or installations;
(b) to prohibit the insertion - in internal regulations of companies and private
documents - of any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or
minority languages, at least between users of the same language;
(c) to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority
languages in connection with economic or social activities;
348.
Schleswig-Holstein has adopted the obligations under paras. (a) and (c).
These obligations are in compliance with the established law of the Federal Republic
of Germany and thus are fulfilled nation-wide for all regional or minority languages.
Pertinent violations of the legal order have not become known. Therefore, no special
measures had to be taken by the Land.
Art. 13, para. 1, sub-para. (d) - Facilitating the Use of the Regional or Minority Language
(d) to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by
means other than those specified in the above sub-paragraphs.
349.
The majority of the members of the Danish minority use the Danish language
in the private sphere. But account must also be taken of the situation in mixednationality marriages where German may prevail. Danish is predominantly spoken
within the organizations of the Danish minority. Constant use and promotion of the
Danish language provide the basis for all minority-related activities. Of particular
importance for proficiency in the Danish language are the Danish private schools,
especially also for the children from mixed-nationality marriages.
350.
There are many and various ways in which the State promotes the learning
and use of minority languages (cf. the comments on the various obligations). In particular, efforts are encouraged among the general public to keep these languages
alive by using them within the family and in extra-familiar everyday-life situations. In
this regard, the cultural value of the minority languages for Germany's cultural life is
particularly emphasized so that, on account of the resultant self-esteem and selfassurance, the younger generation will be more willing to adopt these languages and
pass them on. The structures established for the administration of matters of their
- 105 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Danish

own concern provide the users of Danish with the practical scope for using their
language also in an extra-familiar context.
351.
With a view to encouraging the use of such languages, the Land published
brochures (entitled "Sprache ist Vielfalt" ["Language is diversity"]) containing information on the language situation of the speakers of regional or minority languages and
on the Charter's implications for the language-related rights of such speakers.
Article 13, para. 2
Paragraph 2
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the public
authorities are competent, within the territory in which the regional or minority languages
are used, and as far as this is reasonably possible:
Art. 13, para. 2, sub-para. (c) - Social Care Facilities (c) to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and
hostels offer the possibility of receiving and treating in their own language
persons using a regional or minority language who are in need of care on
grounds of ill-health, old age or for other reasons;
352.
Staff members speaking the Danish language are available in the specialized
clinics of the Land.
Also, it should be pointed out that direct nursing and other care of persons in need of
nursing and care is not a public-sector responsibility, but rather is carried out mostly
by private-sector and free non-profit institutions. For example, only 8 % of the more
than 1,000 approved nursing facilities in Schleswig-Holstein are provided by incorporated public-law institutions. None of these facilities is provided directly by the Land.
Therefore, it is not possible to lay down any requirements to be met by the various
providing bodies as regards the use of the minority language Danish. However, the
Ministry with responsibility in this field has until now not been notified of any cases
which might give reason to require certain institutions to provide permanently for staff
with knowledge of this language.
353.
By far the majority of the speakers of Danish in the Schleswig region of the
Land are members of the Danish minority. The Danish Health Care Service for South
Schleswig (Dansk Sundhedstjeneste for Sydslesvig e.V.) attends to the social,
health-related and charitable matters of the Danish minority. Dansk Sundhedstjeneste is a member of the Schleswig-Holstein Land Association of Deutscher Paritätischer Wohlfahrtsverband [German Non-Denominational Welfare Association]. As a partner of the public health service, its activities also include tasks laid down in the Health
Service Act. Affiliated to Dansk Sundhedstjeneste are, for instance, a nursing home,
- 106 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Danish

several residential homes for the elderly, and a number of home health care services.
The elderly are offered holiday stays at a resthome operated by Dansk Sundhedstjeneste in Denmark. In addition, services are offered by a social counselling bureau,
voluntary services making home visits to elderly people, and 18 senior citizens' clubs.
In the Schleswig region of the Land, Dansk Sundhedstjeneste for Sydslesvig e.V.
works as a home health care service and therefore receives a subsidy as provided
under Section 6, para 2, of the Landespflegegesetz [Land Home Care/Nursing Act]. Fulfilment of the undertaking under Art. 13, para. 2, sub-para. (c), is ensured to a particularly large extent by these offers of Dansk Sundhetstjeneste.
Also, the Danish senior citizens are represented on the Advisory Committee for the
Elderly of Flensburg City.
A number of the staff of the Psychiatric Clinic in the Schleswig region of the Land
speak Danish.
At the four Kreis hospitals of NordfrieslandKreis, especially in Niebüll, Danish-speaking patients can, at least in part, be received and treated in their own language. The
website of the Kreis hospitals is also available in Danish (www.kh-nordfriesland.de).

- 107 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Danish

Article 14
Transfrontier Exchanges
The Parties undertake:
Art. 14, sub-para. (a) - Agreements with Other States (a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the
States in which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if
necessary to seek to conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster
contacts between the users of the same language in the States concerned in the
fields of culture, education, information, vocational training and permanent
education;
354.
With regard to Danish, this provision is fulfilled by the practical
implementation of the Bonn/Copenhagen Declarations of 1955 and the Framework
Convention for the Protection of National Minorities which entered into force for the
Federal Republic of Germany and for the Kingdom of Denmark. Both countries and
Schleswig-Holstein Land fund activities for the benefit of the Danish minority, which
promote matters of culture, education, information, vocational training and permanent
education and increase the scope for transborder contacts.
Art. 14, sub-para. (b) - Co-operation across Borders (b) for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or promote
co-operation across borders, in particular between regional or local authorities
in whose territory the same language is used in identical or similar form.
355.
The Verband landwirtschaftlicher Vereine in Südschleswig e.V. (Fælleslandboforeningen for Sydslesvig - Union of Agricultural Associations in South
Schleswig, reg'd) in Harrislee is an institution of the Danish minority in the Schleswig
region of the Land. The Union receives a subsidy for personnel costs from the
Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation and Agriculture. The Union is
formed by five local associations in various parts of the Schleswig region, which are
supported by advisers of the Union. Thus, the Danish consultants serve as a link
between farmers of the Danish minority in Schleswig-Holstein and farmers in
Denmark.
Also, Flensburg City and the Kreise of Schleswig-Flensburg and Nordfriesland, on
the German side, and Sønderjylland Amt [North Slesvig local authority union], on the
Danish side, are partners of the German-Danish Border Region Schleswig/Sønderjylland which was established on 16 September 1997 by an agreement concluded between these territorial authorities. The aim of that Agreement is to provide the basis
for long-term and intensive co-operation for enhancing the development of this overall region in a European context. The priority activities also include education (training
and permanent education, as well as language instruction). In this field, the objective
- 108 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Danish

is to disseminate knowledge of the culture of the respective neighbours, so as to
overcome cultural barriers. On the German side, transborder cultural projects and
events are promoted jointly by the Kreise of Nordfriesland and Schleswig-Flensburg,
and Flensburg City. Co-operation across borders involves the national minorities,
especially the Danish minority in Germany and the German minority in Denmark.
Membership of the Regional Council, i.e. the organization's body with both consultative and co-ordinating functions, includes - on the German side - three representatives of Sydslesvigsk Vælgerforening (SSV - South Schleswig Association of Voters).
356.
In 2000, the Police Directorate of Schleswig-Holstein Nord, in conjunction
with Denmark, initiated a Further Training Project stretched out over several years.
The project is subsidized with funds of the INTERREG II Programme. Promotion
extends, inter alia, to language courses and joint seminars on the culture and history
of the two countries.
357.
In June 2001, the Schleswig-Holstein Land Government, represented by the
Minister-President, and Sønderjylland Amt, represented by the Amtsborgmester [Amt
mayor], signed a Joint Declaration on regional co-operation between Schleswig-Holstein Land and Sønderjylland Amt. The national minorities are explicitly mentioned in
the preambular paragraphs of the Declaration.

- 109 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

- 110 -

Part D: Danish

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

D.2.2

Sorbian (Upper Sorbian / hornjoserbski and Lower Sorbian

Part D: Sorbian

(Wendish) /

dolnoserbski) in the Sorbian speech area in the Länder of Saxony
[Upper Lusatia] and Brandenburg [Lower Lusatia])

Obligations regarding the Sorbian language have been accepted by the Land of
Brandenburg and the Free State of Saxony where the Sorbs have their traditional
settlement area.
Article 8
Education
358.
As regards the school system in general, it should be noted that, in the settlement area of the Sorbian people, the respective Constitution and the relevant laws of
the two Länder guarantee that children's day-care centres and schools may, on principle, be established by voluntary providing bodies; this guarantee, of course, also
applies to Sorbian (Wendish) associations. Part of the 31 Sorbian and bilingual
children's day-care centres existing in the settlement area are provided by local authorities, and part are provided by Christlich-Soziales Bildungswerk Ostsachsen e.V.
[Christian-Social Educational Association for Eastern Saxony, reg'd], by Sorbischer Schulverein
e.V. [Sorbian Schools Association, reg'd], the Catholic Church, Arbeiterwohlfahrt [Workers'
Welfare Association] and the German Red Cross (DRK). All other educational institutions
of the Sorbian settlement area in Saxony which offer instruction in the Sorbian language, especially the schools, are State-provided. A similar structure exists in Brandenburg.
359.
It may be assumed that only some 20,000 of the 60,000 Sorbs in the central
settlement areas have such a perfect command of Sorbian that they can actively
communicate in that language orally and in writing. In terms of geography, the two
groups are distributed unevenly. Nearly all of those Sorbs having a very good knowledge of Sorbian live in the area of the schooling district of the Sorbian schools, which
have been in existence since the late 1940s, in the Bautzen-Kamenz-Hoyerswerda
region. In the other parts of Lusatia, only a small share of the Sorbs - mostly of older
age - have a good knowledge of Sorbian.
360.
The Saxon Act on Children's Day-Care Institutions of 27 November 2001 and
the Children's Day-Care Centres Act of Brandenburg Land of 10 June 1992 form the
legal basis for the teaching and cultivation of the Sorbian language and culture at
Sorbian and bilingual day-care centres in the German-Sorbian area. The Schools Act
for the Free State of Saxony of 03 July 1991 guarantees the right of pupils to learn
the Sorbian language and, at a number of schools, the right to instruction in selected
- 111 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

subjects, for all grades, in the Sorbian language. Under the Schools Act of Brandenburg Land of 12 April 1996 (Section 4, para. 5, 2nd sentence), advancement of the
knowledge and understanding of the Sorbian (Wendish) culture is a special task of
schools. In the settlement area of the Sorbs (Wends), pupils have the right to learn
Sorbian (Wendish) and, in specified subjects and for grades [age-groups] to be determined, the right to be instructed in the Sorbian language.
Article 8, para. 1
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such
languages are used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without
prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (a) - Pre-School Education (i) to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
(ii) to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or
(iii) to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to
those pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered
sufficient; or
The Free State of Saxony has accepted the obligation under sub-paragraph (a) (iii).
361.
In Saxony, Sorbian-speaking and bilingual groups are set up in childrens'
day-care centres if the parents/guardians so wish. The providing body of the given
institution is responsible for implementing the requirements laid down with regard to
Sorbian and bilingual groups. In practice, this means that the existing good overall
conditions for Sorbian-language education in children's day-care centres are actually
utilized to the extent requested by the parents and supported by the providing body.
The free decision of parents/guardians is in agreement with the constitutional rights
of the Sorbian people.
362.
In the Free State of Saxony there are at present (as of June 2003) 12 daycare centres run under the WITAJ Project ("witaj": Sorbian for "welcome") and Sorbian
day-care centres, 12 German-Sorbian day-care centres with one or several Witaj
group/s, and about 54 children's day-care centres which keep up the Sorbian culture
and the Sorbs' customs/folklore. Sorbischer Schulverein e.V. [Sorbian Schools
Association] became the voluntary providing body of the children's day-care centre of
Sielow in Brandenburg Land on 01 March 1998, and of the children's day-care
centres in Dörgenhausen and in Rohne (both in the Free State of Saxony) on
01 April 1999 and on 01 July 1999, respectively. In these three children's day-care
- 112 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

centres, 95 children from German-speaking or mixed-language homes are at present
initiated into the Sorbian language within the framework of the WITAJ model project.
These three day-care centres employ 14 Sorbian-speaking educators/teachers.
363.

Christliches Soziales Bildungswerk Sachsen e.V. [Christian Social Educational Association for Saxony, reg'd] is the providing body for 10 Sorbian and German-Sorbian
children's day-care centres. These are attended by a total number of 654 children; of
these, 266 form 23 Sorbian groups.
364.
The legal framework as regards promotion of pre-school education in the Upper Sorbian language, as called for in No. 428 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG
(2002) 4 final] of the Committee of Experts, is already established: Section 2, para. 5, of
the Saxon Act on Children's Day-Care Institutions (SächsKitaG), which entered into
force in 2002, requires the children's day-care centres in the Sorbian settlement area
to impart and cultivate the Sorbian language and culture and to preserve Sorbian
traditions. Implementation of this mission is secured by the Ordinance on Children's
Day-Care Centres in the German-Sorbian Region (SorbKitaVO). On the basis of this
Ordinance, the Sorbian and bilingual institutions are granted additional funds, especially for addtional staffing requirements; in 2002, these funds amounted to a total of
447,853 €. The Ordinance is being [was] amended in 2003. There is no perceived
need for expanding promotional funding; a lack of resources has not been ascertained. The question of providing sufficient numbers of qualified teachers was already
raised both within the Foundation for the Sorbian People and by various agencies of
the Saxon Land Administration. These agencies, together with the Sorbian associations, are working on solutions in the field of training and follow-up training.
An Intensive Course 'Sorbian for Nursery-School Teachers' is [was] held in Hoyerswerda in the period 1 October 2002 - 31 July 2003. The course is [was] funded by the
Foundation for the Sorbian People through the WITAJ-Sprachzentrum [Witaj Language
Centre]. Participants include[d] four nursery-school teachers whose release from their

duties is [was] made possible by the temporary employment of another four nurseryschool teachers. Ninety per cent of the costs of employment of the latter are [were]
subsidized by the Free State of Saxony.
In addition, the Sorbian associations negotiate with Employment Offices about funding by these Offices for further education measures.

- 113 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (a) (iv)
(iv) if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school
education, to favour and/or encourage the application of the measures
referred to under i to iii above;
This obligation has been accepted by the Land of Brandenburg.
365.
In Brandenburg Land, pre-school education is the responsibility of local authorities. Under the Local Authorities Financing Act, local governments are allocated
funds to support, inter alia, institutions and measures promoting pre-school education,
e.g. children's homes or day nurseries. Under the pertinent laws, parents are granted
extensive participatory rights. Such rights are exercised, in particular, within the Children's Day-Care Centres Committee (Section 7 of the Children's Day-Care Centres Act)
which "decides on educational and organizational matters of the given day-care centre,
especially on the pædagogical concept". This Committee provides a forum which grants
substantial rights regarding the conceptual design and pædagogical orientation of children's day-care centres also to Sorbian (Wendish) parents, with a view to focusing
educational work also on the cultivation and imparting of the Sorbian (Wendish) language and culture.
366.
In Cottbus-Sielow the first pre-school institution with Sorbischer Schulverein
e.V. [Sorbian Schools Association, reg'd] as its providing body was established. This
institution previously had been provided by the respective local authority. The
institution was transferred to Sorbischer Schulverein; the latter also receives regular
subsidies for the maintenance of the establishment and for its staffing. In addition,
Sorbischer Schulverein has been offered additional support for separate activities for
further and advanced training of the educators concerned.
367.
In twelve children's day-care centres of Brandenburg Land, one of the priority
activities is the imparting of the Sorbian (Wendish) language and culture. In many other
children's day-care centres operated in the Spreewald area (Lübbenau Amt, Vetschau),
use of the Sorbian (Wendish) language is offered as part of activities to maintain
customs/folklore following the yearly cycle of seasons and festivals. The tutoresses
introduce children to dances, songs and stories and to picture books covering the same
subjects in German and Sorbian (Wendish). Also, these children get a first-hand experience of customs/folklore being kept up by their parents, grandparents and relatives
in the clubs and associations dedicated to these activities.
368.
The Youth Welfare and Youth Service Office of Oberspreewald-Lausitz Landkreis plans to take up cultivation of the Sorbian (Wendish) language and culture as an

- 114 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

introductory approach to the subject of "Inter-Cultural Education in Children's Day-Care
Centres".
369.
In the view of Brandenburg Land, the common budgetary framework for promotion of Witaj projects related to day-care facilities in Brandenburg Land - as called
for by the Committee of Experts in No. 469 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4
final] - is actually secured by the financial structure of children's day care, as established under the Children's Day-Care Centres Act. As education providers, local
governments are responsible for ensuring adequate children's day care and guaranteeing offers in line with the actual requirements. If parents want to have a Witaj
group, they must address this request to the provider responsible in their educational
district. As regards provision of children's day care, the authorities obliged to provide
such facilities must base their desicions on the parameter stipulated for pedagogical
work in Section 10 of the Children's Day-Care Centres Act. However, the authority
liable to provide facilities is not obliged to provide staff in addition to the statutory
minimum staffing levels.
Also, the budgetary funds at the disposal of the Foundation for the Sorbian People
are to be used for promoting the Sorbian language also in children's day-care
centres.
Apart from these funds, additional financial resources provided under the Landesjugendplan [Land Youth Plan] have been used over the past few years to promote
involvement of Sorbian native speakers to support the development of children's
language proficiency within the framework of the Witaj projects.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (b) - Primary Education (i) to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
(ii) to make available a substantial part of primary education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or
(iii) to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant
regional or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
(iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to
those pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered
sufficient;
Both Brandenburg and Saxony have accepted the obligation under sub-paragraph (b)
(iv).

- 115 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

1. Brandenburg
370.

At the primary schools in the traditional settlement area of the Sorbs (Wends),

Lower Sorbian (Wendish) is offered as a regular subject. At present, some 1,000 pupils
at 23 primary schools in the settlement area avail themselves of this offer. The primary
schools make efforts to achieve a specific Sorbian profile.
371.

Participation in Sorbian (Wendish) classes has much increased over the past

few years. Also, the number of participants in Sorbian (Wendish) classes, as a percentage of the total number of pupils, has increased substantially because, in the
course of the past three years, the number of participants in Sorbian (Wendish) classes
has increased while the number of pupils attending a primary school has dropped. The
same goes for secondary education within the meaning of para. 1, sub-para. (c), below.
372.

The Education Offices of the kreisfreie Stadt [county borough type authority; non-

district municipality] of Cottbus and the Landkreise of Dahme-Spreewald, Oberspreewald-

Lausitz and Spree-Neisse have been repeatedly informed in recent years, last by the
Circular of the Brandenburg Ministry for Education, Youth and Sports of 14 June 1996,
that - for the right to learn the Sorbian (Wendish) language to be exercised - the choices
existing in this respect must, in an appropriate form, be brought to the parents'
knowledge at the time of their children's enrolment in an elementary school or at the
time of their transfer to another school. A survey carried out at the aforementioned
Education Offices has shown that the requirements for exercising the right to take part
in Sorbian (Wendish) classes are actually met. The increase in the number of pupils
also shows that parents increasingly make use of this right.
373.
Contrary to the Committee's perception in Nos 470 - 473 of the Monitoring
Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], Lower Sorbian in the traditional settlement area is
already included as an integral part in the curriculum. Classroom instruction for
grades 1 to 6 of primary schools is based on a framework plan (curriculum).
374.
The Committee's additional demand that Lower Sorbian instruction should
also be offered at primary schools outside the traditional Sorbian settlement area, is
not justified by the Charter's provisions. Under Article 8, para. 1, the undertakings
listed there refer to the "territory in which such languages are used".
The Land Government considers this obligation to be entirely fulfilled.

- 116 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

2. Free State of Saxony
375.
Sorbian is taught as the native language, as a secondary language and as a
foreign language (secondary language: mainly for pupils from bilingual families or
from a bilingual setting; foreign language: mainly for pupils from German-speaking
families or from a German-speaking setting in the Sorbian settlement area), and as
an encounter language [or basic-communication language, or contact language]. As a mother
tongue, Sorbian is taught at six Sorbian elementary schools, of which two are in
Bautzen Landkreis, and four in Kamenz Landkreis.
376.
At four Sorbian primary schools, Sorbian is taught as a secondary language
during the 2002/2003 school year. Another 16 elementary schools in the area covered by the Bautzen Regional Education Office offer Sorbian as a secondary language or as a foreign language. Sorbian also is one of a choice of seven encounter
languages (in the 3rd and 4th grades at primary schools, the encounter language is a
compulsory subject covering one hour per week). A survey conducted during the
1995/1996 school year on the pædagogic profiles of primary schools showed that the
Sorbian schools - but other primary schools as well - pay particular attention to the
cultivation of the Sorbian language and culture. Also in many other primary schools in
the German-Sorbian region, the Sorbs' customs and folklore are integrated into
school life.
377.
As regards the requested follow-up of Sorbian language instruction after
completion of pre-school education within the Witaj project - cf. No. 429 of the Report
of the Committee of Experts [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] - it is pointed out that the division of
Sorbian language instruction into 'mother tongue' and 'secondary language' instruction is no longer practised at the Sorbian primary schools and some other schools.
Rather, classroom instruction is based on the draft of the Schulartübergreifendes
Konzept [Overarching Concept for All Types of Schools] for bilingual Sorbian-German
schools (cf. http://marvin.sn.schule.de/-~ci/download/mv_la_sorbisch.pdf). At present
Sorbian is taught as a foreign language (incl. contact language) at 12 elementary
schools.
The Bautzen Regional Schools Office, Division 2, examines the scope for ensuring
follow-up education for pupils who have completed a [an Upper Sorbian] pre-school, and
on a case-by-case basis may approve such continued education. A decisive factor is
the respective number of pupils which, depending on the given community, varies
widely. In view of the specific nature of each particular case, laying down a common
framework would not seem expedient, or might even be obstructive. As a matter of
principle, however, account is taken of the wishes of all families/parents. Considera- 117 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

tion is also given, however, to Lower Sorbian instruction offered by neighbouring
schools, so as to ensure schooling provision for children of primary school age. As
regards commuting that might be required in such cases, efforts are made to find
solutions in the interest of the pupils concerned.
It is ensured that the above undertaking will be fulfilled.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (c) - Secondary Education (i) to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
(ii) to make available a substantial part of secondary education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or
(iii) to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant
regional or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
(iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to
those pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number
considered sufficient;
The Land of Brandenburg and the Free State of Saxony have accepted the obligation
under sub-paragraph (c) (iv).
1. Brandenburg
378.
At secondary schools, some 500 pupils at present receive instruction in Lower
Sorbian (Wendish). For the major part, this instruction takes the place of the second
foreign language; in some cases, however, it is also offered in addition to the foreign
languages forming part of the regular curriculum. Three schools offer these Lower
Sorbian language classes also to pupils of other schools, whose parents wish their
children to take part in such instruction.
379.

At one school - Niedersorbisches Gymnasium [Lower Sorbian grammar school] in
Cottbus - instruction in Lower Sorbian (Wendish) is mandatory. Pupils not wishing to
take part in Lower Sorbian instruction have to leave this school and transfer to another
secondary-education school.
380.
In response to the view expressed by the Committee of Experts in No. 477 of
the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that it considers this undertaking only
partly fulfilled, it is pointed out that the history and culture of the Sorbian people is
included in a number of framework curricula for lower secondary grades [secondary
education stage I], which were revised last year [?2002]. The "plan for the respective
stages of school education" (Stufenplan), which forms the basis for all framework
curricula, states the following pedagogic guidelines for classroom instruction in all
- 118 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

subjects of lower secondary education: "A particular element of the educational mandate of the Brandenburg schools is to impart knowledge of the historical background
and the identity of the Sorbs (Wends), and understanding of the Sorbian (Wendish)
culture." For classroom instruction, this implies inclusion of matters related to the Sorbian culture, identity and history. This concerns both knowledge of the commonality
regarding origin and the different traditions, and community life of the various population groups.
A provision to this effect has been included in the respective framework curricula for
the following subjects: political education, history, geography, German, art, music,
and performing and visual arts. These provisions refer to subject-specific instruction,
cross-subject work, and work combining various subjects.

2. Free State of Saxony
381.
In the 2002/2003 school year, the Landkreise [county-type administrative districts]
of Kamenz and Bautzen had six Sorbian secondary technical schools. As of the end
of the 2002/2003 school year, the Saxon State Ministry of Education and Culture
cancelled its co-funding for the Sorbian Mittelschule [secondary technical school] in
Crostwitz because for the school year 2003/2004 school year pupils were enrolled for
only three classes. These remaining three classes are transferred to the Sorbian
Mittelschule in Ralbitz. Thus, five Sorbian secondary technical schools are retained in
the 2003/2004 school year. Four of these schools have classes with Sorbian as a
mother tongue as well as classes with Sorbian as a secondary language. In addition,
Sorbian is offered as a secondary language at two other secondary technical schools
within the area of the Bautzen Regional Education Office. Instruction is based on the
current curricula for Saxon secondary technical schools. For pupils for whom Sorbian
is the native tongue, instruction is given in the Sorbian language, with the exception
of the following subjects: German, mathematics, physics, chemistry and biology (from
the 7th grade onwards). All other pupils are taught in German. The rules laid down by
the Saxon State Ministry of Education and Cultural Affairs with regard to instruction at
Sorbian and other schools in the German-Sorbian region, and the specifications regarding the respective approved subject hours have resulted in an increased requirement for teachers covering these subject hours at the Sorbian secondary technical
schools.
382.
Like all other grammar schools in the Free State of Saxony, Sorbisches Gymnasium of Bautzen provides general education which is the prerequisite for entry to
higher education [entitlement to university entrance]. This is the only Gymnasium where
pupils are offered in-depth linguistic and literary education in the Upper Sorbian lan- 119 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

guage. The Saxon State Ministry of Education and Cultural Affairs generally allows
Sorbian pupils to enrol in a special achievement course [advanced course] in their
mother tongue and to take the written Abitur [grammar-school graduation] exams in this
language. The approval for the introduction, from the 1996/1997 school year onwards, of the advanced-course subject combination Sorbian/natural sciences (biology
or chemistry or physics) for pupils speaking Sorbian as their mother tongue offers
pupils a significant widening of choices and, at the same time, may be seen as a
contribution towards promoting the Sorbian language and culture. Bilingualism is a
particularly decisive factor of school life at Sorbisches Gymnasium; all pupils learn
Sorbian either as their native language or as a secondary language.
383.
In addition to Sorbisches Gymnasium, two grammar schools in Saxony,
within the area of the Bautzen Regional Education Office, offer language instruction
in Sorbian as a secondary language.
384.
Overall, Sorbian instruction was given in the 2002/2003 school year at 33
schools in Saxony and was attended by some 2,500 pupils, of whom about 850
speak Sorbian as their mother tongue.
385.
At Sorbian schools, Sorbian is a compulsory subject. At other schools,
participation in Sorbian language lessons is a free decision to be made by the pupils'
parents. The basis for this decision is provided in day-care centres or, at the latest, at
the time of enrolment in an elementary school. In this respect, it is important that
nursery-school teachers, educators and teachers constantly underline the value of
the Sorbian language and culture and encourage parents and pupils to devote
themselves to these traditional values.
Five of the six Upper Sorbian secondary technical schools have native language
classes. In addition to Sorbisches Gymnasium in Bautzen, two other grammar
schools offer Upper Sorbian language instruction (Johanneum and Lessinggymnasium in Hoyerswerda).
386.
In response to the concern expressed by the Committee of Experts in
Nos. 431 and 432 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] with regard to the
rationalization measures taken at the Crostwitz Mittelschule, it is pointed out that, in
the course of the past few school years, the number of pupils enrolled for the 5th
grade of Crostwitz Mittelschule dropped drastically (in the 2001/2002 school year:
17 pupils; 2002/2003: 8 pupils). Consequently, for the 5th grade in the school years
2001/02 and 2002/03, the pedagogical mandate of Mittelschulen - i.e. to ensure the
education provided by both Realschulen [secondary technical schools] and Hauptschulen
- 120 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

[secondary modern schools] - was in danger of not being fulfilled. The municipality,

despite having been requested several times to do so, did not make the required
structural changes. Comparable education is offered by Sorbian Mittelschulen in the
immediate vicinity. Therefore, the Ministry of Culture of the Free State of Saxony
found that there was no public need for the 5th-grade class of the Sorbian secondary
technical school in Crostwitz for the school years 2001/02 and 2002/03 and revoked
the participation of the Free State of Saxony in the maintenance of this class. By its
decision of 30 July 2001 (5K 912/01), the Dresden Administrative Court refused the
temporary injunction, for which Crostwitz Municipality had applied in 2001; the Saxon
Oberverwaltungsgericht (OVG - Higher Administrative Court) refused leave to appeal
against this decision (OVG Decision of 22 August 2001 - 2BS 183/01). For the
2003/04 school year, only a total of seven pupils were enrolled for the 5th-grade
class. As already mentioned under No. 381 above, the Free State of Saxony, after a
balancing of all interests, then decided to cancel its co-funding for the entire school.
387.
Attention is drawn in this context to the fact that a lower minimum number of
pupils required to maintain a class was, for elementary schools, laid down already in
the Ordinance of the Saxon State Ministry of Education and Cultural Affairs of
22 June 1993 on the Work of Sorbian and Other Schools in the German-Sorbian
Region.
Art. 8, para 1, sub-para. (d) - Technical and Vocational Education (i) to make available technical and vocational education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or
(ii) to make available a substantial part of technical and vocational education
in the relevant regional or minority languages; or
(iii) to provide, within technical and vocational education, for the teaching of
the relevant regional or minority languages as an integral part of the
curriculum; or
(iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to
those pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number
considered sufficient;
The Free State of Saxony has accepted the obligation under sub-paragraph (d) (iv).
388.
At present, this undertaking is of relevance only at Fachschule für Sozialwesen [Specialized Technical School for Occupations in Social Work] of the Bautzen Berufliches
Schulzentrum für Wirtschaft [Vocational School Centre for Trade and Industry], where a
special Sorbian course of study was established for infant-school teachers.
389.
In response to the Committee's conclusion that this undertaking was only
partially fulfilled, cf. No. 433 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], the
- 121 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

following additional information is provided: in the 2001/02 school year, 251 pupils
graduated from the Sorbian Gymnasium [grammar school], and 5,895 pupils
successfully completed their course of education in the entire German-Sorbian
settlement area. These pupils have, in this region alone, a choice of 150
vocational training institutions (without higher education). Among these institutions,
the Fachschule für Sozialwesen is one that integrates use of the Sorbian language.
At the other vocational training institutions, there is neither a demand for instruction in
the Sorbian language nor a sufficient number of students having a command of the
Sorbian language to establish classes or groups. In this respect, it is ensured that the
undertaking is fulfilled to the full extent.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (e) - University and Other Higher Education (i) to make available university and other higher education in regional or
minority languages; or
(ii) to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher
education subjects; or
The obligation under sub-paragraph (e) (ii) has been accepted by the Free State of
Saxony.

390.
Leipzig University offers a course of Sorbian Studies (Sorabistics) for a
Master's degree or for the teaching profession.
391.

In addition, research in the field of Sorabistics in the Free State of Saxony and

in Brandenburg Land is carried out by Sorbisches Institut [Sorbian Institute]. The research
priorities of the Sorbian Institute are linguistics, empirical cultural research, folklore, and
the cultural and social history of the Sorbian people. The Institute is financed with public
funds provided through Stiftung für das sorbische Volk [Foundation for the Sorbian
People].
392.
In the field of linguistics, the Institute, after having completed the work on the
15-volume "Sorbian Linguistic Atlas", focuses its research on the [multinational] Slav
linguistic atlas. Those involved in the related practical work have a great demand for
manuals, dictionaries and textbooks which the Institute develops on a periodical basis.
Sorbisches Institut also has at its disposal the Sorbische Zentralbibliothek [Sorbian
Central Library] with some 80,000 volumes (books and journals), and Sorbisches
Kulturarchiv [Sorbian Cultural Archives] with about 500 running metres of records and
files. Like a national library, the Sorbian Central Library collects all Sorbian and
Sorabistic editions and continuously publishes a "Sorbian Bibliography". The Archives
preserve and explore the essential documents of Sorbian cultural development from
more than four centuries. Sorbisches Institut combines its scholarly studies with the
- 122 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

support of specific projects in the field of cultural and language promotion. Thus, on the
basis of sociolinguistic studies, concepts are developed for focused promotion of the
Lower Sorbian language.
393.
Other scholarly studies carried out by the Institute deal with everyday life and
the living conditions of the Sorbs in the course of their history and at present, their
religiousness, their family relations, changes regarding their identity, or bicultural ways
of life. Studies on literature, music, plastic and graphic arts, theatre and cultural
relations with other civilizations and cultural areas elucidate further main aspects of
Sorbian life. The head office of the Sorbian Institute is in Bautzen in Saxony, with a
branch in Cottbus (Brandenburg). This branch, which focuses on linguistics, is the first
scholarly institution to deal specifically with the Sorbs (Wends) of Lower Lusatia.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (e) (iii)
(iii) if, by reason of the role of the State in relation to higher education
institutions, subparagraphs i and ii cannot be applied, to encourage and/or
allow the provision of university or other forms of higher education in
regional or minority languages or of facilities for the study of these
languages as university or higher education subjects;
This obligation has been accepted by the Land of Brandenburg.
394.
The obligation is implemented by an extension course of studies regarding
Sorbian (Wendish) offered at Potsdam University. For detailed information, cf. Nos.
399 - 412 below.
395.

As regards the Committee's conclusion in No. 478 of its Monitoring Report
[MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that this undertaking is not fullled, it is pointed out that Brandenburg Land and the Free State of Saxony have agreed on resources sharing in view of
the very small number of students enrolled so far for Sorbian studies for the teaching
profession at the two universities of Potsdam and Leipzig. The two Länder agreed
that in future only Leipzig University will offer a course of study of this type which will
also cover the Lower Sorbian language in an appropriate way and will receive
material support from Brandenburg Land.
We do not share the view of the Committee of Experts that the Sorbian studies
programme at Leipzig University does not secure an adequate level of university education in Lower Sorbian. The Brandenburg Land Government agreed to this project
on the basis of its informed conviction that higher education in the Lower Sorbian
language is ensured by this arrangement. There is no information giving reason to
assume that this is not the case.
- 123 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

Also, there is nothing in Article 8 to suggest a requirement specifically for a university/college in Brandenburg Land to offer Lower Sorbian studies. Sufficient provision in
this respect is made by the Land helping to ensure Lower Sorbian university studies
by co-funding courses of study at universities/colleges outside its territory.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (f) (iii) - Adult Education (iii) if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult
education, to favour and/or encourage the offering of such languages as
subjects of adult and continuing education;
1. Brandenburg
396.

The Schule für niedersorbische Sprache und Kultur [School for the Lower
Sorbian/ Wendish Language and Culture] in Cottbus, which is part of the Cottbus Adult
Education Centre, offers a wide range of courses in the Lower Sorbian language and
culture. These are both continuing education courses for adults and courses for
teachers who teach Lower Sorbian in the traditional settlement area of the Sorbian
(Wendish) people, or wish to acquire knowledge of the Lower Sorbian language and
culture for teaching another subject.

397.
The demand for adult further education continues to increase. In 2001, 2,420
participants attended the various courses offered by the Schule für niedersorbische
Sprache und Kultur [School for the Lower Sorbian/Wendish Language and Culture] of the Cottbus Adult Education Centre: i.e. 76 language-learning courses and 50 courses on
other subjects. The majority of the participants were from the traditional settlement
area. About 8 % of the participants were foreign visitors, and around 4 % came from
places in Germany outside the Sorbian settlement area.
2. Free State of Saxony
398.
Sorbian language courses are offered by the adult education centres in the
Sorbian settlement area and, upon request, are subsidized by the Foundation for the
Sorbian People.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (g) - Teaching of the History and Culture Education (g) to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture
which is reflected by the regional or minority language;
1. Brandenburg

- 124 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

399.
Section 4 of the Schools Act of Brandenburg Land lays down that the ability
and readiness of pupils should be enhanced to understand their own culture as well
as other cultures, with particular reference to the Sorbian culture.
400.
In order to be able to take adequate account of the history and culture of the
Sorbs at schools in the traditional settlement area of the Sorbian people, as well as at
schools outside that area, teachers are offered courses regarding the history and culture of the Sorbs by the Schule für niedersorbische Sprache und Kultur [School for the
Lower Sorbian/Wendish Language and Culture] and by Arbeitsstelle Bildungsentwicklung
Cottbus (ABC) [Cottbus Workshop for Educational Development] which was established by
the (Brandenburg) Ministry for Education, Youth and Sports specifically for the Lower
Sorbian subject matter. In addition, the framework curricula of Brandenburg Land provide for the inclusion of the Sorbs' history and culture in a number of school subjects
(e.g. music, arts, politics, "Lifestyle Choices, Moral Philosophy, Study of Religion").
401.

The materials mentioned [in Nos. ?399 - 412] were patterned closely on the
subjects listed in the curricula, and thus provide a concrete aid for dealing with the
Sorbian language as well as with specific cultural aspects.
2. Free State of Saxony
402.
Section 2 of the Saxon Schools Act lays down that all schools in the Free
State of Saxony shall impart basic knowledge of the Sorbs' history and culture. Accordingly, the culture and history of the Sorbian people have been included in the
school curricula.
403.
The materials mentioned [in Nos. ?399 - 412] were patterned closely on the
subjects listed in the curricula, and thus provide a concrete aid for dealing with the
Sorbian language as well as with specific cultural aspects.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (h) - Basic and Further Training of Teachers (h) to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement
those of paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;
404.
This obligation has been accepted by the Free State of Saxony and by the
Land of Brandenburg. Since teacher training is pursued across Land borders, the implementation measures are presented here for both of the Länder in order to avoid
repetition. In this regard, cf. the comments above in No. 394 above.
405.
In the Sorbs' settlement area (Free State of Saxony and Brandenburg Land),
teaching of and in the Sorbian languages (Upper Sorbian and Lower Sorbian/
- 125 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

Wendish) is given at publicly maintained schools. Basic training of Sorbian teachers
in Sorbian Studies (Sorabistics) - for the teaching profession - is offered by Leipzig
University (in Saxony). This University trains the majority of Sorbian-language
teachers. The Ministry for Education, Youth and Sports of Brandenburg Land, jointly
with Potsdam University (Institute for the Study of Slavic Languages and Literatures,
and Centre for Further Education), prepared an extension course of studies regarding
Sorbian (Wendish) for lower secondary grades [i.e. secondary education stage I of German
schools], which started on 1 April 1998. The aim is to qualify some 20 teachers for
teaching Sorbian (Wendish) at schools. A continuation course of studies for acquiring
teaching qualification for secondary education stage II is in preparation. For the school
subject 'Sorbian (Wendish)', framework plans were developed for primary education, for
secondary education stage I, and for the upper secondary grades of Gymnasien [grammar schools]. These plans were established by teachers from Brandenburg Land in cooperation with a linguist from Magdeburg University. The Commission's work was coordinated by the Land Institute for Pædagogics and by Arbeitsstelle Bildungsentwicklung Cottbus (ABC - Cottbus Workshop for Educational Development).
406.
The offers regarding central and regional follow-up/in-service training of Sorbian teachers are essentially demand-oriented at present. The Saxon Akademie für
Lehrerfortbildung [teacher follow-up training college], for instance, during the study
course period September 1998 - February 1999, offered a course on the subject
"Methodische Anregung zur Textarbeit im Sorbischunterricht" ["Methodology for Working with Texts in Sorbian Classes"] for teaching posts at Realschulen [secondary schools,
with lower secondary grades (i.e. secondary education stage I)] and Gymnasien [grammar schools;
schools with upper secondary grades], and a course entitled "Unterwegs nach Europa Mehrsprachigkeit statt Einsprachigkeit" ["On our way to Europe - Polyglotism instead of
unilingualism"]. In addition, regional follow-up training offers exist for teachers who
teach Sorbian as a foreign language or as the native language, for instance "Methodische Anregungen zur Textarbeit im Sorbischunterricht für Lehrer, die Sorbisch als
Fremdsprache unterrichten" ["Methodology for Working with Texts in Sorbian Classes, for
Teachers who teach Sorbian as a Foreign Language"]. Teachers who teach other subjects in the Sorbian language, can take part in centrally or regionally organized follow-up training in subject-specific and multidisciplinary studies. The regional follow-up
training activities offered so far also comprise follow-up training which is advertised
and carried out in the Sorbian language. The catalogue of training offered by the
Bautzen Regional Education Office covers two courses for teachers of Sorbian primary schools and one course for teachers of Sorbian secondary technical schools,
which are also advertised and held in the Sorbian language. For the entire spectrum

- 126 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

of school types, a follow-up training course is offered on the subject of "Sorbian: Reactivation of the Language / In-Class Educational Materials / Textbooks".
407.
In May 1992, the independently managed Arbeitsstelle Bildungsentwicklung
Cottbus (ABC) [Cottbus Workshop for Educational Development] was established at Niedersorbisches Gymnasium [Lower Sorbian grammar school] in Cottbus (Brandenburg). As regards follow-up training of Sorbian (Wendish) language teachers and of educators
teaching other subjects at Niedersorbisches Gymnasium, ABC has the following tasks:
Sorabistic, including reactivating and advanced, linguistic follow-up training;
subject-specific didactical follow-up training of teachers;
follow-up training in the fields of culture, history, customs/folklore and the policy
regarding minorities, for Sorbian (Wendish) teachers and interested teachers for
other school subjects.
408.
For follow-up training of teachers, funds are available to Arbeitsstelle Bildungsentwicklung Cottbus (ABC). In addition, a teachers' instructor specially qualified for
giving follow-up training is employed for teachers' follow-up training. ABC and the
teachers' instructor, in co-ordination with the Brandenburg Land Institute for Pædagogics, independently develop the pertinent follow-up training offers. The courses are
usually held once or twice per month and, in compact form, at the start of the summer
holidays and occasionally during the spring vacation. In addition, follow-up training is
offered for teachers for other school subjects in co-operation with the Schule für Niedersorbische Sprache und Kultur [School for the Lower Sorbian Language and Culture] which is
part of the Cottbus Adult Education Centre.
409.
In response to the suggestion of the Committee of Experts in No. 437 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that more efforts are needed to provide further training of teachers, the Free State of Saxony points out that every year the
pupils of the Bautzen Sorbisches Gymnasium are informed about the course of
studies for the teaching profession. On these occasions, information is provided on
the Sorbian course of studies and express mention is made of the fact that there is a
great demand for bilingual Sorbian-German teachers for all approved combinations of
subjects. The pupils of this Gymnasium are offered conclusion of an educational
grant contract with the Bautzen Regional Schools Office for the duration of their university studies. The Free State of Saxony has guaranteed that all bilingual student
teachers who successfully complete their studies will be employed at schools. Also,
the pupils' parents are regularly informed of these options.
410.
It should be pointed out that personal continued education is part of a teacher's official duties. This also includes further education in the language. Teaching
- 127 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

hours will be credited only in the case of approved in-service teacher training that
leads to the final qualification "licence to teach, granted for an unlimited period". Language courses for teachers have been offered for three school years already. In the
2003/2004 school year, the Bautzen Sorbisches Institut, in co-operation with the Institut für Sorabistik of Leipzig University, organizes a one-year specialist further training course for a total number of ten elementary school teachers in the area of the
Bautzen Regional Schools Office. The concepts for a series of follow-up training
courses covering intensive advanced language instruction have been developed and
will be implemented in the near future. For participation in this training, teachers will
be released from their classroom duties for the duration of one year, with continued
payment of their salaries. In our judgment, the employment offices are not obliged to
provide further training for employed teachers.
411.

In view of the existing demand for the recruitment of pre-school teachers (cf.

Nos. 427 and 428 of the Monitoring Report) and the follow-up training required in this
regard, Sorbian associations and institutions have put this matter before the employment office. Since this office comes under the jurisdiction of the Bund, it might make
amplifying comments from its point of view.
412.
As regards the comments of the Committee of Experts in No. 485 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], Brandenburg Land provides the additional information that the leader of an expertise seminar for Sorbian (Wendish) at the Cottbus Studienseminar [institution for the professional training of teachers] is responsible for the
training of trainee teachers during the second [practical and professional] phase of teacher training, which follows after graduation from university/college.
413.

[blank]

Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (i) - Supervisory Bodies (i) to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures
taken and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of
regional or minority languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their
findings which will be made public.
1. Brandenburg
414.
At the Ministry for Education, Youth and Sports, a section has been established
(Section for International Matters and Matters of the Sorbs) where an Assistant Head of
Section and an executive officer supervise the introduction and further development of
Lower Sorbian instruction. In addition, the four Education Offices in the Sorbian
- 128 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

people's traditional settlement area in Brandenburg Land have school supervisory
officers whose main task is to supervise Lower Sorbian instruction.
415.
The Land Government informed the Parliament of the implementation measures in response to a parliamentary question put to the Government.
416.
In the view of Brandenburg Land, the Committee's criticism No. 486 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] - i.e. that there is no supervisory body for
monitoring the teaching of Lower Sorbian - is unfounded since, as explained above,
appropriate supervisory bodies do exist.
2. Free State of Saxony
417.

The Saxon State Ministry of Education and Cultural Affairs is responsible for

school matters of the Sorbs. In addition, the interests of the various types of Sorbian
and German/Sorbian schools in the Sorbian settlement area of the Free State of
Saxony are dealt with by a Commissioned Inspector of Schools of the Bautzen Regional Schools Office.
418.
A report on the situation - including the educational system - of the Sorbian
people in the Free State of Saxony is submitted pursuant to Section 7 of the Saxon
Sorbs Act by the Saxon State Government to the Saxon Landtag [Land Diet] at least
once per legislative period. The report is published for release to the general public.
419.
Supervisory bodies - as called for by the Committee of Experts in No. 438 of
the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] - have been in existence for quite some
time already. For example, all divisions of the Bautzen Regional Schools Office have
assigned performance of this supervisory function to staff members responsible for
schools who have a perfect - oral and written - command of the Sorbian language
(i.e. native speakers).
420.
The Saxon Staatsinstitut für Bildung und Schulentwicklung (Comenius-Institut
- State Institute for Education and School Development) has the task of developing a concept
for bilingual Sorbian-German schooling. For this purpose, a project group was set up,
which closely co-ordinates its work with Sorbischer Schulverein e.V. [Serbske šulske
towaristwo z.t. - Sorbian Schools Association].
421.
The aforementioned bodies submit regular reports to the Saxon Ministry of
Education and Culture on the status of the development and evaluation of this concept. Information on the status of the concept-related work and of the Sorbian educa- 129 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

tion system is regularly presented on the Internet and in the "Report on the state of
the Sorbian People". It is thus ensured that the provision of Article 8, para. 1, subpara. (i), of the Charter is fulfilled to the full extent.
Article 8, para. 2
Paragraph 2
With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the
regional or minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number
of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide
teaching in or of the regional or minority language at all the appropriate stages of
education.
This obligation has been accepted by the Free State of Saxony.
422.

Instruction in the Sorbian language outside the traditional settlement area of

the Sorbian people in Upper Lusatia in the North-Eastern part of the Free State of
Saxony is offered by Sorbisches Kultur- und Informationszentrum [Sorbian Cultural and
Information Centre] in Berlin. The Centre holds Sorbian courses which are subsidized

by the Foundation for the Sorbian People. At the Sorbian Language and Culture Institute of Leipzig University, all courses (other than beginners' courses) are held in Sorbian. In order to enable Sorbian students to stay in contact with the Sorbian language
and culture also outside their settlement area, accommodation in Sorbian student
hostels is offered in Dresden, Leipzig and Berlin. More extensive implementation of
this obligation is not envisaged at present, in view of the small number of members of
these language groups living outside the settlement area.
423.

As regards the Committee's comment in No. 439 of the Monitoring Report
[MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that it does not have sufficient information to conclude that this
undertaking is fulfilled, it is pointed out that there is no current information indicating
any demand for Upper Sorbian instruction in places outside the Sorbian settlement
area. In addition it is pointed out that the Institut für Sorabistik of Leipzig University
offers Sorbian studies as an optional [elective] subject or as a compulsory subject of
choice [required elective].
424.
As regards colleges and universities, the obligation - in the sense of "undertake ... to allow" - is met for the entire territory of the Federal Republic by virtue of
Article 5, para. 3, of the Basic Law (autonomy of institutions of higher education)*.
______________________
*

"(3) Art and scholarship, research, and teaching shall be free. The freedom of teaching ..."

- 130 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

Article 9
Judicial Authorities
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of
residents using the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below,
according to the situation of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the
facilities afforded by the present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the
proper administration of justice:
425.
As regards the Committee's suggestion in Nos. 446, 488 and 491 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that use of the Upper Sorbian language in
court procedures should be encouraged and facilitated, we maintain that the existing
legal framework ensures complete fulfilment of the undertakings entered into. The
relevant obligations under the Charter grant the individual the right to use the Sorbian
language if he/she so wishes, and in this case the state does indeed guarantee their
implementation; these provisions do not, however, call for active encouragement of
the individual's use of the Sorbian language.
Art. 9, para. 1, sub-para. (a) - Criminal Proceedings in criminal proceedings:

(ii)

to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or minority
language; and/or
(iii) to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not be
considered inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a regional or
minority language; and/or
These obligations have been accepted by the Free State of Saxony and by the Land
of Brandenburg. The implementation measures are presented here for both of these
Länder.
426.
Special provisions governing use in court with regard to the Sorbian
language are laid down in the Treaty between the Federal Republic of Germany and
the German Democratic Republic on the Establishment of German Unity (Unification
Treaty) of 31 August 1990, which explicitly provides that the Sorbs shall - continue to
- have the right to speak Sorbian in court in their home Kreise and that this right shall
remain unaffected by Section 184 of the Organisation of the Courts Act (Annex-I,
Chapter III, Subject Area A, Section III 1.r of the Unification Treaty of
31 August 1990). This provision is implemented in the Länder of Saxony and
Brandenburg.
427.
The signs indicating the courts in the traditional settlement area [Lower Lusatia] of
the Sorbian (Wendish) people in Brandenburg are bilingual. If Sorbians wish to litigate
- 131 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

in their own language - which they are entitled to do under the Unification Treaty and
the Land Constitution - translators will be called in. So far, however, no case has become known where a Sorb invoked this right in a court of Brandenburg Land.
In the Sorbian settlement area [Upper Lusatia] of the Free State of Saxony, all courts have
bilingual signs. In addition, the Saxon Higher Administrative Court also uses GermanSorbian letterhead stationery. In every court in the Sorbian settlement area of the Free
State of Saxony, at least one staff member has a command of the Sorbian language so
that citizens can also state their case in Sorbian. This right is actually being made use
of.
The costs incurred for any required services of interpreters or translators are part of the
regular costs of the proceedings and thus are not charged as an extra item.
Art. 9, para 1, sub-para. (b) - Civil Proceedings in civil proceedings:

(ii)

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he
or she may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby
incurring additional expense; and/or
(iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;
The obligations under sub-paragraph (b) (ii) and (iii) have been accepted by the Free
State of Saxony; also, the obligation under (iii) has been adopted by Brandenburg
Land.
428.

In this regard, cf. the comments in Nos. 426 - 427 above.

Art. 9, para 1, sub-para. (c) - Proceedings before Courts concerning Administrative
Matters in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:

(ii)

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he
or she may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby
incurring additional expense; and/or
(iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;
Art. 9, para 1, sub-para. (d) - Expense (d) to take steps to ensure that the application of sub-paragraphs i and iii of
paragraphs b and c above and any necessary use of interpreters and
translations does not involve extra expense for the persons concerned.
The obligations under sub-paragraph (c) (ii) and (iii) and under sub-paragraph (d)
have been explicitly accepted by the Free State of Saxony; also, the obligation under
sub-paragraph (c) (iii) has been adopted by Brandenburg Land.
- 132 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

429.

Part D: Sorbian

In this regard, cf. the comments in Nos. 426 - 427 above.

430.
As regards this branch of the judiciary, it must be pointed out that administrative courts are obliged to conduct ex officio investigations and, where necessary and
appropriate, will on their own initiative rely on the services of interpreters. Thus, the
members of a given language group suffer no prejudice by the use of their language.
Art. 9, para. 2, sub-para. (a) - Validity of Legal Documents Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake:
(a) not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely
because they are drafted in a regional or minority language; or
431.
Cf. the preceding comments as regards implementation of this obligation which has been accepted by Free State of Saxony and by Brandenburg Land.
432.

For the Land of Brandenburg, the following should be pointed out:

Under Section 23, para. 5, of the Administrative Procedure Act of Brandenburg Land, a
legal document is not invalid at law solely because it is drafted in the Sorbian language.
Rather, a translation must be made of it. It is not known how many legal documents
drafted in Lower Sorbian (Wendish) exist in Brandenburg and in what form they have so
far been used in legal relations. However, no case has become known where such
documents were used in relations with judicial authorities.

- 133 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

Article 10
Administrative Authorities and Public Services
433.
As regards the Committee's general suggestion in Nos. 447 - 452 and 494
- 496 [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that the authorities should launch measures to facilitate the
use of Upper Sorbian in administrative procedures, we maintain that the existing legal
framework ensures complete fulfilment of the undertakings entered into. The relevant
obligations under the Charter grant the individual the right to use the Sorbian language if he/she so wishes, and in this case the state does indeed guarantee their
implementation; these provisions do not, however, call for active encouragement of
the individual's use of the Sorbian language.
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are
users of regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and
according to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is
reasonably possible:
Art. 10, para. 1, sub-para. (a) - Applications, and Submission of Documents (iv) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or
written applications in these languages; or
(v)
to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a
document in these languages;
The obligations under sub-paragraph (a) (iv) and (v) have been accepted by the Free
State of Saxony and by the Land of Brandenburg.
434.
In the German-Sorbian areas, both German and the Sorbian language are
admitted in relations with the authorities and administrations of the Land and local
governments. This right is expressly stipulated in Sections 9 and 11 of the Act on the
Sorbs' Rights in the Free State of Saxony (Saxon Sorbs Act) of 20 January 1999 and
in Section 23 of the Administrative Procedure Act of Brandenburg Land. These provisions provide for the general possibility to submit applications, petitions, records,
deeds or other documents in the Sorbian language.
The translation of such applications etc. into the German language is taken care of by
the authority concerned. No costs for translations are charged to the citizen. It is not
known to what extent use is made of the facilities granted under this provision. In this
regard, no statistical data are collected.
435.

As regards the Committee's comment in No. 494 of its Monitoring Report
[MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that the Committee of Experts must conclude that the
undertaking is not fulfilled in practice regarding oral applications, Brandenburg Land
- 134 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

points out that so far no case has become known where a user of the Sorbian
language would have been hindered from using the Sorbian language. Therefore, the
Land takes the view that the undertaking is fulfilled since this option does exist.
436.
With regard to the use of the Sorbian language, the Free State of Saxony, in
connection with Article 10, points out that public authorities, especially local administrations in the German-Sorbian settlement area, are fully aware of the obligation to
allow use of both German and Sorbian as the official language. Therefore, appropriate considerations and efforts are already underway to achieve progress as regards use of the Sorbian language. In this context, reference is made to the letter of
20 November 2002 addressed by the State Minister of the Interior to the Federal
Minister of the Interior.
437.
In the view of the Saxon State Ministry of the Interior, the constitutional provisions of Articles 33, paras. 2* and 3**, and 3, para. 3, of the Basic Law preclude general inclusion of knowledge of the Sorbian language as a qualification criterion for
employment with public authorities in the Sorbian settlement area. The performance
principle requires equal eligibility to public office on the basis of aptitude, qualifications and professional ability. The candidate's origin and/or his/her belonging to a
particular ethnic group must not be a determining factor of selection and consequently, as a matter of principle, may not be used as a discretionary criterion for selection
among candidates who otherwise have the same qualifications. In a very restricted
number of cases, an exception may be made if so required for the post to be filled.
This restriction does not collide with the international obligations applicable to the
Free State of Saxony under the provisions of the European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages. As evidenced by the Declaration by the Federal Republic of
Germany in Preparation of the Ratification of this Charter (Federal Law Gazette 1998
II, p. 1134 - cf. Annex 1 to the present Report), the obligation under Art. 10, para. 4, subpara. (b), of the Charter - recruitment and training of official/public service employees
having a knowledge of the minority language - was not accepted for any of the regional or minority languages spoken in Germany.
438.
Accordingly, the State Ministry of the Interior considers it admissible to recognize knowledge of the Sorbian language as a proper qualification if the post of a contact person within the meaning of Section 11 of the Saxon Sorbs Act (SächsSorbG -

*
**

"(2) All Germans are equally eligible for any public office according to their aptitude, qualifications
and professional achievements."
"(3) The enjoyment of civil rights, eligibility for public office, and rights acquired in the public service
shall not depend on a person's religious denomination. Nobody may suffer disadvantage by reason
of their adherence or non-adherence to a denomination or their other convictions."

- 135 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

*

Act on the Sorbs' Rights in the Free State of Saxony) is to be filled, because command of the

Sorbian language is part of the core competence required for such a post. Also, to a
certain extent, it is considered admissible to include command of the Sorbian language as a desirable additional qualification in job advertisements for a post where
its holder will have contact with personal callers. However, in view of the fact that
Sorbian is spoken as a foreign language by a very small part of the non-Sorbian
population, this approach entails the risk that, in violation of the equality principle [prohibition of discrimination], non-Sorbian applicants would factually be placed at a disadvantage on account of their national origin. Therefore, command of the Sorbian language could not be used throughout the Land's territory as an additional criterion in
the selection-related decisions. Also, it is pointed out that even the designation of a
Sorbian contact person is subject to feasibility, especially as regards the available
number of Sorbian-speaking applicants who in all other respects have the required
qualifications.
439.
A number of the subordinate agencies of the State Ministry of the Interior especially those in regular contact with personal callers - already have Sorbianspeaking contact persons. The State Ministry of the Interior will make sure that the
authorities/agencies within its remit will once more be explicitly informed of the possibility to include knowlege of the Sorbian language as a criterion for the selection of
job applicants, and will be encouraged to make the widest use possible of this option.
In addition, the State Ministry will pass on, to the authorities concerned, the request
that their citizens should, in an appropriate way, be informed of the fact that Sorbianspeaking staff is available and can be contacted.
440.
The State Ministry of the Interior is quite willing to follow up on the request for
greater provision of further education for Sorbian language acquisition. The Akademie für öffentliche Verwaltung [Academy of Public Administration], which comes within
the remit of this Ministry, will make a survey of the requirements for such further education within the Land's public administration. The Fachhochschule der Sächsischen
Verwaltung [College of Saxony's Public Administration], which is responsible for training
of public servants of the higher immediate service, will be informed that - upon request, especially by the recruiting local authorities in the Sorbian settlement area the Sorbian language should be included in the optional language courses offered to
their staff.
*

"Section 11 - Contact Persons of Public Authorities
(1)
In the Sorbian settlement area, the public authorities of the Free State of Saxony and the
agencies of public-law corporations, statutory institutions and public law foundations under its
supervision should, wherever possible, designate as contact person a staff member having command of the Sorbian language."

- 136 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

441.
Recruitment and further training of the staff of local public service come
within the organizational jurisdiction of local governments. The State Ministry of the
Interior will write to the local government associations of the Land to inform them of
the desired approach in this respect and of the existing legal scope for meeting such
wishes.
Article 10, para. 2
Paragraph 2
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents
who are users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified
below, the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
Art. 10, para. 2, sub-paras. (a) and (b) - Use of a Regional or Minority Language, and
Applications to Local and Regional Authorities (a) the use of regional or minority languages within the framework of the regional
or local authority;
(b) the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or
written applications in these languages;
The obligations under sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) have been accepted by the Free
State of Saxony; also, the obligation under sub-paragraph (b) has been entered into
by Brandenburg Land.
442.
In this regard, cf. the comments in Nos. 433 - 441 above. Also, it should be
noted that within local administrations, the staff and directors of various sections
speak the Sorbian language. Some of them have direct responsibility for Sorbian
matters. Within the local authorities of the traditional settlement area of the Sorbian
(Wendish) people in Brandenburg Land, most public notices are bilingual; for official
letters of these authorities, bilingual letterhead stationery is used.
443.
In the exclusively Sorbian communities, or communities with a Sorbian majority,
in the Free State of Saxony, the Sorbian language prevails in public life. This also goes
for administrative authorities and meetings of local/municipal councils. At the same time
it is ensured, e.g. by bilingual notices on the bulletin board, that also citizens who only
speak German are included in community life. In these places, in particular, civil marriages are increasingly contracted in the Sorbian language.
444.
In all places where the Sorbs form the (mostly small) minority within the local
population, only hesitant use is made of the legal and practical scope for using the Sorbian language in relations with the administration.

- 137 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

445.
Even where sufficient numbers of staff members of Kreis and local authorities
have proficiency in the Sorbian language, these capabilities are seldom used by the
Sorbian population. As a rule, Sorbian citizens prefer to use the German language in
their relations with administrative authorities because they thus want to preclude any
misunderstanding in the administration's assessment of the matter put before it. To give
some examples:
446.
In the city of Cottbus, the correspondence between the Commissioner for Sorbian (Wendish) Matters and the Sorbian institutions and associations as well as citizens
belonging to the Sorbian people takes place, for the major part, in the Lower Sorbian
language. Although this provides the basis for handling such petitions in Sorbian, no
citizen has so far made a written submission in the Lower Sorbian language to the
municipal authorities.
447.
In Oberspreewald-Lausitz Landkreis, the Lower Sorbian language is very
seldom used in relations with administrative authorities although the actual conditions
for such use exist, given that the staff of the authorities concerned usually have a
command of the Lower Sorbian language. For the Landkreise of Spree-Neisse and
Dahme-Spreewald, no cases have been reported where citizens contacted
administrative authorities in the Lower Sorbian language.
448.
As regards further measures of encouragement as suggested by the
Committee of Experts, cf. the introductory remark in No. 433 above.
Art. 10, para 2, sub-para. (g) - Place-names (g) the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official
language(s), of traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or
minority languages.
This obligation has been accepted by the Free State of Saxony and by the Land of
Brandenburg.
449.
In the Sorbian settlement area, there are - for the major part - bilingual signs
for places, towns, Landkreise [rural county-type administrative districts], etc. and for public
buildings, institutions, streets, lanes and roads, squares and bridges. This is explicitly
laid down in Section 10 of the Act on the Sorbs' Rights in the Free State of Saxony
(Saxon Sorbs Act) and in Section 11 of the Act to regulate the substance of the
Sorbs' (Wends') rights in the Land of Brandenburg (Act on the Specification of the
Rights of the Sorbs (Wends)).

- 138 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

450.
The requirement for bilingual inscriptions, as laid down in Section 11 of the Act
to regulate the substance of the Sorbs' (Wends') rights in the Land of Brandenburg, also
covers the arrangement, design and posting of traffic signs/road signs pursuant to the
German Road Traffic Regulations [StVO]. Where local authorities, as public construction
agencies, are responsible for putting up traffic signs/road signs, such responsibility refers to Sign 432* (indicating direction to destinations within built-up areas and to locations of considerable traffic importance) and to Sign 437* (indicating road or street
names).
451.
Often the Sorbian/Wendish names of towns and villages are also used on the
letterhead stationery of the local authorities concerned.
452.
As regards the Committee's suggestion in No. 497 [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that
municipalities should be encouraged to become a part of the Sorbian settlement
area, Brandenburg Land points out that the traditional settlement area of the Sorbian
people is defined by Section 3, para. 2, of the Sorben-Wenden-Gesetz (SWG - Act on
the Specification of the Rights of the Sorbs (Wends)). The Administrative Regulation of
29 May 1997 issued by the Ministry of Science, Research and Cultural Affairs on the
implementation of the SWG assigns to local authorities the task of verifying whether
the legal requirements are met for a municipality to be considered part of the traditional settlement area. The reason for this tasking was that the SWG makes inclusion
in the category of 'municipality within the traditional settlement area' dependent on
the existence of continuity of the Sorbian language and culture, and that the municipalities, in view of their familiarity with local conditions, are in a better position than
the Land Government to assess the existence of Sorbian traditions in their area; the
Land Government might possibly overlook such evidence. If such linguistic and cultural elements are ascertained to exist, the respective municipality is, ex lege, considered a part of the traditional settlement area, without having any say in the matter.
Thus, the decision that a municipality falls under this category is not a matter or discretion and choice on the part of the given municipality, but only refers to the determination that the relevant legal requirements and conditions are met.
Moreover, decisions by local governments are entirely subject to supervisory control
over local authorities and thus can be corrected. So far, however, the local government supervisory authorities have not been informed of any cases where municipalities would, contrary to law, have denied their being a part of the traditional settlement
area.

*

as defined in the German Road Traffic Regulations

- 139 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

The Land Government therefore assumes that the SWG (Sorbs/Wends Act) gives a
correct definition of the Sorbian settlement area and that consequently bilingual signposting is guaranteed throughout the Sorbian settlement area.
Article 10, para. 3
Paragraph 3
With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other persons
acting on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which regional or
minority languages are used, in accordance with the situation of each language and as far
as this is reasonably possible:
Art. 10, para. 3, sub-paras. (b) and (c) - Applications in a Regional or Minority Language
with regard to Public Services Paragraph 3
(b) to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request and receive
a reply in these languages; or
(c) to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request in these
languages.
The obligations under sub-paragraphs (b) and (c) have been assumed by the Free
State of Saxony and the Land of Brandenburg.
453.

For detailed information, cf. the preceding comments.

Article 10, para. 4
Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by
them, the Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
Art. 10, para. 4, sub-para. (a) - Translation or Interpretation (a) translation or interpretation as may be required;
This obligation has been accepted by the Land of Brandenburg.
454.

In this regard, cf. the comments in Nos. 433 - 441 above.

Art. 10, para. 4, sub-para. (c) - Appointment of Public Service Employees having a
Knowledge of a Regional or Minority Language (c) compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees
having a knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the
territory in which that language is used.
This obligation has been accepted by the Free State of Saxony and by the Land of
Brandenburg.
- 140 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

455.
So far, this provision has not yet been implemented in the sense of introducing
pertinent Land legislation providing that public sector workers having a knowledge of
the Sorbian/Wendish language shall be appointed, at their request, to posts in the Sorbian people's traditional settlement area. However, the Land Government and Land
Administration, within the limits of what is possible, always strive to meet any wishes
expressed by Land public officials as regards their employment. Accordingly, no case
has yet become known where a public official having a command of the Sorbian/Wendish language expressed the wish to be appointed in the traditional settlement area of
the Sorbian people and where this wish was not complied with.
456.
As regards the comments of the Committee of Experts in Nos. 454 and 502
of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that the information available to the
Committee was not sufficient to conclude that this undertaking was fulfilled, both
Länder once more point out that wishes expressed by public officials as regards their
employment or transfer are met within the limits of budgetary law and
public service law regulations, and that the accepted undertaking is established
applicable law which is binding on public administration. Therefore, we see no need
for enacting any further legislation. Given that so far no requests to this effect have
been made by members of the Sorbian language group and that there has been no
case where such a request would have been denied, additional information is neither
available nor, as we see it, required for assessing the implementation of this
undertaking.
Article 10, para. 5
Paragraph 5
The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or
minority languages, at the request of those concerned.
457.
This obligation has been explicitly accepted by the Free State of Saxony and
by the Land of Brandenburg. For detailed information, cf. the comments in Nos. 220 225 above.

- 141 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

Article 11
Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in
which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that
the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this field,
and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:

Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (b) (ii) - Broadcasting of Radio Programmes (ii)

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;

458. In the traditional settlement areas of the Sorbian people in the Free State of
Saxony and in Brandenburg Land, public-service broadcasting has developed an
extensive programme in the two Sorbian languages. The programme is devoted, in
particular, to the fields of information, culture and education. 'Culture' is understood in
the largest sense of the word; this thematic section also covers reports on traditions/
folklore and on the life of societies and associations, reviews of stage productions and
of books, and talks with Sorbian authors and other persons engaged in the cultural sector. In addition, there are news, commentaries, topical reports, especially on current
affairs in the region, and religious contributions. The musical sector focuses on Sorbian
folk songs, but also covers modern Sorbian popular songs and Sorbian rock and pop.
1. Brandenburg
459. Under Article 4 of the Act on Ostdeutscher Rundfunk Brandenburg, the programme of Ostdeutscher Rundfunk Brandenburg (ORB), like that of Mitteldeutscher
Rundfunk (mdr), has to take account of the cultural diversity of Brandenburg Land
and of the Sorbian culture and language.
460. Within the framework of the reorganization of broadcasting in Berlin and Brandenburg, these two Länder concluded the Inter-State Treaty on the Establishment of
a Joint Broadcasting Corporation for the Länder of Berlin and Brandenburg of 25
June 2002 [RBB Inter-State Treaty]. The Rundfunk Berlin-Brandenburg (RBB) unites
the Ostdeutscher Rundfunk Brandenburg (ORB) and Sender Freies Berlin (SFB).
The new Broadcasting Treaty entered into force as of 17 March 2003.
Under Section 4, para. 2, sub-para. 2, of the RBB Treaty, the programmes of Rundfunk Berlin-Brandenburg take account of the regional [cultural] diversity in the Länder
of Berlin and Brandenburg, and of the language and culture of the Sorbian (Wendish)
people. Under Section 14, para. 1, no. 20, of the RBB Broadcasting Treaty, a member of the associations of the Sorbs (Wends) in Brandenburg is represented on the
- 142 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

Broadcasting Board of the RBB so that the Sorbs' interests are safeguarded within
this body. In this respect, the legal situation is the same as under the ORB Act and
ensures that the new programmes will continue to take account of the Sorbian language.
461. As regards further information on measures of encouragement for the broadcasting of radio programmes in Lower Sorbian by private stations, as requested by the
Committee of Experts in No. 504 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], Brandenburg Land points out that private broadcasters are, to a large extent, free to lay
down their own programming; outside very narrowly defined limits, the Land has little
scope for both direct intervention and indirect influence. Consequently, this provision
of the Charter obliges the Land to encourage the broadcasting of programmes in the
[Sorbian] language only to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly,
are competent, have power or play a role in this field. Against this background, this
undertaking must be fulfilled essentially by public service broadcasting. As regards
private broadcasters, the Land Government must confine its intervention to general
efforts to create an opinion-forming climate well-disposed towards minorities and
aimed at fostering the regional or minority languages.
2. Free State of Saxony
462. Under Section 6, para. 3, of the [Saxon] Act to implement the Inter-State Treaty
on Mitteldeutscher Rundfunk (mdr) of 27 June 1991, broadcasts of the mdr must take
account of the interests of all segments of the population – including the minorities.
With its Sorbisches Studio in Bautzen, Mitteldeutscher Rundfunk (mdr) broadcasts a
daily radio programme in Upper Sorbian on Mondays through Saturdays, for three
hours during the early morning programme, and on Sundays, around noon, for one
and a half hours, and occasionally live transmissions as well. In addition, a 2-hour
youth programme entitled "Radio Satkula" is aired every Monday evening. It covers
news, reports, modern Sorbian and international music, and other reporting items.
The programme is developed and presented by Sorbian youngsters. It is re-run on
Ostdeutscher Rundfunk Brandenburg (ORB) the following day. Leaving special
broadcasts aside, this amounts to an airtime of 21.5 hours per week in the Upper
Sorbian language.
463. In addition, Landesfunkhaus Sachsen [Land Broadcasting Centre Saxony] of the mdr
airs a half-hour double-tone (German and Upper Sorbian) television programme at
20.15 p.m. every four weeks on Wednesdays. Also, every Sunday, a double-tone
transmission of the short children's programme "Sandman" can be received in the

- 143 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

Upper Sorbian language. These are not programmes dealing with Sorbian subjects,
but are translations of the regular programmes into a Sorbian version.
464. As regards the Committee's request, in No. 457 of the Monitoring Report [MINLANG (2002) 4 final], for additional information with regard to private broadcasters, reference is made to the comments in Nos. 461 - 462 and 236 above. It is pointed out
that, under the appropriate legal provisions, a Sorbian representative is nominated to
the Assembly of Sächsische Landesanstalt für privaten Rundfunk und neue Medien
[Saxon Land Institution for Private Broadcasting and New Media].
Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (c) (ii) - Broadcasting of Television Programmes (ii)

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;

465. As regards the Committee's request, in Nos. 457 and 505 of the Monitoring
Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], for additional information with regard to private television programmes, reference is made to the comments in Nos. 458 - 464 and 236
above.
1. Brandenburg
466. ORB (Ostdeutscher Rundfunk Brandenburg) Television airs the only regular
Sorbian-language programme in Germany, which is entitled "Łużyca - Sorbisches aus
der Lausitz" ["Sorbian matters from Lusatia"]. Since April 1992, a regular monthly air-time
has been assigned to this programme, namely every third Saturday of the month, at
13.30 p.m. There are re-runs on the respective subsequent Wednesday, at about 23.30
p.m. This is a 30-minute magazine programme in Lower Sorbian, with German subtitling. This magazine programme aims at presenting the Sorbian language, culture,
tradition, everyday life and problems. The aim is to foster the Sorbs' emotional ties with
their homeland and their national self-assurance. Examples of this are reports on traditions in the handicrafts and on folk arts and crafts which in future might die out. Also,
efforts are made to prevent any reduction in the younger generation's respect and
esteem for the Sorbian language.

2. Free State of Saxony
467. Mitteldeutscher Rundfunk (mdr) has repeatedly been requested by the Saxon
State Government to start regular broadcasting of television programmes in the Sorbian language. Since September 2001, the TV station mdr airs a "tele-window"
programme, "Wuhladko", in the Sorbian language and on Sorbian subjects on every
- 144 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

first Saturday of the month. The programme is re-run on the following Tuesday in the
morning.
468.

[deleted: paragraph contained in the 1st State Report]

Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (d) - Audio and Audiovisual Works (d)

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in the regional or minority languages;

This obligation has been accepted by the Free State of Saxony and by the Land of
Brandenburg.
469. Special attention is given to the cultivation of Sorbian music and the study and
revival of the musical heritage. This is, in part, achieved by presenting a wide range of
carefully selected music in the radio programme. In addition, Mitteldeutscher Rundfunk
(mdr), in Saxony, and Rundfunk Berlin-Brandenburg (RBB) produce their own Sorbian
recordings since Sorbian music is scarcely offered on the market. About 80 to 100 titles
are recorded per year. This production also comprises efforts to research the inventory
of Sorbian folk songs, giving suggestions and assistance to interpreters, groups and
vocalist ensembles with regard to their musical arrangements, promoting talented Sorbian musicians, for instance by organizing a yearly concert of talented young artists, as
well as tape-recordings of musical events, and help given by RBB with the publication
of sound recording media.
470. A number of Sorbian film productions are offered on video-cassettes. Most of
them are children's movies (for the major part, adopted from Czech animated cartoons), videos for schools, e.g. for history classes, and films about the Sorbs or Sorbian topics. Most of these videos are in Upper Sorbian; a few are also edited in Lower Sorbian; in most cases, information films are provided as multilingual versions.
About three to five videos are published per year.
471. Under the present arrangements, production of sound recordings and videos is
commissioned by the Foundation for the Sorbian People [Za³ožba za serbski lud].
A Media Commission decides on the works and/or projects to be contracted out.
472. The Internet also provides information on the Sorbs, which inter alia was contributed or is edited by Sorbisches Institut Bautzen or by Domowina. This information
is published in the German, Upper and Lower Sorbian, and English languages.
473. Rundfunk Berlin Brandenburg (RBB) is obligated, in compliance with its programming mandate, to include production companies in Brandenburg Land in its contract
- 145 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

award process. To a considerable extent, marketers from the traditional settlement area
of the Sorbian people benefit from this regulation. Also, RBB is obligated to operate a
radio and television studio in the Lower Sorbian language area in Cottbus.
474. Section 5, para. 3 of the RBB Inter-State Treaty allows the RBB to purchase
broadcasting productions of other providers, provided that such productions are not
purchased or produced for the main purpose of commercial exploitation. This applies
irrespective of whether or not these productions are in the Lower Sorbian language.
Various efforts are made in the field of film promotion with the aim of facilitating the
production and distribution of audio and audiovisual works and to encourage filmmakers in this sense.
These measures are addressed to the cinema sector in general and, of course, are
also open to producers whose projects are realized in regional or minority languages.
Both in the past and in future, particular importance is attached in the film promotion
field to cultural diversity. The Film Subsidies Directives do not contain any restrictions
regarding promotion of films in the Lower Sorbian language. The same principles are
applied to projects in regional or minority languages as to German-language projects,
and such projects are not subject to any specific separate restrictions. The fact that
so far no film in the region's language has been subsidized is primarily due to the
reason that promotion of a film in the Lower Sorbian language has as yet not been
applied for. In addition, there are companies which produce and commercially sell
phonograms and audiovisual works in the Sorbian language with promotional funds
provided by the Foundation for the Sorbian People which is subsidized by the Bund
[Federal Government] and the Land. No turnover figures are available.
Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (e) (i) - Newspaper (i)

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one
newspaper in the regional or minority languages; or

This obligation has been accepted by the Free State of Saxony and by the Land of
Brandenburg.
475. There is little scope for state intervention on account of freedom of the press as
guaranteed by the Constitution (in this respect, cf. the comments on Article 11 in
Part D, Nos. 226 - 239 above).
476. For the Sorbian people, the following Sorbian-language print media are published on a regular basis:

- 146 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

-

Serbske Nowiny (Sorbische Zeitung - Sorbian Newspaper) - 2,100 copies
A daily in Upper Sorbian, published on Mondays through Fridays as an
evening paper; on Fridays: including specific supplements, e.g. literature/arts,
youngsters' supplement, sports supplement (Sokołske listy)
Circulation: Mondays through Thursdays: 1,650 copies; Fridays 2,100 copies

-

Nowy Casnik (Neue Zeitung - New Weekly) - 1,100 copies
A weekly in Lower Sorbian, with a German-language portion; published on
Saturdays

-

Rozhlad (Umschau - Outlook) - 610 copies
A monthly periodical for Sorbian culture, language, literature and art, with
articles in the Upper and Lower Sorbian languages

-

Serbska Šula (Sorbische Schule - Sorbian School) - 210 copies
Educational journal, with articles in the Upper and Lower Sorbian languages;
6 editions per year

-

Płomjo / Płomje (Flamme - Flame) -1,800 / 850 copies
Children's and youngsters' journal
Płomjo: Upper Sorbian edition - 1,800 copies
Płomje: Lower Sorbian edition - 850 copies

-

Katolski Posoł (Katholischer Bote - Catholic Herald) - 2,360 copies
Upper Sorbian weekly of the Catholic Sorbs

-

Pomhaj Bóh (Gott hilf - Help God) - 800 copies
Protestant monthly in Upper Sorbian

Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (f) (ii) - Financial Assistance for Audiovisual Productions (ii) to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual
productions in the regional or minority languages;
This obligation has been accepted by the Free State of Saxony.
477.
Direct financial assistance by the state is problematic, due to freedom of
broadcasting as guaranteed by the Constitution (in this respect, cf. the comments on
Article 11 in Part D, Nos. 226 - 239 above).
478.

For detailed information, cf. the comments in Nos. 469 - 474 above.

479.

In response to the Committee's question in No. 460 of the Monitoring Report
[MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], it is reported that the major part of audiovisual works in the
Upper Sorbian language are subsidized by the Foundation for the Sorbian People, by
the publishing house Domowina-Verlag GmbH and the WITAJ-Sprachzentrum [Witaj
- 147 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

Language Centre]. Examples of works, as requested by the Committee of Experts, are

as follows:
Overview of film productions in the Upper Sorbian language commissioned by,
or on behalf, of the Foundation for the Sorbian People (from 1994 onwards)
title

production year

no. of copies

Animated cartoons for children - dubbed versions of existing cartoon films
produced, in particular, by the Czech Television Corporation - licence agreement:

Matej a Šołćikec [Matej and Miss Sholchik]

1994

200

Powědki wo soninje Amalce [Stories about the
1995

(forest) fairy Amalka]

200

Dyrdomdeje čmjełakow [Adventures of the
1995

bumble-bees]

200

Čapkowe činki [Pranks of the Water Sprite]

1996

200

Micka z Kocorkowa [The kitten from Catville]

1997

200

Puće fórmana Štrympički [The ways of carter
1997

Shtrympichka]

200
"Sandman" - a short bedtime programme aired by mdr for children in the Upper
Sorbian language; licensing for publication has been obtained

Naš pěskowčik [Our Sandman]

2001

300

Fairy-tale movies for children:

Jasna a Krasna ["Jasna and Krasna" ("The Wise One and Little Beauty"), a film about
1999

Water Sprite's daughters]

400

Lutki ["Little Folks" (brownies), a film about the legendary people of midgets in the Lusatian
2000

heath]

400

Tři pjeršćenje [Three Rings]

2002

200

At the end of 2003, another movie will come out; its title is

Potajnstwo stareho młyna [The Mystery of the Old Mill] 2003

- 148 -

400

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

Slavic peoples in the region between the Oder and Elbe rivers - a 12-volume
historic series on the Sorbs' history, in the Upper Sorbian, Lower Sorbian and
German languages

Zasydlenje (I. dźěl)

1995

200

1996

200

1996

200

1997

100

1997

100

1998

150

1998

150

1999

150

2000

150

2001

200

2002

200

(Settlement - Part I)

Hrodźišća (II. dźěl)
(Castle ramparts - Part II)

Kolonizacija (III. dźěl)
(Colonization - Part III)

Dobywanje kraja (IV. dźěl)
(Land reclamation - Part IV)

Město (V. dźěl)
(The town - Part V)

Reformacija a pismowstwo (VI. dźěl)
(Reformation and Literature - Part VI)

Zažne rozswětlerstwo (VII. dźěl)
(The early Age of Enlightenment - Part VII)

Narodne wozrodźenje (VIII. dźěl)
(National rebirth - Part VIII)

Młodoserbske hibanje (IX. dźěl)
(Young Sorbian Movement - Part IX)

Weimarska republika (X. dźěl)
(The Weimar Republic - Part X)

Serbja w nacionalsocializmje (XI. dźěl)
(The Sorbs under National Socialism (Nazi era) - Part XI)

Serbja po 2. swětowej wójnje (XII. dźěl)

to be completed in 2003/04

(The Sorbs after World War II - Part XII)

Videos on the Sorbs' cultural history, on leading figures of Sorbian cultural
history - in the Sorbian and German languages

Škrě - Jan Skala ["Sparks - Jan Skala"]

1992

20

1993

120

1996

100

Doma w Serbach - Belkotec swójba
["At home with the Sorbs - The Belkot Family"]

Dwěle a nadźija - Jurij Brězan ["Doubts and Hope"
("A length of time"), a film about the Sorbian writer
Jurij Brězan]

- 149 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

General information films about the Sorbs' customs, way of life, and culture - in
the Sorbian and German languages

Zymske nałožki we Łužicy

1992
(Winterbräuche in der Lausitz - "Traditional Winter Customs in Lusatia")

120

W katolskich Serbach

400

1995
(Bei den katholischen Sorben - "A visit to the Catholic Sorbs")
Development of Sorbian-language products in the New Media sector
CD ROM
First Sorbian-language computer game, "Billy"

1998

300

The first Sorbian adventure computer game
for children, "Krabat" *

2001

500

Visual and acoustic game for learning
the Sorbian language, "Teo, Leo & Manda"

2002

500

multi-media CD [with Sorbian music for young people],
"sorbspirit"

2001

1.000

480.
It should also be pointed out that, while Brandenburg Land has not explicitly
adopted this obligation, the existing measures to provide financial support for audiovisual works also extend to productions in the Lower Sorbian language. Express
mention will be made of this fact when the subsidizing principles for film promotion will
be established.
Art. 11, para. 2 - Freedom of Direct Reception of Broadcasts, and Freedom of Expression
Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to
a regional or minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake
to ensure that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of information in the written press in a language used in identical or similar form to a
regional or minority language. The exercise of the above-mentioned freedoms, since it
carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions,
restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic
society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the
prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of
the reputation or rights of others, for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.

*

Krabat is a Sorbian legendary figure

- 150 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

This obligation has been accepted by the Free State of Saxony and by the Land of
Brandenburg.
481.
As regards the fundamental conditions governing freedom of expression and
reception of broadcasts, cf. the detailed comments in Part D above on Article 11,
Nos. 226 - 239.
482.
Also, it should be pointed out that Sorbian, as a Slavic language, is related to
Polish and to Czech and that, on account of the Sorbs' settlement area being close to
the borders with Poland and the Czech Republic, Polish and Czech radio and television broadcasts can be received within the limits of technical feasibility. Transmission and direct reception of radio and television broadcasts in Lower Sorbian (and Low
German) have been explicitly regulated, with due regard to the availability of technical
capabilities, on the basis of the retransmission provisions of Sections 37 and 38 of the
Inter-State Treaty between the Länder of Berlin and Brandenburg on Co-operation in
the Field of Broadcasting (Inter-State Treaty on Media Services - MStV) as amended on
21 December 1998.

- 151 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

Article 12
Cultural Activities and Facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities - especially libraries, video libraries, cultural centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary
work and film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries, including inter alia the use of new technologies - the Parties undertake,
within the territory in which such languages are used and to the extent that the public
authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this field:
(a) to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority
languages and foster the different means of access to works produced in these
languages;
(b) to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in
regional or minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing,
post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;
(c) to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other
languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation
and subtitling activities;
(d) to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural
activities of various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the
knowledge and use of regional or minority languages and cultures in the
undertakings which they initiate or for which they provide backing;
(e) to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or
supporting cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full
command of the regional or minority language concerned, as well as of the
language(s) of the rest of the population;
(f) to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given
regional or minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural
activities;
(g) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for
collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the
regional or minority languages;
(h) if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and
terminological research services, particularly with a view to maintaining and
developing appropriate administrative, commercial, economic, social, technical
or legal terminology in each regional or minority language.
The obligations under sub-paragraphs (a) to (h) have been accepted by the Free
State of Saxony and by the Land of Brandenburg; since the pertinent activities are
pursued across Land borders, the implementation measures are presented for both
of these Länder.
483.

The Sorbs have their traditional settlement area in the Free State of Saxony
[Upper Lusatia] and in Brandenburg Land [Lower Lusatia]. In order to avoid separate
promotional policies in Saxony and Brandenburg, these two Länder have, mutually
and with the Bund [Federal Government], agreed a common promotion policy. A mani-

- 152 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

festation of this policy is the Foundation for the Sorbian People (Za³ožba za serbski
lud) (for details, cf. the comments above in Part A, Nos. 68 - 75).
484.

The Deutsch-Sorbisches Volkstheater (Němsko-Serbske ludowe dźiwadło

- German-Sorbian Popular Theatre), Bautzen, is subsidized as part of project promotion by the Foundation. In addition to institutional promotion [basic funding of institutions], project-oriented promotion by the Foundation covers a wide range of subjects,
for instance production of movies and sound recordings, projects related to the cultivation of culture, traditions and folklore, competitions for various age groups and
fields of interest.
485.
Support is given not only by the Foundation or, for other activities, by the
Länder but also by the local authorities and Landkreise [rural county-type administrative
districts] in the traditional settlement area. This is the case, in particular, as regards
promotion of traditional festivals carried out, and of customs observed, by Sorbian
associations. Cultural groups and associations are actively fostered and supported by
local authorities. Maintenance of Sorbian customs is an integral part of almost all local
mass events in the traditional settlement area of the Sorbian people. In most cases,
these customs are also kept up and practised by the Sorbs' fellow-citizens belonging to
the majority population.
486.
Another priority of cultural promotion at the local government level is
educational work. It is especially due to the work of the museums provided by local selfadministration bodies that items of the Sorbian cultural heritage are collected, made
accessible to the public, and presented and explained in lectures, guided tours, etc.
Also, many centres displaying pieces of local customs and traditions (so-called
Heimatstuben), which are supported by local authorities within the framework of project
promotion, preserve the Sorbian cultural heritage and make others familiar with it.
487.
With a view to conveying the Sorbian people's cultural values or traditions
and way of life in an authentic way, the association "Sorbischer Kulturtourismus e.V."
(Zwjazk za serbski kulturny turizm z.t. - Sorbian Cultural Tourism, reg'd association)
formed in 1996. With its projects, inter alia development of a Sorbian Cultural Route,
it intends, without aiming at superficial commercialization for tourism purposes, to
make Sorbian institutions, museums and local traditional centres (Heimatstuben)
accessible to tourism on a greater scale. This requires close co-operation with many
individuals and institutions. The Sorbian Affairs Commissioners of the Free State of
Saxony and of Brandenburg Land are to be involved as well. There is close co-operation with the Working Group "Serbske pomniki - Sorbische Denkmale" [Sorbian Architectural Monuments], which also aims at preserving Sorbian cultural monuments.

- 153 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

As regards the various obligations, the following clarifying and additional points are
made:
Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (a)
(a) to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority
languages and foster the different means of access to works produced in these
languages;
488.
The Foundation for the Sorbian People fulfils its purpose by promoting
individual projects and by supporting institutions dedicated to specific aspects of
maintaining the Sorbian culture, e.g. Domowina Publishing House. The Foundation is
taking great care to achieve inclusion of all forms of cultural expression and artistic
creation. In particular, great store is set not only by providing the basis for preserving
traditional cultural assets but also by ensuring that more recent forms of Sorbian cultural
expression get their due, e.g. by promoting young artists and authors or supporting
innovative art forms.
Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (b) and (c)
(b) to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in
regional or minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing,
post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;
(c) to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other
languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation
and subtitling activities;
489.
Sorbisches Institut (Serbski institut Budyšin - Sorbian Institute) in Bautzen [Saxony] which operates a branch in Cottbus [Brandenburg], a scholarly institution dealing specifically with the Lower Sorbian language - devotes its work not only to preserving the
knowledge of the linguistic heritage, but also to adjusting the development of this language to modern-life aspects. This ensures continuing translatability of texts from one
language into the other. However, the Sorbian Institute does not make its own translations but, instead, only provides the scholarly prerequisites for this.
The most important Sorbian-language newspaper in Brandenburg, Nowy Casnik ("New
Weekly"), regularly publishes articles in German as well. The newspaper's use of both

languages results in greater effectiveness.
Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (d)
(d) to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural
activities of various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the
knowledge and use of regional or minority languages and cultures in the
undertakings which they initiate or for which they provide backing;
- 154 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

490.
The inclusion of Sorbian cultural activities in the work of regional cultural providing bodies is ensured. Under the Saxon Sorbs Act and the Brandenburg Act on the
Specification of the Rights of the Sorbs (Wends), the local self-administration bodies
are obligated to take account of the Sorbian language and culture in their cultural
policy/project planning, and implement this mandate by supporting cultural activities
of associations and of other cultural actors and by including them in their own cultural
projects.
Also, regional cultural activities play a prominent role in the tourist industry, in particular.
Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (e)
(e) to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or
supporting cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full
command of the regional or minority language concerned, as well as of the
language(s) of the rest of the population;
491.
The Foundation for the Sorbian People disposes of staff members having a
good command of the Sorbian language.
492.
In all other respects, the Foundation's structure ensures that Sorbs can
exercise a decisive influence on the allocation of the Foundation's funds. The Director
of the Foundation cannot be elected against the majority of the Sorbian (Wendish)
representatives on the Foundation Board (Stiftungsrat). The majority of representatives on
the Foundation Commission [a committee of the Foundation Board] are Sorbs. To replace the
original unincorporated foundation of 1991, the new, legally autonomous Foundation
has now been established.
493.

[blank]

Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (f)
(f) to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given
regional or minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural
activities;
494.

Cf. the comments on the preceding sub-paragraphs.

Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (g)
(g) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for
collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the
regional or minority languages;

- 155 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

495.
Preservation of the Sorbian (Wendish) cultural heritage is the responsibility of
the Foundation for the Sorbian People. Scholarly assessment and analysis, which also
includes the preservation of testimonies of past times, is incumbent on Sorbisches
Institut in Bautzen, which operates a branch in Cottbus, dealing specifically with the
Lower Sorbian language and culture.
Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (h)
(h) if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and
terminological research services, particularly with a view to maintaining and
developing appropriate administrative, commercial, economic, social, technical
or legal terminology in each regional or minority language.
496.
The work of Sorbisches Institut includes work on recent linguistic
developments, especially as regards technical terms, and on specific technical
languages, such as business/economic terminology and administrative language. It is
ensured that the Lower Sorbian language will remain open also with regard to modern
linguistic developments and will be able to follow and integrate these developments.
Article 12, para. 2
Paragraph 2
In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are
traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority
language justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities
and facilities in accordance with the preceding paragraph.
This obligation has been accepted by Brandenburg Land and the Free State of
Saxony.
497.
In the Federal Republic of Germany, cultural activities complying with the law
in force are not subject to any permit procedure or restrictions. Thus, the above obligation is already fulfilled by the system of law in the Federal Republic of Germany.
498.
Thanks to the broad definition of the specified purposes for which the respective public promotional funds may be used in the context of the cultural work of the
Sorbian people, it is also possible to offer activities outside the immediate language
area.
499.
In response to the Committee's request in Nos. 463 and 510 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] for more information on the implementation of
this undertaking, it is reported that there are only few speakers of the Sorbian
language outside the traditional settlement area. On account of the generous legal
regulation in Section 3, para. 2, of the SWG [Act on the Specification of the Rights of the
- 156 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

Sorbs (Wends)], the traditional settlement area in Lusatia is considered to include also

those areas with only very sparse Sorbian cultural and language traditions; these
areas are covered by Art. 12, para. 1. Outside Lusatia, there are only few Sorbs who
settled there in the course of internal migration and could benefit from cultural
projects designed to present Sorbian culture outside Lusatia.
500.
In their cultural presentation activities, the Land of Brandenburg and the Free
State of Saxony endeavour to accentuate the Sorbian element. In Berlin, for
example, at the Representation of Land Saxony to the Federation, a presentation
was given within the framework of the Woche der sorbischen Kultur [Sorbian Culture
Week]; this year [? 2003], similar activities are planned in the form of readings in the
honour of the Sorbian writer Mato Kossyk at the Representation of Land Brandenburg to the Federation. Exhibitions of the works of visual artists are regularly organized in the rooms of the Brandenburg Ministry of Science, Research and Cultural Affairs in Potsdam; this included, for example, the Sorbian artist Fred Pötsche,
winner of the Cisinski Prize. A Sorbian dance group gave performances on the
occasion of the festivities organized every year on the 'Day of German Unity' [3rd of
October].
501.
are:

Examples of activities pursued outside the traditional Sorbian settlement area

-

The publishing house Domowina-Verlag GmbH regularly presents itself at the
Leipzig Book Fair.

-

The Sorbian National Ensemble presents its programme in many places of the
Federal Republic of Germany.

-

Also, Sorbian Internet sites provide possibilities for worldwide individual
communication.

-

Students have Sorbian youth groups in Leipzig, Berlin, Dresden and Görlitz.

-

In Leipzig, the Institut für Sorabistik of Leipzig University can also be considered
a cultural institution within the meaning of the Charter.

-

The Foundation for the Sorbian People presented its travelling exhibition on the
Sorbs in several places in Germany.

Article 12, para. 3
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy
abroad, for regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.

- 157 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

502.
The work of the Foundation for the Sorbian People ensures that due account is
taken of transborder co-operation, especially with the Slav neighbours. Under Article 2,
para. 2, no. 5, of the State Treaty establishing the Foundation, the promotion of projects
serving to enhance international understanding and co-operation with other ethnic
groups and minorities in Europe and to cultivate the historically evolved relations of the
Sorbs with their Slav neighbours is considered part of fulfilling the objectives of the
Foundation.
The following are examples of transfrontier cultural policy:
1. Brandenburg
503.
Transborder cultural co-operation, especially with Poland, makes appropriate
provision for the Sorbian culture in the sense that Sorbian artists, writers, etc. are regularly involved in jointly organized cultural events ("Poets' Steamer", transfrontier seminars, colloquies, etc.). Transborder co-operation is, in addition, an element of the declared endowment objective of the Foundation for the Sorbian People which is also
subsidized with Land funds.
2. Free State of Saxony
504.

The Free State of Saxony presented itself at the so-called Sächsische Tage
["Saxon Days" festival] in Wrocław/Breslau (Poland) in June 1998. This event involved
the Serbski Muzej Budyšin [Sorbian Museum in Bautzen], with a special exhibition
dedicated to Sorbian traditions and customs, and the Deutsch-Sorbisches Volkstheater [Němsko-Serbske ludowe dźiwadło - German-Sorbian Popular Theatre]
with a performance in the Sorbian language.
Sorbian matters are included in the work of the Saxon-Czech and the Saxon-Slovak
working group, respectively.
505.
In response to the criticism expressed by the Committee of Experts in Nos.
464 and 511 [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that the federal authorities, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, do not make any special provision in this respect, the following
information is provided:
The instruments for promoting cultural programme activities within the framework of
our cultural and educational policies abroad are, on principle, available to all groups
of society in Germany and, of course, to the national groups speaking a regional or
minority language. Consequently, groups can apply for grants for guest-performance
tours abroad if they intend to give their performances in a regional language.
- 158 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

For example, in 2003 the Federal Office sponsored a performance of the Roma
theatre Pralipe in Sevilla/Spain. This theatre group has over the past few years also
received support for many guest-performance tours abroad.
Also, a project with the working title "Platt in den USA" ["Low German in the U.S."] was
under discussion, but ultimately was not realized.
The Foreign Office seeks to achieve an even greater number as before of performances abroad also for the other minority languages. Whether - within the framework of language instruction at schools abroad, and through many cultural activities
of German intermediary organizations - additional scope for giving publicity to the
regional and minority languages spoken in Germany exists, is a question that will
have to be considered on a case-by-case basis.

- 159 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

Article 13
Economic and Social Life
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake within the whole
country:
(a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without
justifiable reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents
relating to economic or social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in
technical documents such as instructions for the use of products or installations;
(b) to prohibit the insertion - in internal regulations of companies and private
documents - of any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or
minority languages, at least between users of the same language;
(c) to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority
languages in connection with economic or social activities;
506.
The obligations under sub-paragraphs (a) and (c) have been accepted by the
Free State of Saxony and Brandenburg Land. These obligations are in compliance
with the established law of the Federal Republic of Germany and thus are fulfilled
nation-wide for all regional or minority languages. Pertinent violations of the legal
order have not become known. Therefore, no special measures had to be taken by
these Länder.
507.
As regards the statement of the Committee of Experts in Nos. 466 and 513 of
the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that it could not conclude that this
undertaking was fulfilled, reference is made to the general observations in No. 248
above with regard to Article 13.
Art. 13, para. 1, sub-para. (d) - Facilitating the Use of the Regional or Minority Language
(d) to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by
means other than those specified in the above sub-paragraphs.
This obligation has been accepted by Brandenburg Land and the Free State of
Saxony.
508.
As regards the statement of the Committee of Experts in Nos. 467 and 514 of
the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that it could not conclude that this
undertaking was fulfilled, reference is made to the general observations in No. 249
above with regard to Article 13.
In addition, it is pointed out that, under the provisions of the Saxon Sorbs Act (SächsSorbG), tax-related matters submitted in Sorbian, either orally or in writing, can be
treated at all times. The Revenue Offices of Bautzen, Bischofswerda and Hoyers- 160 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

werda, also in 2001, did not encounter any problems in this respect. The Revenue
Offices of Bautzen and Hoyerswerda, both located in the Sorbian settlement area,
have bilingual signposting for their premises in both the German and the Sorbian
languages. Also, the letterheads of these Offices are bilingual.
Also, private and local-government initiatives aimed at strengthening village community life are promoted through the Kamenz Amt für Ländliche Neuordnung (ALN - Office for Management of Rural Environment). In this context, it emerged that the Sorbian villages have a relatively intact community life. Already within the framework of the EU
Community Initiative LEADER II, which supported regional activities aimed at the
integrated development of rural areas, one of the designated zones of subsidized
development was the "settlement area of the Sorbs - north eastern part". The followup programme LEADER Plus [LEADER+] also deals with projects in a programmesupported area covering the Sorbian settlement area of the Catholic Sorbs and of
Sorbs living in the environs of Bautzen and partly of Hoyerswerda.
Regarding the LEADER+ area of subsidized development "Upper Lusatia Heath and
Pond Landscape", in the period 2002 - 2006: The guiding concept for the project particularly underlines the bilingualism of this region as a "gateway to Eastern Europe".
Krabat e.V.: The registered association Krabat e.V. pursues, among others, the aim
of supporting awareness-raising with regard to the Sorbian cultural heritage and promoting the Sorbian language as well as contacts with Slav peoples. The project "Auf
den Spuren des Krabat" ["Following the trail of Krabat" *] is linked to a regional development process with intensive common elements regarding projects and implementation. At the same time, it is aimed at networking tourism and other capabilities of this
region. The essential basis of these activities is the region's location in the Sorbian
settlement area and the resultant capabilities in terms of the specific cultural area,
cultural history, economic and social life. The conceptual stages of this work and the
implementation process were supported also with funds allocated under the Directive of the Saxon State Ministry of the Interior to Promote Creation of Regional Development and Action Concepts for Spatial Planning Model Projects.
509.
Use of the Sorbian language in private depends, to a large extent, on the
Sorbian people themselves, especially on whether the language is passed on to their
children. In the central settlements with a large share, or even the majority, of Sorbs,
this is practised to a much greater extent than by Sorbian families in larger places
and towns where they constitute a dispersed minority. In the case of the Sorbs, too,
the existence of many mixed-nationality marriages has an influence on the language
spoken within the family and on the extent to which Sorbian is passed on to the
*

Krabat is a Sorbian legendary figure

- 161 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

children, and thus attendance of Sorbian schools is of particular importance to these
children. Use of the Sorbian language in public is rendered difficult by the fact that
the German-Sorbian settlement area is not generally bilingual but that, as a rule, only
the Sorbs have a command of both languages. Therefore, apart from a number of
exceptions, greater use is being made of German than of the Sorbian language in
public and also in church.
510.
There are many and various ways in which the state promotes the learning
and use of minority languages (cf. the comments on the various obligations). In particular, efforts are encouraged among the general public to keep these languages
alive by using them within the family and in extra-familiar everyday-life situations. In
this regard, the cultural value of the minority languages for Germany's cultural life is
particularly emphasized so that, on the basis of the resultant self-esteem and selfassurance, the younger generation will be more inclined to adopt these languages
and pass them on. On account of the structures established for the administration of
matters of their own concern, the users of Sorbian are provided with the practical
means for using their language also in an extra-familiar context.
511.
Brandenburg Land provides the additional information that the competent
courts (labour courts, social courts) endeavour to make it possible for Sorbian-speaking citizens to submit their requests in this language. At least some of the staff of
these courts have a command of the Sorbian language. If, however, any difficulties
arise in receiving applications, an interpreter will be called in.
Speaking this language is an important additional criterion in recruitment selection.
Also the other public agencies see to it that Sorbian-speaking citizens will not encounter any problems in their dealings with administrative authorities.
Article 13, para. 2
Paragraph 2
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the public
authorities are competent, within the territory in which the regional or minority languages
are used, and as far as this is reasonably possible:
Art. 13, para. 2, sub-para. (c) - Social Care Facilities (c) to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and
hostels offer the possibility of receiving and treating in their own language
persons using a regional or minority language who are in need of care on
grounds of ill-health, old age or for other reasons;
This obligation has been accepted by the Free State of Saxony.

- 162 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Sorbian

512.
As regards the statement of the Committee of Experts in No. 468 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] encouraging the authorities to take the
necessary measures to increase recruitment of bilingual staff, reference is made to
the comments in No. 250 above in respect of Article 13.
513.
Social care facilities in the bilingual region also employ Sorbian staff who are
able to speak Sorbian with Sorbs in need of care. Schweinerden in Kamenz Landkreis has the Catholic Sorbian nursing home for elderly people, "St. Ludmila". In December 2002, the nursing home was replaced by a new building in Crostwitz. The
providing body for this home also offers pastoral care and cultivates the Sorbian
traditions and customs.
However, recruitment of bilingual staff is not pursued expressly by social care facilities.
514.

In the view of the Free State of Saxony, general compliance with the stipula-

tions of this provision with regard to hospitals is, in terms of material and organizational requirements, neither expedient nor feasible. Such compliance could only be
achieved by employing bilingual staff, and this is inconceivable in view of the wide
spectrum of specialization of hospital staff. It can be taken for granted that the Sorbian population has a command of the German language and that consequently no
communication problems will arise. Therefore, from the point of view of hospital planning, generalized provision of services in the minority language will not be possible in
hospitals.
Should any concrete need for action emerge, it is possible, at short notice, to get together with the providing body of the given hospital in order to find a solution that will
take account of the needs of the patients concerned.

- 163 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

- 164 -

Part D: Sorbian

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

D.2.3

Part D: Frisian

North Frisian in the North Frisian speech area in Schleswig-Holstein

Preliminary remarks:
515.
As regards the implementation deficits noted by the Committee of Experts in
its Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], the Land Government takes the view that
assumption of such deficits derives, at least in part, from divergent assessments of
the actual conditions in the North Frisian speech area and on the island of Heligoland. In this regard, the Land Government wishes to clarify that the pertinent requirements do not apply uniformly to Nordfriesland Kreis, but to the more narrowly defined
speech area. Cf. the comments in Nos. 31 and 32 above.
516.

In the Land Government's view, the Committee also takes too little account of

the fact that the basic requirement for fulfilment of the education-related obligations
by the Land - i.e. the parents' wish for Frisian instruction for their children - does de
facto not exist. As the Friesenrat [Frisian Council] sees it, this is due to the fact that
Frisian is not recognized as an "official classroom subject and therefore can be
chosen by pupils only as an additional subject and, in many cases, only at times outside the main school hours. In the Land Government's view, the existence of various
different dialects hampers implementation of undertakings, especially since - as
noted quite rightly by the Committee - the work related to Frisian concentrates, with
the exception of Föhr-Land, on learning Frisian as a foreign language. This inevitably
results in a small number of young people who are willing to study one of the Frisian
dialects.
Article 8
Education
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are
used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching
of the official language(s) of the State:

Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (a) - Pre-School Education (i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or
to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those
pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient; or
if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school
education, to favour and/or encourage the application of the measures referred to
under i to iii above;

- 165 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

Schleswig-Holstein has accepted the obligations under sub-paragraphs (a) (iii) and
(iv).
517.
In the Land of Schleswig-Holstein, the legal basis for providing the possibility
to learn one's own language in the settlement area of the Frisian ethnic group is
Article 5, para. 2, of the Schleswig-Holstein Land Constitution, under which, inter alia,
also the Frisian ethnic group have a right to protection and promotion.
518.

In the period 1993 - 1996, at the initiative of the Gremium für Fragen der

friesischen Volksgruppe beim Schleswig-Holsteinischen Landtag [Body set up by the
Schleswig-Holstein Landtag for Matters of the Frisian Ethnic Group], tests were run in
Schleswig-Holstein nursery schools in Süderende on the island of Föhr and in RisumLindholm to find out whether it is possible, on a sustained basis, to revitalize the
Frisian language already in a nursery-school context. On the basis of the findings
obtained from the Model Test "Erwerb friesischer Sprachkompetenz innerhalb und
außerhalb der Schule" ["Acquisition of Frisian Language Proficiency in School and Informal
Education"], the Frisian language has, in the meantime, been introduced in other
nursery schools in Nordfriesland Kreis.
As stated by Friesenrat Sektion Nord [Frisian Council Section North], there are 14 nursery
schools offering Frisian language activities. These offers range from half an hour per
week of instruction by external Frisian staff to whole-day Frisian work performed by
trained nursery-school teachers. The majority of nursery schools offer Frisian activities on one or two day/s per week. Attendance of Frisian courses in nursery schools
is voluntary.
519.
Contrary to the Committee's conclusion that this undertaking was only partly
fulfilled and with regard to its recommendation that further measures be taken in the
financial and legal areas, cf. No. 173 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final],
Schleswig-Holstein considers this undertaking fulfilled.
520.
Pertinent offers are made even in those places where parents do not request
pre-school Frisian instruction. One problem does, however, exist as regards the lack
of Frisian-speaking nursery-school teachers. However, the providing bodies concerned strive to include such persons during the recruitment process. In addition, a
working panel of nursery-school teachers has been set up, which is supported, inter
alia, by primary-school teachers and by the Frisian Council. In the Land Government's view, it consequently cannot be said that a legal framework is lacking as
regards pre-school education.
521.

[blank]
- 166 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

522.

Part D: Frisian

[blank]

Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (b) - Primary Education (i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
to make available a substantial part of primary education in the relevant regional
or minority languages; or
to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those
pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient;

The Land of Schleswig-Holstein has accepted the obligation under sub-paragraph (b)
(iv).
523.
Frisian is taught at many publicly maintainted schools in the North Frisian
speech area and at a number of schools of the Danish minority. These are mainly
primary schools. As a rule, this instruction is offered as a voluntary optional-subject
course for the 3rd and 4th grades. However, this course is competing with foreignlanguage instruction (mainly English, but also Danish). The willingness of parents to
let their children take part in Frisian classes also depends on whether, and how
much, multilingual instruction is offered to their children.
524.
As regards the Committee's comment that it does not consider this undertaking fulfilled and its recommendation in No. 174 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG
(2002) 4 final] that the authorities should make the teaching of North Frisian an integral
part of the curriculum at least to those pupils whose families so request, it must be
pointed out that in the school year 2002/03, a total number of 1,473 pupils had
Frisian instruction by a total of 29 teachers at 25 schools of all types. Since 1987/88,
the number of pupils participating in such instruction has almost doubled. At three
other schools of the Dänischer Schulverein [Dansk Skoleforening for Sydslesvig - Danish
Schools Association], Frisian is taught by a total number of 4 teachers. Against this
background, the Land Government cannot understand the Committee's critical view
of the fact that Frisian is offered in the form of mostly voluntary foreign-language instruction. The practice of offering Frisian mainly as a foreign-language subject is due
to the fact that Frisian is mostly no longer used as a language in daily life. The Frisian
Council reports, however, that around 20 per cent of those inhabitants of Nordfriesland who identify themselves as Frisians use this language every day. The tendency
of many parents to base their schooling decisions on pragmatic considerations also
results in the fact, regretted by the Committee of Experts, that Frisian courses compete with foreign-language instruction which is also offered at primary schools. Enforcing mandatory instruction, against the parents' declared wish, is alien to the
- 167 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

nature and spirit of the Charter. Therefore, Schleswig-Holstein considers this obligation fulfilled.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (c) - Secondary Education (i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
to make available a substantial part of secondary education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or
to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those
pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered
sufficient;

The Land of Schleswig-Holstein has accepted the obligation under sub-paragraph (c)
(iv).
525.

[deleted: paragraph contained in the 1st State Report]

526.
The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled and, in
No. 175 of its Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], encourages the establishment
of a legal framework and the allocation of adequate resources to secure the implementation of this undertaking. In the Committee's view, Realschulen [secondary technical schools] in the Frisian speech area do not offer any Frisian instruction at all; and
Gymnasien [grammar schools] provide such courses only in their upper classes [second
stage of secondary education].
Schleswig-Holstein considers this obligation to be fulfilled. Frisian is taught at the
Gymnasien in Wyk auf Föhr and Niebüll, at the combined Realschulen of Wyk, Neukirchen, Amrum and Heligoland, at the elementary and secondary modern schools of
Niebüll, Föhr-Ost, Föhr-West, Keitum/Morsum, List, Hörnum, St. Nicolai/Westerland,
Westerland-Nord, Fahretoft, Husum, Emmelsbüll, and at the Westerland Förderschule [special school: school providing special tuition for children with learning difficulties]. The following Frisian dialects are taught: Mooring (Frasch, Freesk), Fering [dialect spoken on the
island of Föhr/Feer], Sölring [dialect spoken on the island of Sylt/Söl], Öömrang [dialect spoken on
the island of Amrum/Oomram] and Halunder [dialect spoken on the island of Heligoland]. Schools
of the Danish minority that offer Frisian instruction are those in Keitum (Sylt), Bredstedt and Risum. The only school using Frisian, in addition to Danish and German, as
a language of tuition is the Risum Skole/Risem Schölj (school in Risum) where
Frisian instruction is mandatory. The following example is given to make quite clear
that the cause of the problem is not the lack of resources: at the Neukirchen Realschule, which also has primary and secondary modern classes, no use at all was
made of the available resources because no pupils had enrolled for the planned
- 168 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

courses. So far, in all cases where Frisian instruction was requested, adequate
resources have been allocated.
Art. 8, para 1, sub-para. (d) - Technical and Vocational Education (i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

to make available technical and vocational education in the relevant regional or
minority languages; or
to make available a substantial part of technical and vocational education in the
relevant regional or minority languages; or
to provide, within technical and vocational education, for the teaching of the
relevant regional or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those
pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered
sufficient;

527.
The obligation flowing from Article 8, para. 1, sub-para. (d), has so far not
been accepted by Schleswig-Holstein Land. Nevertheless, it should be pointed out
that, as of 01 February 2003, Frisian is offered as a 'compulsory subject of choice'
[required elective], covering up to four hours/week, at the Fachschule für Sozialpädagogik [College for Social Pædagogics] in Niebüll (a vocational training school for tutors/educators). To this effect, an agreement was concluded between the Berufliche Schule
[part-time vocational school] of Nordfriesland Kreis in Niebüll and the Friesenrat Sektion
Nord e.V. [Frisian Council Section North]. Initially, Frisian instruction is to be provided
under a joint project of the two parties.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (e) - University and Other Higher Education (ii)

528.

to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher education subjects; or

Frisian is offered as a subject forming part of the course of studies for the

teaching profession for primary and secondary modern schools and Realschulen at
Flensburg University (UF - Universität Flensburg). The Kiel University (Christian-Albrechts-Universität - CAU) offers "Frisian philology" as a post-graduate study subject,
both as a major and minor, for the Master's degree and doctor's degree. In addition,
Frisian studies are offered to students training to become teachers at Realschulen or
Gymnasien. Under the Teacher Examination Regulations which entered into force at
the end of 1999, both universities include Frisian in the course of studies for the
teaching profession, i.e. as a complementary subject (18 - 20 hours/week per
semester) or as an extension subject (e.g. 40 hours/week per semester for teachers
of primary and secondary modern schools) and, from the 2001/02 winter semester
onwards and, upon individual request, as a second subject for teachers at primary
and secondary modern schools.

- 169 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

529.
The courses on offer at Flensburg University are supported by an associate
professorship and lectureships covering 15 hours/week per semester. The associate
professorship, amounting to 6 hours/week per semester is held by the Director of the
Nordfriisk Instituut (NFI - North Frisian Institute) in Bredstedt. In compensation for the
resultant loss of scholarly work capacity, the NFI receives a yearly compensatory
payment. Kiel University has a grade C3 professorship covering eight hours/week per
semester. Kiel University did not fill the post of an Akademischer Rat [a member of the
established academic staff of German universities] which fell vacant in 2002 when its last
holder retired.
530.
For the 2002/03 winter semester, a total number of 15 students were enrolled
for the subject "teaching profession, Frisian" at the Friesisches Seminar [Frisian Institute] of Flensburg University; at Kiel University, five such students were enrolled. For
the Master's course of studies, 9 students majored in Frisian, and 28 students took
Frisian as a minor.
531.

Nordfriesische Wörterbuchstelle (North Frisian Dictionary Institute) at Kiel University (CAU) has been in existence since 1950 and, since 1978, with "Frisian philology" as a study subject, has been the only university institution for scholarly research
on the Frisian language in the Federal Republic of Germany. The professor for
Frisian at Kiel University also is the Director of Nordfriesische Wörterbuchstelle. This
Institute has regular contacts with the Frisian Academy of Leeuwarden [in the Netherlands Province of Friesland], with the Mertens Instituut of the Royal Netherlands Academy
of Sciences, with the professorial chairs for Frisian in Groningen and at the two Amsterdam universities, and with Nordfriisk Instituut (NFI) [North Frisian Institute] in Bredstedt/Bräist [Germany].
532.
As regards the comment of the Committee of Experts in No. 177 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] urging authorities to ensure that sufficient university-level study of Frisian is preserved, reference is made to the comments in Nos.
528, 529 and 531 above.
533.
In future, the universities of Kiel and Flensburg and the Nordfriisk Instituut
plan to co-operate still more closely and to set priorities as regards research on, and
scholarly work for the promotion of, the Frisian language in Schleswig-Holstein. Kiel
University is responsible for linguistic research, development of an electronic language database, and the training of linguists and Frisian teachers for Gymnasien
[grammar schools] and Realschulen [secondary technical schools]. Flensburg University is
responsible for research on language acquisition, literature and regional culture, for
didactics concerning the Frisian language and the region's history and geography,
- 170 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

and for the training of teachers for elementary and secondary modern schools and
Realschulen. The tasks of the Nordfriisk Instituut (NFI) in Bredstedt/Bräist include
research on linguistic practice, the region's history, geography and culture; scholarly
support for the work concerned with practical language use; awareness-raising in
respect of, and documentation on, the Frisian language; and literature and the
region's culture.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (f) (iii) - Adult Education (iii)

if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult education,
to favour and/or encourage the offering of such languages as subjects of adult and
continuing education;

534.
In 2002, three Frisian language courses attended by 41 participants were
held at two adult education centres in Nordfriesland Kreis.
535.
In addition, the accepted obligation is also implemented with the work of
Nordfriisk Instituut [North Frisian Institute] and of other Frisian organizations which in
part are Land-subsidized. As part of their cultural work, the local Frisian organizations
also offer language courses for adults.
536.
A survey conducted by the Nordfriisk Instituut (NFI) showed that more than
200 people attended Frisian language courses in Nordfriesland Kreis and on the
island of Heligoland during the 2002/03 winter semester. NFI said that particular interest in such courses was shown by parents whose children had Frisian as a classroom subject.

Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (g) - Teaching of the History and Culture Education (g)

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is
reflected by the regional or minority language;

537.
Under the federal structure of the Federal Republic of Germany, implementation of this provision is primarily incumbent on the Länder. Within the educational system of the Länder, promoting the knowledge of the culture, history, languages and
religion of the respective minorities/language groups as well as of the majority population is part of the curricula of publicly maintained and private schools. An important
role in imparting knowledge of the culture of the language groups, in and outside
schools, is also played by the state institutions for political education (i.e. the Federal
Centre and the Land Centres for Polical Education). For detailed information on the
aforementioned institutions, cf. the comments in Nos. 179 - 184 in Part C above.

- 171 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

538.
The curricula of publicly maintained schools provide for many ways of dealing
with minority matters in class. Classes for German, Danish, history, arts and music,
and textile handicrafts allow encounters with the Frisian language and culture.
Examples are:
Curriculum "German": "Study of the languages and speech communities in Schleswig-Holstein", or study of the various cultures and languages of the Land.
Curriculum "music": to sing, arrange and play Christmas carols of various forms
and contents (e.g. traditional German, Low German, Frisian, foreign Christmas
carols).
539.
The materials mentioned in Nos. 540 - 543 below have been patterned
closely on the subjects listed in the curricula, and thus provide a concrete aid for
dealing with both the North Frisian language and specific cultural aspects.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (h) - Basic and Further Training of Teachers (h)

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of
paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;

540.
The Land Government provided the legal framework for the professional and
further training of teachers. The IQSH [Institute for Quality Development at Schools] set up a
training group for Frisian at the Regionalseminar Nord [Northern Region Teacher Training College] so that every student teacher who so wishes can be trained for teaching
the subject 'Frisian'. Problems arise in this respect from the fact that the North Frisian
language exists in the form of various different dialects. In view of the requirements
laid down in the Training Regulations for the second stage of teacher training, it is not
always possible to meet the applicants' wishes regarding specific locations so that
trainee teachers must be expected to provide transfer from one dialect to another.
In co-operation with the IQSH, further training courses are organized for Frisian
teachers, and schools are involved in the organization of cultural events in Nordfriesland qua language region. In this context, classroom visits followed by conferences
have been planned and carried out for many years already.
The teachers' work is supported by advisory and further education activities. For this
purpose, a 'Land specialist adviser for Frisian' was appointed. This work is also supported by the provision of classroom materials (Fryske Taal Rotonde) which were
prepared in close co-operation with, and with funding provided by, the Friesenrat
[Frisian Council], and by now are available for several dialects of the North Frisian language.
- 172 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

Also, the learning workshop established at the Nis-Albrecht-Johannsen School in
Risum-Lindholm significantly contributes to the enhancement of classroom instruction. In co-operation with the IQSH, this workshop on a continuous basis develops
new materials - e.g. texts, work sheets, search games, puzzles, songs and video
recordings for the teachers employed in Nordfriesland Kreis. These materials are
available to all teachers.
541.
For many years already, one of the most important tasks of Nordfriisk
Instituut (NFI) has been to help school teachers with Frisian classroom instruction.
This includes information on new publications dealing with didactics and teaching
methodology, and the collection, compilation and evaluation of teaching material and
its distribution.
542.
This work is continued in the Frisian 'learning workshop' where educational
materials, translations of children's books into Frisian, games and audiovisual media
are available to pupils' groups and for follow-up training of teachers. For many years,
Frisian teachers have regularly met in a Working Group. In order to make the results
of the work of the 'learning workshop' available to as many teachers as possible, two
approaches to providing information were adopted. On the one hand, specific opening hours were laid down for teachers while it is also possible to fix dates of one's
own choice. On the other hand, the meetings of Frisian teachers, which were instituted and are organized by the IPTS [Institute for Practical and Theoretical School Matters]
(now: IQSH - Institute for Quality Development at Schools), are used for presenting and
disseminating the newly developed aids and materials. This ensures that all Frisian
teachers will be supplied continuously with new information and media.
543.
Nordfriisk Instituut (NFI) [North Frisian Institute, in Bredstedt] developed a wide
range of material for designing and organizing school activities. It remains to be seen
what the impact of the use of these new materials will be.
544.
As regards the possibility for teachers to take a supplementary exam in
Frisian, cf. the comments in No. 528 above.
545.
In No. 180 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], the Committee of
Experts expresses the opinion that additional efforts are needed for complete fulfilment of this undertaking. The Committee encourages the authorities to ensure that
appropriate facilities for teacher training are in place to meet the needs for education
in North Frisian.
The Land Government considers this obligation to be entirely implemented. It has
provided the legal framework for the professional and further training of teachers. In
- 173 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

view of the guaranteed free choice of subjects of university study and the right freely
to chose one's place of work*, the Land Government cannot control the choices made
by students. Moreover, the potential number of students opting for Frisian as a teaching subject is small on account of the demographic structure. The IQSH [Institute for
Quality Development at Schools] set up a training group for Frisian at the Regionalseminar
Nord [Northern Region Teacher Training College] so that every student teacher who so
wishes can be trained for teaching the subject 'Frisian' (cf. No. 240 [? 540] above).
Problems arise in this respect from the fact that the North Frisian language exists in
the form of various different dialects, and in some cases use of a given dialect is confined to one particular island of the North Frisian group of islands. In view of the requirements laid down in the Training Regulations for the second stage of teacher
training, it is not always possible to meet the applicants' wishes regarding specific
locations so that trainee teachers must be expected to provide transfer from one dialect to another. Also, the expenditure of time and funds required for training on the
North Frisian islands raises quite a few difficulties. Nevertheless, a grammar school
teacher in training will start her second phase of teacher training for the subject
'Frisian' on the island of Sylt in August 2003.
546.
The teachers' work is supported by advisory and further education activities.
For this purpose, a 'Land specialist adviser for Frisian' was appointed. This work is
also supported by the provision of classroom materials (Fryske Taal Rotonde) which
were prepared under a commission and with funding provided by the Friesenrat
[Frisian Council], and by now are available for several dialects of the North Frisian language.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (i) - Supervisory Bodies (i)

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken
and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or
minority languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings which will be
made public.

547.
Responsibility for supervision of the measures taken in primary schools,
secondary modern schools and Realschulen [secondary technical schools] lies with the
supervisory school authorities of the Kreise [administrative districts] and kreisfreie Städte
[non-district municipalities]. The Ministry for Education, Science, Research and Cultural
Affairs of Schleswig-Holstein Land is responsible for the supervision of Gymnasien
[grammar schools] and comprehensive schools.

*

Basic Law, Article 12

- 174 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

548.
As regards the Committee's comment encouraging the authorities to improve
the supervision of the measures taken in the field of teaching, cf. No. 181 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], Schleswig-Holstein considers this undertaking fulfilled. In addition to responsibility for school inspection concerning Gymnasien [grammar schools] and comprehensive schools, the Ministry of Education also has
a section responsible for classroom promotion of Frisian at schools of all types. Moreover, the Ministry co-operates with a public official responsible for expert supervision.
The school supervisory bodies, i.e. the Education Offices of Nordfriesland and Pinneberg (for Heligoland), watch over Frisian. To this end, the Nordfriesland Education
Office every year presents a survey showing how many pupils attended how many
courses at what schools. Surveys of this kind are not carried out for any other subject.
549.

In all other respects, the comments on Danish also apply to North Frisian mu-

tatis mutandis. In the view of the Schleswig-Holstein Land Government, supervision
is ensured through interaction of school inspection (incumbent on the Ministry of Education), expert [administrative/legal] supervision, and the respective supervisory school
authorities [education offices] of Kreise and kreisfreie Städte [non-district municipalities]. Information on the activities of the Frisian ethnic group as regards nursery schools and
regular schools is provided in one of the chapters of the Land Government's 'Minorities Report'. Once per legislative period - last in December 2002 - the Land Government submits its Report on Minorities to the Schleswig-Holstein Landtag.
Article 8, para. 2
Paragraph 2
With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the regional or
minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a
regional or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the
regional or minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.

550.
As regards colleges and universities, this obligation - in the sense of "undertake ... to allow" - is met for the entire territory of the Federal Republic by virtue of
Article 5, para. 3, of the Basic Law (autonomy of institutions of higher education).
551.
Regarding the need for further information, as pointed out by the Committee
of Experts in No. 182 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], it is reported
that Frisian instruction is given at Klaus-Groth-Schule Husum. While the town of
Husum is located in Nordfriesland, it is not part of the more narrowly defined
North Frisian speech area.

- 175 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

Article 9
Judicial Authorities
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents using
the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to the
situation of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the
present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of justice:

Art. 9, para 1, sub-para. (b) (iii) - Civil Proceedings (iii)

552.

to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

With the proviso that documents and evidence drafted in a minority language

must be presented in a form obviating misunderstandings or errors with regard to
their translation, this obligation is met by the legal situation prevailing in Germany.
Therefore, no special measures have been taken.
Art. 9, para 1, sub-para. (c) (iii) - Proceedings before Courts concerning Administrative
Matters in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
(iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

553.

In this regard, cf. the comments in No. 552 above.

554.
As regards this branch of the judiciary, it must be pointed out that administrative courts are obliged to conduct ex officio investigations and, where necessary and
appropriate, will on their own initiative rely on the services of interpreters. Thus, the
members of a given language group suffer no prejudice by the use of their language.
Art. 9, para. 2, sub-para. (a) - Validity of Legal Documents The Parties undertake:
(a) not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because
they are drafted in a regional or minority language; or

555.

In this regard, cf. the comments in No. 552 above.

- 176 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

Article 10
Administrative Authorities and Public Services
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of
regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the
situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:

Art. 10, para. 1, sub-para. (a) (v) - Submission of Documents (v)

556.

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a
document in these languages;

The legal basis for assuming this obligation is Section 82a, para. 2, of the

Land Administration Act. This discretionary regulation provides for the general possibility to submit applications, petitions, records, deeds or other documents in a foreign language, i.e. a language other than the official language.
557.
According to a non-representative survey carried out among subordinate
agencies of the Ministry of the Interior of Schleswig-Holstein Land, use is made of
this possibility, inter alia, by land survey offices [cadastral offices] and by the Land
Statistical Office.
558.
In No. 186 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], the Committee of
Experts expresses the opinion that additional efforts should be made with a view to
creating the conditions encouraging users of North Frisian to use their language before the administrative authorities. Schleswig-Holstein points out that the fact that
only little use is made of the option to submit documents in the North Frisian language would seem basically due to the extremely small number of such documents.
559.
In the Land Government's view, the broader criticism expressed by the Committee that the North Frisian minority has never been encouraged to use North
Frisian in public matters - goes beyond the requirements stipulated in Art. 10, para. 1,
sub-para. (a) (v). Nevertheless, in its information brochure "Sprache ist Vielfalt" ["Language is diversity"], the Land Government pointed out both the respective possibilities
and limits ensuing from the Charter. For example, items 12 to 15 of this brochure
deal specifically with questions regarding relations with administrative authorities.
The brochure was distributed free of charge to all Land authorities, Kreise, Ämter,
and local authorities, and to the organizations of the language minorities. A reprint is
planned to be published.
560.
It should also be pointed out that the Committee' view that the majority of the
North Frisian community is bilingual (standard German/North Frisian) - cf. No. 185 of
the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] - is not correct (see Nos. 31, 32 and 515
- 177 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

above). In addition, it is pointed out that the Frisian ethnic group also includes a
larger group whose language of everyday use is not Frisian, but Low German.
Article 10, para. 2
Paragraph 2
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who are
users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below, the
Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:

Art. 10, para. 2, sub-para. (a) - Use of a Regional or Minority Language (a)

the use of regional or minority languages within the framework of the regional or local
authority;

561.
Schleswig-Holstein has not explicitly adopted this obligation. However, a
large number of staff members of the Ämter [local authority unions] and local authorities
of Nordfriesland Kreis have a good knowledge of the North Frisian language. As a
result, some public service employees, especially in the island communities, deal in
Frisian with personal callers during office hours if the callers so wish. The spoken
message in the wait loop of the telephone system of the Nordfriesland Kreis Administration is given in four languages (German, Frisian, Danish, and Low German).
Art. 10, para. 2, sub-para. (f) - Use by Local Authorities of the Minority Language in
Debates in Their Assemblies (f)

the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

562.
Schleswig-Holstein has not explicitly adopted this obligation. However, on the
North Frisian islands and in Bökingharde Amt, local council meetings are often held
in the Frisian language, provided that no local councillor or visitor attending a meeting
objects to such use.
Art. 10, para 2, sub-para. (g) - Place-names (g)

the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official
language(s), of traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or minority
languages.

563.
Under the Second Act to Implement the European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages, which entered into force on 19 September 2002 [cf. Annex 1 to this
report], Schleswig-Holstein accepted this obligation for the North Frisian language.
This undertaking is implemented by the possibility to put up bilingual place-name
signs (German/Frisian) in the North Frisian speech area (sign 310, under the Road
Traffic Regulations [Highway Code]). The legal basis is provided by a Decree of the
- 178 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

Schleswig-Holstein Land Ministry of Economics, Labour and Transport of 20 August
1997). Interested municipalities in Nordfriesland Kreis can submit applications to this
effect. By 31 December 2002, applications had been filed by ten local governments
(Borgsum/Borigsem on the island of Föhr/Feer; Bredstedt/Bräist; Dagebüll/Doogebel;
Kampen/Kaamp on the island of Sylt/Söl; Nebel/Neebel on the island of Amrum/
Oomram; Niebüll/Naibel; Norddorf/Noorsaarep on the island of Amrum/Oomram;
Risum-Lindholm/Risem-Lonham; Süderende/Söleraanj on the island of Föhr/Feer;
and Utersum/Ödersem on Föhr/Feer). The Frisian ethnic group, Nordfriesland Kreis,
and the local authorities belonging to this Kreis have been informed of this option,
inter alia in the Land Government's brochure entitled "Sprache ist Vielfalt" ["Language
is diversity"] (cf. Item 19 of this brochure).
In January 2003, under a decision on a specific case, the Ministry of Economics,
Labour and Transport approved bilingual or Frisian-language signposting also with
regard to direction signs (sign 386-50, under the Road Traffic Regulations) for the
Frisian cultural centre Andersen-Hüs in Risum-Lindholm.
Article 10, para. 4
Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the
Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:

Art. 10, para. 4, sub-para. (c) - Appointment of Public Service Employees having a
Knowledge of a Regional or Minority Language (c)

compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a
knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which
that language is used.

564.
With a view to implementing this obligation, an announcement to this effect
was made at the Personalreferentenkonferenz (PRK - Conference of Personnel Officers) in 1999 and again in 2003. The PRK brings together the personnel officers of
the supreme Land authorities at regular meetings with the aim of co-ordinating and
harmonizing the essential cross-departmental decisions in the field of personnel
management.
565.
If a staff member within the Land Administration expresses a wish regarding
such an appointment, the scope for complying with the request will be examined. So
far, however, there have been no requests to this effect at the Land Government
level.
566.
In No. 188 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], the Committee of
Experts gave the lack of information on positive practice or a structural approach as
- 179 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

the reason for not being able to conclude that the undertaking[s were/] was fulfilled.
Schleswig-Holstein cannot share this view and points out that, in 2000, a parliamentary debate took place on the requirement that decisions on the recruitment of
staff for Land public service positions should, as a matter of principle, include the
applicants' knowledge of the regional or minority languages as a qualification criterion. The Land Government had welcomed this practice if and where such language
proficiency was required for the specific post. In such cases, knowledge of these languages may be included in the assessment of the aptitude, qualifications and professional achievements of the applicants for such posts.
567.
A survey conducted throughout the Land administration showed that so far
no cases have become known where knowledge of any of the minority languages
Danish, Frisian and Romanes or of the regional language Low German would have
been a prereqisite for appointment to a post. In individual cases, however, knowledge
of any of these languages was included as a criterion in the selection decision.
568.
Within the area of responsibility of the Ministry for the Environment, Nature
Conservation and Agriculture, knowledge of the Frisian language was considered a
positive factor in the selection procedure for recruitment of field staff of the Tönning
National Park Office. For appointments to professorships for Frisian, Danish or Low
German studies, adequate knowledge of these languages is, of course, an indispensable prerequisite.
569.
Within the Husum Police Headquarters, which is responsible for
Nordfriesland Kreis, some 5 % of the staff speak the Frisian language at least so well
that they are able to converse in this language with the citizens of their community.
These officers also indicate their language proficiency on signs on their office doors
and on lapel stickers.
Article 10, para. 5
Paragraph 5
The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or minority
languages, at the request of those concerned.

570.

In this regard, cf. the comments in Nos. 220 - 225 above.

- 180 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

Article 11
Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in
which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that
the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this field,
and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:

Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (b) (ii) - Broadcasting of Radio Programmes (ii)

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;

571.
In 1999 and again in 2003, the Minister-President of Schleswig-Holstein Land
encouraged the radio and TV station programme directors of Norddeutscher Rundfunk (NDR), Zweites Deutsches Fernsehen (ZDF - Second German Television, or Channel
II), DeutschlandRadio, Radio Schleswig-Holstein (R.SH), NORA (NordOstseeRAdio),
delta radio and POWER RADIO Nord as well as the Unabhängige Landesanstalt für
Rundfunk und neue Medien (ULR - Independent Land Supervisory Authority for Broadcasting), the TV stations RTL and SAT1, the Gesellschaft zur Förderung audiovisueller Werke in Schleswig-Holstein mbH (MSH - Limited Liability Company for the Promotion of Audiovisual Works in Schleswig Holstein) and Kulturelle Filmförderung [registered
association Cultural Film Promotion, Schleswig-Holstein] that "further avenues should be
explored for integrating contributions in the minority languages and in the regional
language Low German into their programmes, as a service for the citizens and in
support of this element of the culture of Schleswig-Holstein".
572.

In addition, the following provisions have been laid down:

• The broadcasting corporation under public law (Norddeutscher Rundfunk - NDR)
has the legal mandate to report on the cultural diversity and the special features of
the respective Land and to give its support to the protection of minorities.
• Adequate room must be given in the programme to the North German region, its
culture and language.
• Programming principles for private broadcasting: "Broadcasting programmes shall
contribute (...) to the protection and promotion of minorities (...)."
• Protected minorities have access to the media, and scope for participation, on the
same conditions as other groups of society. The provisions of the Land Broadcasting Act promote programming diversity and the variety of broadcasters.
• The Land Broadcasting Act was amended in 1999. Under this amendment, the
previous Assembly of the supervisory authority ULR [Schleswig-Holstein Land broadcasting institution for private broadcasters] was replaced by a Media Council. Any so-

- 181 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

cially relevant group, organization or association of supraregional standing is entitled to make nominations for the election of the Media Council.
• In addition, the ULR operates two radio broadcasting "Open Channels" in Schleswig-Holstein. Through these Open Channels, anybody who is not a broadcaster
him/herself, can disseminate his/her own contributions via radio broadcasting.
573.
Legal Bases:
Inter-State Treaty on Norddeutscher Rundfunk [NDR State Treaty] (of 26 February
1992): Section 3, para. 3; Section 5, para. 2, 1st sentence; Section 7, para. 2,
3rd sentence;
Inter-State Agreement on the Public Corporation Zweites Deutsches Fernsehen
(ZDF) (of 15 December 2000): Section 5, para. 2;
Land Broadcasting Act (of 22 May 2002): Section 17, para. 2, nos. 1 and 2; Section 24, para. 3; Section 34, para. 1, 1st - 3rd sentences; Section 54, para. 3.
574.

Facts and Examples:

Once per week, the radio programme of NDR 1 - Welle Nord has, since 1989, aired a
1-hour evening broadcast about Schleswig-Holstein, which also includes about 3 ½
minutes in the Frisian language ("Freesk for enarken") - this is a sub-regional broadcast for Nordfriesland Kreis. Also, there are regular 1-hour feature broadcasts in the
Frisian language (e.g. on 1 December 1999: "A nuardfresken eran an üüb sia" - "The
North Frisians and the Sea").
At irregular intervals, R.SH [Schleswig-Holstein Radio] airs a 1-hour special single-subject
broadcast in the Frisian language at 19.00 hours, in the sub-regional transmission
area of the entire West coast and the Flensburg/Schleswig area.
From October 1999 until December 2000, a programme of Radio Friislon was broadcast by Offener Kanal Westküste (Heide/Husum) on every first Monday of the month
(at 15.00 - 15.30) and was repeated on every third Monday at the same time. Radio
Friislon is open to the diversity of languages spoken in Nordfriesland, the 'land of
languages', and especially to the Frisian language with its various dialects. The
programme was produced by Nordfriisk Instituut (NFI), in co-operation with the "ferian
för en nuurdfresk radio (ffnr)" [Association for a North Frisian Radio Station]. The broadcasting station NDR provided its contributions to this programme free of cost. The
presenters of Radio Friislon were trained by NDR 1 - Welle Nord. So far, a total of
eight Frisian-speaking staff members received such training.
575.
The view expressed by the Committee of Experts in Nos. 190 - 192 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] - i.e. that the obligation is not yet fulfilled prompted the Minister-President to inform, in writing, the directors and managers of
public-service and private broadcasting institutions of the Committee's findings [letter
- 182 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

of 9 January 2003]. At the same time, she once more encouraged the addressees "to

support, to the best of their ability, the presence of minority languages in TV and
radio broadcasts, in the print media and in promoting audiovisual works, and to focus
their programming on new lines".
576.
The supervisory authority ULR provides considerable funds for a project
actively supporting both the Danish minority and the Frisians with their own production of TV and radio broadcasts. A pertinent contract was signed with a private media
office in December 2002. The contract covers development of a strategy for activating the minorities (the Danes as regards television, and the Frisians as regards
radio broadcasting) in order to design and produce contributions for the citizens'
media. It is planned to air these programmes on Offener Kanal Flensburg und Westküste [Open Channel 'Flensburg and Western Coast']. No provisional results are yet
available.
577.

A big success was the Frisian story-telling competition "Ferteel iinjsen" ["Tell a
tale"] advertised in 2001 by the radio station NDR jointly with the Nordfriisk Instituut
(NFI), Nordfriesland Savings Bank and Bredstedt Savings and Loan Bank, which
drew contributions from 75 interested participants. The winners' stories were presented at a large public event in Niebüll and also aired on NDR Welle Nord.
578.
The private broadcasting station Radio Schleswig-Holstein (R.SH) aired several magazine programmes in the Frisian language, mainly on current affairs.
579.
In 1999 and 2000, the Nordfriisk Instituut, in co-operation with the ferian för
en nuardfresk radioo [ffnr - Association for a North Frisian Radio Station] produced a monthly
magazine programme of "Radio Friislon". The aim was to show that it is possible to
produce extensive, attractive Frisian-language programmes. The magazine
programmes were recorded on CD's and also aired by Offener Kanal Westküste
[Open Channel West Coast]. However, this station does not cover all parts of the Frisian

speech area. Because of the costs involved, the ULR has so far not been able to
comply with the wish for remedying this situation.
580.
For the production of Frisian video films, a studio was set up in 2001, with
project funds provided by the Federation, in the assembly building of Friiske Foriining
[Frisian Association] in Stedesand. The project was sponsored by the Nordfriisk Instituut
in co-operation with the Frisian youth group Rökefloose and was completed by mid2002.
581.
The private media bureau Riecken, formerly in Kiel, since 1 February 2003 in
Rausdorf near Trittau, lately has made itself a name with its productions. Under a
- 183 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

commission by the Friesischer Radioverein (ffnr - Association for a North Frisian
Radio Station), Frisian-language documentary films have been made since the summer of 2002 on a two-monthly basis. So far, the following films were produced or
have been shown on TV or at the cinema:
Delegasjon üt Berlin än Kil tu besäk bai e nordfriiske [A delegation from Berlin and Kiel
visits the North Frisians] (around 10 minutes]
100 iir Nordfriesischer Verein [The 100th anniversary of the North Frisian Association]
(around 2 minutes)
Wat deet Berlin for e nordfriiske? - Friiske önj e bundesdäiswoolkampf 2002 [What
does Berlin do for the North Frisians - Frisian in the Bundestag election campaign 2002]

(18 minutes)
Apätj unti dilätj? - E tukamst foon e nordfriiske spräke [Upwards or downwards? - The
future of the North Frisian language] (20 minutes)
Short versions of all of these films are available on the Internet (www.ffnr.de), and
full-length versions are shown by Offener Kanal Flensburg, at public screen showings
in Nordfriesland, and on video cassettes for sale.
In addition to this, the media bureau produces, for the ffnr, monthly Frisian-language
Internet radio items of about 4-minutes' length and entitled "Radio Redbad". These
are reports, reflecting the point of view of the Frisian ethnic group, on subjects such
as culture and minorities policy.
Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (c) (ii) - Broadcasting of Television Programmes (ii)

582.

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;

In this regard, cf. the comments in Nos. 571 - 581 above.

583.
The Schleswig-Holstein-Magazin - which is aired daily, except on Sundays often includes broadcasts on the Frisian tradition and culture, e.g. "Jahrhundertstory"
["Story of the Century"]. The regional programmes of Zweites Deutsches Fernsehen
(ZDF - Second German Television) also air broadcasts on the Frisian language as part of
current affairs reporting or with reference to events of particular significance.
Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (d) - Audio and Audiovisual Works (d)

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in the regional or minority languages;

584.
The programming principles laid down for public service broadcasting and for
private broadcasting provide an indirect incentive: Broadcasting programmes shall
- 184 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

contribute (...) to the protection and promotion of minorities (...). In addition, subsidies
may be granted. The relevant provision reads as follows:
"The Unabhängige Landesanstalt für Rundfunk und neue Medien (ULR) is entitled
to provide financial support to non-profit organizations with cultural (...) aims, especially in the audiovisual sector (...)."
Additional support is provided by the Gesellschaft zur Förderung audiovisueller Werke in Schleswig-Holstein mbH (MSH - Limited Liability Company for the Promotion of Audiovisual Works in Schleswig-Holstein). MSH obtains funds from the NDR broadcasting corporation and from ULR [the Schleswig-Holstein supervisory authority for private broadcasters].
These funds are used for the promotion of commissioned productions and coproductions in the cinema sector, television and sound broadcasting.
In 2001 the Riecken media bureau, in co-operation with R.SH, produced four 1-hour
radio programmes in the Frisian language as part of a MSH-sponsored measure.
585.
Legal Basis:
Land Broadcasting Act of 22 May 2002: Section 24, para. 3; Section 53, para. 2; Section 73, para. 2
586.
Otherwise, it is left to the (linguistic) minorities, on the basis of the cultural
promotion by the Land and of the principle of self-government, to decide on pertinent
measures and to implement these within the limits of the overall funds available. In
addition, four 1-hour magazine programmes entitled "Friesische Perspektiven" were
produced for Radio Schleswig-Holstein (R.SH). These programmes were promoted
by MHS.
Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (e) (ii) - Newspaper Articles (ii)

to encourage and/or facilitate the publication of newspaper articles in the regional
or minority languages on a regular basis;

587.
There is little scope for [state] intervention on account of freedom of the press
as guaranteed by the Constitution (in this respect, cf. the general explanations in
Nos. 226 - 239 above).
588.

However, the Verband der Zeitungsverlage Norddeutschland e.V. [Association
of Newspaper Publishers for Northern Germany] takes the protection of minorities and of
linguistic groups very seriously. For this reason, and thanks to editorial work offered
free of charge by the Nordfriisk Instituut (NFI) and on acccount of requests to this
effect by readers, reports in the Frisian language have become an integral part of a
number of newspapers in the North Frisian speech area.
- 185 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

589.

Part D: Frisian

In addition, in 1999 and again in 2003 in letters addressed, inter alia, to the

Zeitungsverlegerverband Schleswig-Holstein e.V. [Schleswig-Holstein Association of Newspaper Publishers, reg'd], the Minister-President of Schleswig-Holstein Land encouraged
the addressees to integrate "linguistic particularities which determine the specificity of
our Land" in their publications; intensification of first action already taken in this
respect would be welcomed.
590.
In the North Frisian speech area, the following daily newspapers carry journalistic texts in the Frisian language once per month (1/2 page): Der Insel-Bote [Island
Herald], Husumer Nachrichten [Husum News], Nordfriesland Tageblatt [Nordfriesland Newspaper] and Sylter Rundschau [Sylt Review]. The texts are written or edited by the Nordfriisk Instituut (NFI).
Also, North Frisian articles are published at irregular intervals in Nordfriesland
(monthly journal, ed. by NFI), Flensborg Avis, Der Helgoländer (a monthly for the
island of Heligoland), and Sylt Aktuell (a weekly publication for the island of Sylt).
The following monolingual newspapers are published in Frisian: En krumpen üt e
Wiringhiird (published by Nordfriesischer Verein der Wiedingharde three to four times
a year at irregular intervals), Nais aw frasch [Frisian News] (published by Friiske Foriining two to three times a year at irregular intervals) and Di Mooringer Krädjer (published about two times per year at irregular intervals).
591.
In No. 195 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], the Committee of
Experts states that further information is needed for an assessment of whether this
undertaking is fulfilled. In this regard, it is pointed that the Minister-President, by letter
of 9 January 2003 (cf. No. 314 above), also informed the Verband der Zeitungsverlage Deutschland e.V. [Association of Newspaper Publishers for Germany] in Kiel of the Committee's findings, stressed the need for further efforts and encouraged the Verband "to
support, to the best of [their] ability, the presence of minority and regional languages
in TV and radio broadcasts, in the print media and in the context of promoting audiovisual works, and to focus their programming on new lines".
Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (f) (ii) - Financial Assistance for Audiovisual Productions (ii)

to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions
in the regional or minority languages;

592.
Direct financial assistance by the State is problematic, due to the freedom of
broadcasting as guaranteed by the Constitution (in this respect, cf. the comments in
Part D, No. 230 above).

- 186 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

593.
Subsidies may be granted, however. The relevant provision reads as follows:
"The Unabhängige Landesanstalt für Rundfunk und neue Medien (ULR) is entitled
to provide financial support to non-profit organizations with cultural (...) aims, especially in the audiovisual sector (...)."
Additional support is provided by the Gesellschaft zur Förderung audiovisueller Werke in Schleswig-Holstein mbH (MSH - Limited Liability Company for the Promotion of Audiovisual Works in Schleswig-Holstein). MSH obtains funds from the NDR broadcasting corporation and from ULR [the Schleswig-Holstein supervisory authority for private broadcasters].
These funds are used for the promotion of commissioned productions and coproductions in the cinema sector, television and sound broadcasting.
Legal Basis:
Land Broadcasting Act of 22 May 2002: Section 24, para. 3; Section 53, para. 2; Section 54, para. 3; Section 73, para. 2.
594.
As regards the Committee's request for examples of cases where financial
assistance has been provided - cf. No. 196 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG
(2002) 4 final] - it is reported that only very little use is made by eligible producers of the
existing possibilities for obtaining promotional funding, although producers are aware
of such possibilities. Kulturelle Filmförderung Schleswig-Holstein e.V. [Cultural Film
Promotion, Schleswig-Holstein] reported that, since 2000, no eligible producer had applied
for financial assistance to productions in the Frisian language. Therefore it is not
possible at present to give any examples.
Art. 11, para. 2 - Freedom of Direct Reception of Broadcasts, and Freedom of Expression
Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television broadcasts
from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or
minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from
neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure that no restrictions
will be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of information in the written press
in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of
the above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to
such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in
a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for
the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the
reputation or rights of others, for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or
for maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.

For the relevant implementation measures, cf. the detailed comments on paragraph 1
of Article 11, above.

- 187 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

Article 12
Cultural Activities and Facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities - especially libraries, video libraries, cultural
centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film
production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries, including
inter alia the use of new technologies - the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such
languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play
a role in this field:

Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (a) - Types of Expression, and Access to Works (a)

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority
languages and foster the different means of access to works produced in these
languages;

595.
The aim of this obligation is to promote initiatives which are typical of the
forms of cultural expression specific to regional or minority languages. As in the case
of other obligations under Article 12, implementation of this obligation is
accomplished indirectly through Land promotional measures for Frisian institutions.
596.
The local Frisian associations engage in many and various cultural activities.
Inter alia, they offer language courses for adults, organize events for children, support Frisian stage productions, maintain traditional costume societies, and on 21
February [St. Peter's Day] of every year, organize the traditional local festival called
"Biikebrennen" [a bonfire to expel winter]. Some of these projects are supported with
public funds.
597.
Of great importance to the cultivation of the Frisian language, culture and
history is the Nordfriisk Instituut (NFI, Nordfriesisches Institut - North Frisian Institute)
in Bredstedt, as a central scholarly institution in Nordfriesland. The Institute sees its
role as a bridge between theory and practice, between scholarly work and nonspecialist research. In particular, its scholarly and journalistic activities cover the languages, history, and study of the geography and civilization of Nordfriesland. It has a
specialized library and archives, and organizes seminars, courses, workshops and
lectures. The Institute's providing body is the association Verein Nordfriesisches Institut, with a membership of about 850. The work of the Institute is funded with substantial subsidies provided by Schleswig-Holstein Land. Funding is also provided by local
authorities and by the Danish minority. In addition, own resources are available in the
form of membership dues, donations and sales revenues.
598.
In addition, funds from the Land Budget - institutional funding and project
funds - including the annual interest earnings of the projected foundation "Friesenstiftung", which also can be used for pertinent measures to implement this obligation,
- 188 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

are made available to the Friesenrat Sektion Nord e.V. [Frasche Rädj - Frisian Council,
Nordfriesland Section].
In 1993, the Secretariat of Nordfriesischer Verein e.V. [North Frisian Association, reg'd]
was moved to "Andersen-Hüs" in Klockries, in Risum-Lindholm (Risem-Lonham) Gemeinde. This Uthland-Frisian farmstead, which is a scheduled monument, was
thoroughly renovated with funding provided by the Land.
599.
The Federal Republic of Germany has not explicitly adopted this obligation.
However, general promotion of the cultural interests of the Frisian ethnic group is provided within the framework of project-oriented promotion.
Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (b) - Access to Works in the (Minority) Languages (b)

to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in regional
or minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;

600.

The institutions of the Frisian ethnic group, especially Nordfriisk Instituut (NFI
- North Frisian Institute) in Bredstedt/Bräist, can make use of promotional funds of
Schleswig-Holstein Land for the translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and
subtitling of works into, or in, the Frisian language. Through its own publishing house
and in co-operation with other publishers, the NFI publishes journals and books in the
German and Frisian languages.
601.
In addition, project funds from the Land budget and the annual interest earnings of the projected foundation "Friesenstiftung", which can be used for projects and
publications of all Frisian associations and unions, are made available to the Friesenrat Sektion Nord e.V. [Frasche Rädj - Frisian Council, Nordfriesland Section]. Such use includes translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling of works into, or in,
the Frisian language.
602.
In the past, Nordfriisk Instituut (NFI), working with Frisian associations and
the Nordfriesische Wörterbuchstelle [North Frisian Dictionary Institute] of Kiel University,
fostered the different means of access, in other languages, to works produced in the
North Frisian language. Thus, extracts of Frisian-language publications were translated into other languages (German, Danish, English, Dutch/Flemish, West Frisian).
Several books were published as bilingual (Frisian-German) editions.
603.
The Frisian-language film "Klaar Kiming" ["Clear Visual Horizon"] was subtitled in
German, English and Danish. Occasionally, Frisian-language radio broadcasts are
dubbed or translated into German. Standard-German translations are provided for
- 189 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

audio cassettes of Frisian songs. Frisian dictionaries always give the German and, in
part, also the Danish or English equivalents, so as to facilitate access to the North
Frisian language.
Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (c) - Access to Works Produced in Other Languages (c)

to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages
by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling
activities;

In this regard, cf. the comments in Nos. 600 - 603 above.
604.
In 2002, the Riecken media bureau, under a commission of the North Frisian
Institute (NFI), dubbed two series of ten West Frisian animated cartoons each (Boor
Buulu), of about 50-minutes' length, in Mooringer frasch [Frisian of the Bökingharde region]
and in Fering [Föhr/Feer Frisian]. The sponsoring NFI receives substantial Land subsidies. The dubbed video films meet with an enthusiastic response by nursery schools,
regular schools and Frisian nurseries.
Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (d) - Taking Account of the Regional or Minority Language in
Cultural Activities (d)

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of
various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of
regional or minority languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or
for which they provide backing;

605.
With promotional funds provided by Schleswig-Holstein, the institutions of the
Frisian ethnic group and/or its appointed bodies for the cultural self-management of
the Frisian ethnic group ensure that appropriate allowance is made for incorporating
the knowledge and use of the North Frisian language and the Frisian culture in their
cultural activities.
606.
Many museums in Nordfriesland Kreis have multilingual inscriptions,
including the Frisian language. In view of the diversity of languages used in
Nordfriesland, it is not possible, with regard to multilingual inscriptions, to make a
recommendation that would fit all institutions involved. Account must be taken of
place-specific interests and regional case-by-case decisions.
Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (e) - Employment of Staff Proficient in the Language(s)
Concerned (e)

to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting
cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of the regional

- 190 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

or minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest of the
population;

607.
Activities regarding the Frisian culture and language are offered, for the
major part, by institutions, e.g. Nordfriisk Instituut (NFI, North Frisian Institute), and
associations of the Frisian ethnic group, which are subsidized by Schleswig-Holstein
Land. In addition, federal and Land funds can be allocated for project promotion on a
case-by-case basis. State-provided subsidies can also include funds for covering
personnel expenses.
Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (f) - Participation of Representatives of the Group Speaking the
Given Language in Cultural Activities (f)

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or
minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

608.
Every two years, Schleswig-Holstein Land organizes the Schleswig-HolsteinTag [a "day" dedicated to the special character of the Land] as a central cultural event. The
organizations and associations of the Frisian ethnic group are also invited to participate in this event and to take part in arranging and organizing it. Through SchleswigHolsteinischer Heimatbund (SHHB) [Schleswig-Holstein Union for Local and Regional
Traditions], Nordfriesischer Verein e.V. [North Frisian Association, reg'd] - its present
chairman is a member of the executive board of SHHB - is represented on the Landkuratorium Schleswig-Holstein-Tag. By letter of 6 June 2003, the Minister-President's
Commissioner for Minorities suggested to the festival's organizing body, Landeskuratorium Schleswig-Holstein-Tag, that Friesenrat Sektion Nord e.V. should be invited to
membership on the Kuratorium in order to cover the entire spectrum of the Frisian
ethnic group.
609.

Within the framework of [the Hanover World Exposition] EXPO 2000, a total of
more than twenty Danish and German libraries and the Frisian library of Nordfriisk
Instituut (NFI) jointly developed a one-week programme as part of the regional
EXPO events in order to give a picture of the region's cultural and library scene which
in this form is unique in Germany and Denmark, by organizing many and various
activities featuring various places and subjects.
Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (g) - Creation of Archive Bodies (g)

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for
collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the
regional or minority languages;

- 191 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

610.
The Land-subsidized Nordfriisk Instituut (NFI, North Frisian Institute) in
Bredstedt has a specialized library and archives available for the collection, storage
or publication of works produced in the Frisian language.
Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (h) - Translation and Terminological Research Services (h)

if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and terminological
research services, particularly with a view to maintaining and developing appropriate
administrative, commercial, economic, social, technical or legal terminology in each
regional or minority language.

611.
In Schleswig-Holstein, implementation of this obligation is indirectly achieved
by promotional funds provided by the Land to the Nordfriisk Instituut (NFI, North Frisian
Institute) and to other Frisian organizations. For further details, cf. also the comments
above on Article 8.
612.
Of the total number of nine North Frisian local idioms*, three - which are
spoken by less than 150 persons - are acutely threatened by extinction. The other six
local idioms are not only used orally but also exist in written form. Their orthography
for the major part is based on uniform rules. The first book in the North Frisian language was published in 1809. Since then, a large body of Frisian-language literature
has been created, which covers several hundreds of books and, in addition, several
thousands of literary items in a variety of publications. This ensures that the Frisian
language also meets the requirements expected of a modern means of communication.
Article 12, para. 2
Paragraph 2
In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are
traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language
justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in
accordance with the preceding paragraph.

613.
In the Federal Republic of Germany, cultural activities conforming with the
law in force are not subject to any permit procedure or restrictions. Thus, the above
obligation is already fulfilled by the system of law in the Federal Republic of
Germany. More extensive implementation of this obligation by encouraging or
providing such activities will have to be decided by the Länder on a case-by-case

*

inter alia, Sölring (Frisian spoken on the island of Sylt/Söl); Fering-Öömrang (Frisian spoken on
the islands of Föhr/Feer and Amrum/Oomram); Halunder (Frisian spoken on the island of Heligoland); Wiringhiirder freesk (Frisian spoken in the Wiedingharde region); Mooringer frasch
(Frisian spoken in the Bökingharde region, around Niebüll/Naibel); Noordergooshiirder fräisch
(Frisian spoken in the Norder Goesharde region); Halifreesk (Frisian spoken on the holms)

- 192 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

basis. Cultural events and activities are offered, if there is a demand for them, outside
the Frisian language area (Nordfriesland Kreis).
614.
Participation in the Schleswig-Holstein-Tag, which is held every two years in
varying places of Schleswig-Holstein, also includes associations and groups dressed
in traditional costumes from Nordfriesland. The Landeskuratorium Schleswig-Holstein-Tag and the Land Government welcome the fullest participation possible of
associations, clubs and unions from the entire Land.
Article 12, para. 3
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for
regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.

615.
Frisians do not only live in Schleswig-Holstein, but also in the Saterland of
Lower Saxony and in the Netherlands province of Friesland. The joint umbrella organization of the West, East and North Frisians is Interfrasche Rädj [Interfriesischer Rat Inter-Frisian Council]. It has 27 members - nine each from its three Friesland Sections
[i.e. Sections North, East, and West]. The Inter-Frisian Council has the legal form of an association. The association's headquarters is in the town of Leer in Ostfriesland [in Lower Saxony]. Under its Articles of Association, the objectives of the Inter-Frisian Council
include the preservation, promotion and presentation of the Frisian culture and the
development and maintenance of contacts with Frisians outside West, North and
East Friesland.
The Friesenrat Sektion Nord e.V. [Frasche Rädj / Frisian Council - Section North, i.e. Nordfriesland] is supported with funds of Schleswig-Holstein Land.
616.
For measures relating to Germany's cultural policy abroad, cf. No. 505
above.

- 193 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

Article 13
Economic and Social Life
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake within the whole country:
(a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without
justifiable reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to
economic or social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical
documents such as instructions for the use of products or installations;
(b) to prohibit the insertion - in internal regulations of companies and private documents of any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or minority languages, at
least between users of the same language;
(c) to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority languages in
connection with economic or social activities;

617.
The obligations under sub-paragraphs (a) and (c) have been accepted by the
Land. These obligations are in compliance with the established law of the Federal
Republic of Germany and thus are fulfilled nation-wide for all regional or minority
languages. Therefore, no special measures had to be taken by the Länder.
In this regard, cf. also the comments in Nos. 245 - 248 above.
Art. 13, para. 1, sub-para. (d) - Facilitating the Use of the Regional or Minority Language
(d)

to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by means other
than those specified in the above sub-paragraphs.

618.
In Germany, freedom to use one's own language - in private and in public - is
ensured by Article 2, para. 1, of the Basic Law, which guarantees the right to free
development of one's personality. Use of minority languages in public is generally
accepted by the German population. No reservations exist in this respect.
619.
The North Frisian language still is, to a major extent, the language spoken
within the family and the language for communication in public, especially among the
Frisians living on the islands and in the northern continental region (extending from
the German-Danish border to the town of Bredstedt/Bräist). In mixed-language marriages, German and Frisian are increasingly being used as languages of equal rank.
620.
There are many and various ways in which the state promotes the learning
and use of minority languages (cf. the comments on the various obligations). In particular, efforts are encouraged among the general public to keep these languages
alive by using them within the family and in extra-familiar everyday-life situations. In
this regard, the cultural value of minority languages for Germany's cultural life is
particularly emphasized so that, on the basis of the resultant self-esteem and selfassurance, the younger generation will be more willing to adopt these languages and
pass them on.
- 194 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

Article 14
Transfrontier Exchanges
The Parties undertake:
(a)

to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the States in which
the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if necessary to seek to conclude such
agreements, in such a way as to foster contacts between the users of the same language in the
States concerned in the fields of culture, education, information, vocational training and
permanent education;

621.
As regards the Frisian language, this obligation is fulfilled by promotion of
Frisian also in the Kingdom of The Netherlands where, in Friesland Province, the
largest of the surviving Frisian language groups live and are protected by the state. In
both countries, state-sponsored support in the Netherlands and in Germany has in
both countries helped to establish structures fostering contacts between the users of
the same language - i.e. Frisian, in a wider sense - in the fields mentioned in subpara. (a) of Art. 14.
622.

In 1999, the previous working group Interfrasche Rädj (Interfriesischer Rat Inter-Frisian Council), which since 1925 had been the joint organization of West, East
and North Friesland, was transformed into a registered association to act as the
umbrella organization of the West, East and North Frisians. It is composed of
members from all three Friesland regions, and organizes the Friesenkongress
[Frisians' Congress] in a three-year sequence. The North Frisian organizations work
together within the Frasche Rädj, Sektion Nord e.V. (Frisian Council - Section North (Nordfriesland)) which is supported with funds provided by Schleswig-Holstein Land.

623.

[deleted: paragraph contained in the 1st State Report]

624.
As regards the comment of the Committee of Experts in No. 213 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that the undertaking was not fulfilled, reference is
made to on-going talks between the Friesenrat Sektion Nord e.V. and the SchleswigHolstein Land Government about the conclusion of a cultural agreement between
Schleswig- Holstein Land and the Netherlands. However, these negotiations are in
their initial stages, and their eventual outcome is still open.
625.
In No. 214 of its Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], the Committee of Experts stated that, while the measures reported by Germany would comply with the
undertaking in option (b) of Art. 14, this option had not been chosen by the Federal
Republic for North Frisian. This raises the question as to the feasibility of exchanging
pertinent obligations since the Charter does not provide for such adjustments. In this
respect, cf. the comments in No. 116 above.

- 195 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

D.2.4

Part D: Frisian

Saterland Frisian (Seelterfräisk)* in the Sater Frisian speech area
(Seelterlound) in Lower Saxony

Article 8
Education
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are
used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching
of the official language(s) of the State:

Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (a) - Pre-School Education (i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or
to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those
pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient; or
if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school
education, to favour and/or encourage the application of the measures referred to
under i to iii above;

Lower Saxony has entered into the obligation under sub-paragraph (a) (iv).
626.
In response to the recommendation made by the Committee of Experts in
No. 215 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that a legal framework be
established and adequate resources be allocated, Lower Saxony provides the following information:
The Lower Saxony Children's Day-Care Centres Act (KitaG) gives the providing
bodies of children's day-care centres (municipalities, private providing bodies) the
option to set pedagogic priorities of their own choice in their day-care centres. In
the Saterland, the providing bodies concerned make use of this option, as evidenced by the marked progress made in the cultivation of Sater Frisian thanks to
the activities pursued at the local level: regular meetings of the voluntary helpers
for exchanges of experience; organization of festivals focusing on Sater Frisian
customs; and various further education activities for specialized staff and voluntary
helpers. In addition, nursery-school children who take part in group activities
aimed at imparting knowledge of Sater Frisian, will, at the end of a nursery-school
year, receive a certificate designed to provide a positive feedback and an incentive
to continue participation in such activities.

*

spoken in three slightly different local varieties: the idioms of (the villages of) Strukelje/Strücklingen,
Roomelse/Ramsloh and Schäddel/Scharrel

- 196 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (e) (ii) - University and Other Higher Education (ii)

to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher
education subjects; or

627.
Lower Saxony does not offer specific Frisian teacher training to supplement
the course of studies offered in Schleswig-Holstein.
628.
Research on the Saterland Frisian history, culture and language generally is
of more recent date. Sater Frisian has not been handed down as a written language.
A known work is a collection of Sater Frisian proverbs, dating from the year 1901. It
was only after World War II that the first spelling rules were laid down for this language. In 1980, a "Saterland Frisian Dictionary" was published; a revised and significantly enlarged second edition is in preparation. Further publications are compilations
of texts, such as "Saterfriesisches Volksleben" ["Sater Frisian Folkloric Life"] and "Saterfriesische Stimmen" ["Sater Frisian Voices"].
629.
In response to the recommendation made by the Committee of Experts in
No. 216 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that research into, and facilities for studying, the language should be ensured, Lower Saxony provides the following information:
At Oldenburg University, Dr. Marron Fort pursues research on, and teaching of,
the Sater Frisian language and has published definitive works on this subject, including a Sater Frisian dictionary with a grammatical outline. Despite his long-time
commitment to this scholarly work, there is not much demand by students for such
studies. In a target agreement discussion, it was suggested - with reference to the
Charter - that such teaching offers should be maintained after Dr. Fort's retirement
on 31 October 2003.
However, the university's management attached greater importance to other
priorities, especially since the lack of demand did not, as the management asserted, point to any concrete requirements to be met in this respect.
Professor Stellmacher, of Göttingen University, directs his teaching and research
activities to both the Low German and the Sater Frisian languages.
630.
The Land considers the undertaking fulfilled since no restrictions are applied
and universities can, on the basis of their autonomy, offer facilities for the study of
this language at all times.

- 197 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (f) (iii) - Adult Education (iii)

if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult education,
to favour and/or encourage the offering of such languages as subjects of adult and
continuing education;

631.

Katholisches Bildungswerk Saterland [Saterland Catholic Educational
Association] once per year offers the course "Saterländisch sprechen und lesen"
["Speaking and reading Sater Frisian"]; this course covers ten 2-hour evening classes.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (g) - Teaching of the History and Culture Education (g)

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is
reflected by the regional or minority language;

632. Under the Lower Saxony Schools Act, pupils shall be enabled to develop their
faculties of perception and sensitivity and their capacity for expressing themselves,
with the inclusion of the relevant regional variety of Frisian. Implementation of this
mandate in classroom instruction can be supported by all school subjects. This calls
for a differentiated support system. (Cf. also Nos. 633, 634, 636 - 638 and 640 below).
633.
The Sater Frisian language is a classroom subject at all elementary schools
of the Saterland. At Ramsloh primary school, one teacher teaches Sater Frisian for a
total of three hours in grades 1 to 4. At Strücklingen primary school, the 2nd grade
has two 1-hour lessons of Sater Frisian per week, the 3rd grade has one hour/week,
and the 4th grade has two hours/week. Also at Scharrel primary school, each pupil
can take part in a one-hour Sater Frisian activity group per week; at Sedelsberg primary school, two voluntary teachers offer voluntary Sater Frisian classes to all
grades. As of 1 August 2003, one teacher will teach Sater Frisian for 4 hours per
week. At Saterland Schulzentrum, two activity groups of 5th- and 6th-grade pupils
have two hours of Sater Frisian lessons. Overall, 182 pupils in 5 learning groups (primary school, and lower secondary grades) at present receive this Sater Frisian instruction which covers a total of 13 hours per week (the number of all pupils of
grades 1 to 5 is 1,085).
634. Following the "Model Test: Bilingualism in Nursery School" (1997/98), Ostfriesische Landschaft was, for seven European speech communities, the overall project
manager of the EU Project "Multilingualism in Pre-School and Elementary Education"
which also involved Saterland Frisians. This was documented in a publication by
Nath, Cornelia / Brückmann, Elke: Mehrsprachigkeit in der Vor- und Grundschulperiode, Schwerpunkt Bilingualer Unterricht in der Grundschule [Multilingualism in the

- 198 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

Pre-School and Primary Education Phase, Key Activity: Bilingual Instruction at Elementary School],

Aurich 2003.
The project was carried out in the period 1 April 2001 - 31 March 2003. The subjects
studied under this project can be looked up on the Internet:
www.kinder-mehrsprachigkeit.de.
For Ostfriesland, the main subjects were training of educators and bilingual instruction at elementary schools. Regarding the first subject, a training course on early multilingualism, including the regional language Low German, was tested. The second
subject focused on continuation of bilingual education after the children's enrolment
in an elementary school. The aim of bilingual instruction in this case was language
learning at school.
635.
Continuation of minority language instruction at primary schools is
considered good policy since it is a means for promoting children's language skills.
Also, primary-school age is particularly well suited for extending language skills to
multilingualism through early learning of foreign languages (English, French,
Dutch/Flemish).
636.
In the Saterland, Sater Frisian is taught not only by fully trained teachers but
also by other persons provided that these have the appropriate qualification and that
there is a demand for such instruction. In the area of the Government of Weser-Ems
Bezirk [District] it is pointed out, under the procedure for inviting applications for a position at the respective schools, that knowledge of Sater Frisian is desirable or even
required. Recruitment advertising for a position to be filled as of the start of the
2003/2004 school year at Sedelsberg primary school included the item 'knowledge of
Sater Frisian'.
637.
The educational materials developed by the Sater Frisian teachers
themselves are used mainly in primary education. They are based on materials for
English lessons in primary school, materials of the teaching and learning system
developed as part of the pilot project "Plattdeutsch in der Schule" ["Low German in
School"], and materials from the Nordfriesland and West-Friesland language areas.
Within the framework of teacher follow-up training, it is planned to develop a concept
for learning Sater Frisian in the primary education stage.
638. As part of the EU Project "Early Multilingualism in Pre-School and Primary
Education", another two further training events of two-days' duration were organized
in October 2002 and February 2003 on the following subjects:

- 199 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

-

-

Part D: Frisian

Developmental stages of children - Starting points for successful language education (Sater Frisian)
Multilingual education - features of Frisian language education in Dokkum,
Fryslân (Netherlands)

Each of the two courses, which were attended by 18 participants each, were held by
the Specialist Adviser for Sater Frisian at the town hall of Saterland Gemeinde. Under
the target agreements made with the Specialist Adviser for Sater Frisian, she is
responsible for planning and implementing such further education activities. These
further training activities are to be continued on a yearly basis.
639. The [Lower Saxony] Ministry of Education and Cultural Affairs, in its contacts with
the Federal Government Commissioner for Culture and the Media, vigorously supports the application for promotional funding of the development of a teaching and
learning system for Sater Frisian in grades 1 - 6. In November 2000, a "Specialist
Adviser for Sater Frisian in Classroom Instruction" was appointed to serve with the
government of Weser-Ems Bezirk [District].
640.
In response to the statement of the Committee of Experts in No. 218 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that it had received no information about a
structural approach and therefore could not conclude that this undertaking was fulfilled, the following information is provided by Lower Saxony:
At the schools level, the Specialist Adviser set up a "Sater Frisian Working Panel"
with the task of developing a teaching and learning system for Sater Frisian for
grades 1 - 6. The essential objective is to create awareness of the cultural values
of the Sater Frisian language; to initiate, and consolidate, communicative learning
processes in language education; and to document the history of the Saterland
culture. In the course of various projects, combined readers/painting books with a
focus on various specific subjects were developed for primary school grades 1 - 4
and for nursery schools, and books entitled "Seelterlound" ["Saterland"], for use by
pupils and teachers, were developed for grades 1 - 4. Educational materials for
use in subject teaching on the "history, culture and language of the Saterland" are
under preparation. Also, half-year plans for grades 2, 3 and 4 are available by
now. In addition, an anthology of songs and poems was produced. The Specialist
Adviser also co-ordinates Sater Frisian teaching at schools by professional teachers and volunteers. For such co-ordination, conferences are held every three
months. Volunteers are, to the extent possible, assisted by the full-time teachers
and/or the headmasters of the schools concerned. They are given learning units
on a wide range of subjects. The learning units contain methodological sugges- 200 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

tions and are geared to the seasons of the year and to life at school. The next step
will be to develop guidance/support material for classroom instruction. The Ministry
of Education and Cultural Affairs invites the teachers of the 'Sater Frisian Working
Panel' to attend the specialist conferences organized every three years on the
subject "Our region in classroom instruction" and gives them the opportunity to
present the results of their work.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (i) - Supervisory Bodies (i)

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken
and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or
minority languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings which will be
made public.

641.
In November 1997, a Working Group was established, with representatives
from the Landschaften and Landschaftsverbände [regional local authorities], the Niedersächsischer Heimatbund [Lower Saxony Union for Local and Regional Traditions] and the
schools offices. The task of this Working Group is to monitor the proper implementation of the obligations under the Charter which have been accepted by the Land.
Responsibility for the preparation and regular publication of the report regarding the
provisions on education lies with the Lower Saxony Ministry of Education and Cultural Affairs.
642.
In response to the recommendation made by the Committee of Experts in
No. 219 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that a special supervisory
body be established and period reports be drawn up, Lower Saxony provides the following information:
The appointment of the Specialist Adviser and the target agreements made with
her provide for monitoring of the measures aimed at further developing Sater
Frisian instruction. The Government of Weser-Ems Bezirk [District] regularly reports
to the Lower Saxony Ministry of Education and Cultural Affairs on the implementation of these agreements.

- 201 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

Article 9
Judicial Authorities
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents using
the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to the
situation of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the
present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of justice:

Art. 9, para 1, sub-para. (b) (iii) - Civil Proceedings (b) in civil proceedings:
(iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

643.

With the proviso that documents and evidence drafted in a minority language

must be presented in a form obviating misunderstandings or errors with regard to
their translation, this obligation is met by the legal situation prevailing in Germany.
Therefore, no special measures have been taken.
Art. 9, para 1, sub-para. (c) (iii) - Proceedings before Courts concerning Administrative
Matters (c)

644.

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
(iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

In this regard, cf. the comments in No. 643 above.

645.
As regards this branch of the judiciary, it must be pointed out that administrative courts are obliged to conduct ex officio investigations and, where necessary and
appropriate, will on their own initiative rely on the services of interpreters. Thus, the
members of a given language group suffer no prejudice by the use of their language.
Art. 9, para. 2, sub-para. (a) - Validity of Legal Documents The Parties undertake:
(a) not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because
they are drafted in a regional or minority language; or

646.

In this regard, cf. the comments in No. 643 above.

- 202 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

Article 10
Administrative Authorities and Public Services
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of
regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the
situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:

Art. 10, para. 1, sub-para. (a) (v) - Submission of Documents (v)

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a
document in these languages;

647.
In Saterland Gemeinde, no problems exist as regards submission of legal
documents drafted in Sater Frisian. The administration has staff members who can
process such documents. In practice, however, no use has been made of this facility.
648.

In response to the Committee's comment in No. 222 of the Monitoring Report

[MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that for complete fulfilment, efforts should be made by public

authorities to create the conditions encouraging the use of Sater Frisian, Lower
Saxony provides the following information:
With reference to the implementation deficits, as perceived by the Committee of
Experts, regarding the accepted alternative of "encouraging", the Land examines
the possibility of issuing directives or formal guidance - ensuring complete fulfilment/implementation of all undertakings entered into - to administrative authorities
and public services.
Art. 10, para 1, sub-para. (c) - Drafting of Documents (c)

to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in a regional or minority
language.

649.
The local authority [i.e. Saterland Gemeinde] is prepared at any time to draft
documents in the minority language. So far, however, no requests to this effect have
been made.
650.

[blank]

651.
As regards the statement of the Committee of Experts in No. 223 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that this undertaking was fulfilled only formally,
reference is made to the comments in No. 648 above.

- 203 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

Article 10, para. 2
Paragraph 2
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents
who are users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified
below, the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:

Art. 10, para. 2, sub-para. (a) - Use of a Regional or Minority Language (a)

652.

the use of regional or minority languages within the framework of the regional or local
authority;

In Saterland Gemeinde in Lower Saxony, where some 2000 people speak

this minority language, the local authorities promote the use of this language. Staff
members indicate their proficiency in Saterland Frisian on their office doorplates.
653.
In Saterland Gemeinde, it is possible to have civil marriages and other official
acts performed in the Sater Frisian language.
Art. 10, para. 2, sub-para. (b) - Submission of Applications (b)

the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written
applications in these languages;

654.
In Saterland Gemeinde in Lower Saxony, citizens may present their requests
in Sater Frisian. The replies will equally be furnished in this language. Also, applications may be submitted in Sater Frisian. As stated by the local authority, no use has
so far been made of this possibility.
655.
As regards the statement of the Committee of Experts in No. 225 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that this undertaking was fulfilled only formally,
reference is made to the comments in No. 648 above.
Art. 10, para. 2, sub-para. (c) - Publication by Regional Authorities of Official Documents
(c)

the publication by regional authorities of their official documents also in the relevant
regional or minority languages;

656.
This obligation has been accepted by the Land of Lower Saxony. Since
Saterland Gemeinde, to which the speech area of Frisian [in Lower Saxony] is confined,
represents the local level, the pertinent implementation measures are described
under sub-para. (d) [publication by local authorities] below.

- 204 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

Art. 10, para. 2, sub-para. (d) - Publication by Local Authorities of Official Documents (d)

657.

the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in the relevant
regional or minority languages;

So far, there has been no such publication in Saterland Frisian; however,

pertinent preparations are underway with regard to short official communications (e.g.
notices on the bulletin board), especially as regards standard texts, which are then to
be published as bilingual notices.
Art. 10, para. 2, sub-para. (e) - Use by Regional Authorities of the Minority Language in
Debates in Their Assemblies (e)

the use by regional authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

658.
This obligation has been accepted by the Land of Lower Saxony. Since
Saterland Gemeinde, to which the speech area of [Sater] Frisian is confined,
represents the local-government level, the pertinent implementation measures are
discussed under sub-para. (f) below [assemblies of local authorities].
In response to the Committee's statement in No. 228 of the Monitoring Report [MINLANG (2002) 4 final] that this undertaking was not fulfilled regarding the regional authorities, Saterland Gemeinde provides the following information on the use of the minority language in assembly debates:
"Därfon wät in do Meenteroatssitzingen nan Gebruk maket, weil blot sowät 20%
fon do Roatsherren ju Seelterske Toal balle konnen. Därfon kumt düt uk, dat een
grooten Deel fon do Toulüsterer dän Ferloop fon de Sitzungen nit ferfulgje konnen." ["No use is made of this in local council meetings since only around 20 per cent of
the councilmen have a command of the Saterland language. Thus, also many of the listeners are not able to follow the proceedings of these assembly debates."]

Art. 10, para. 2, sub-para. (f) - Use by Local Authorities of the Minority Language in
Debates in Their Assemblies (f)

the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

659.
Local council members do not make use of the Frisian language - mainly out
of consideration for persons who do not know the language or do not have a sufficient command of it.

- 205 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

Art. 10, para 2, sub-para. (g) - Place-names (g)

the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official
language(s), of traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or minority
languages.

660.
Under the Second Act to Implement the European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages, which entered into force on 19 September 2002 [cf. Annex 1 to this
report], Lower Saxony accepted this obligation for the Sater Frisian language. Adequate signposting was provided.
Article 10, para. 4
Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the
Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:

Art. 10, para. 4, sub-para. (a) - Translation or Interpretation (a)

translation or interpretation as may be required;

661.
The facilities and staff required for the purpose are available in Saterland Gemeinde. In this context, it must be pointed out that it is relatively difficult to write Sater
Frisian, and thus considerable work is involved.
Art. 10, para. 4, sub-para. (c) - Appointment of Public Service Employees having a
Knowledge of a Regional or Minority Language (c)

compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a
knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which
that language is used.

662.
If a staff member of the Saterland Gemeinde administration expresses a wish
regarding such an appointment, the scope for complying with the request will be
examined. So far, however, no requests to this effect have been made.
663.
In response to the statement of the Committee of Experts in No. 231 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that, due to the lack of information on any
deployment policy, it could not conclude that this undertaking was fulfilled, the following information is provided by Lower Saxony:
With reference to the implementation deficits, as perceived by the Committee of
Experts, the Land examines the possibility of issuing directives or formal guidance
- ensuring complete fulfilment/implementation of all undertakings entered into - to
administrative authorities and public services.
The Land is not aware of any concrete deployment policies.

- 206 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

Article 10, para. 5
Paragraph 5
The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or minority
languages, at the request of those concerned.

664.

In this regard, cf. the comments in Nos. 220 - 225 above.

- 207 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

Article 11
Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in
which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that
the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this field,
and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:

Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (b) (ii) - Broadcasting of Radio Programmes (ii)

665.

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;

Under the Inter-State Treaty on Norddeutscher Rundfunk concluded by the

Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg and the Länder of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Lower Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein, the programming mandate of Norddeutscher Rundfunk (NDR), as a broadcasting corporation under public law, stipulates, inter alia, that adequate room must be given in the programme to the North
German region, its culture and language (Section 5, para. 2, of the NDR Inter-State
Treaty).
666.
The Broadcasting Centres of the Länder produce Land programmes - as a
full-day radio, and regional TV, programme - which present, inter alia, the cultural and
social life of the respective Land (Section 3, para. 3, of the NDR Inter-State Treaty).
This also covers various broadcasts about the Sater Frisian language which, however, are not aired at fixed broadcasting times but in the context of current affairs
reporting.
667.
The Lower Saxony Land Broadcasting Act lays down, inter alia, that the
programmes of private broadcasters must make appropriate allowance also for the
cultural diversity of the regions and for the regional languages used in Lower Saxony
(Section 17, para. 2, of the Land Broadcasting Act). Compliance with these requirements is also monitored by the minimum number of 41 members of the Assembly of
the Lower Saxony Land Supervisory Authority for Private Broadcasters [Niedersächsische Landesmedienanstalt]. All major groups of society or organizations in the Land are
entitled to make nominations as regards representation on the Assembly.
668.

Niedersächsische Landesmedienanstalt [Lower Saxony Land supervisory authority
for private broadcasters] also supports non-commercial local broadcasters and the Open
Channels. It is especially in the programmes of these broadcasters with a focus on
regional and local settings that specific cultural features and linguistic minorities are
included and presented. In the East Frisian (Ostfriesland) area, this also applies to
Sater Frisian.
- 208 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

669.
Broadcasters, also in view of their own interest, strive to meet the legal requirements. In addition, Lower Saxony Land - within the limits of its scope for exerting
an influence - encourages radio and television broadcasters to take greater account
of, and to present, region-specific features of culture and language. As regards the
Sater Frisian language (Seelterfräisk), however, this can be achieved to a very limited
extent only, given that this minority language is used in a relatively small area.
670.
In response to the recommendation made by the Committee of Experts in
No. 233 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that measures aimed at encouraging and/or facilitating the broadcasting of programmes on a regular basis
should be considered, Lower Saxony provides the following information:
The aim of accentuating the cultural diversity of the regions and the regional languages in broadcasting programmes is to be attained by the obligation imposed on
private broadcasters under Section 15, para. 2, of the Lower Saxony Media Act. In
view of safeguarding their programming autonomy, however, no regulations are
laid down on the way in which and the extent to which broadcasters choose to
comply with this obligation. One must acknowledge that private broadcasters, in
particular, in their programming decisions depend on the audience's response.
Therefore, it must ultimately be up to these broadcasters to decide on the extent to
which they will include local special features such as the Sater Frisian language.
This goes both for radio and television programmes.
While the Land Government will continue to request and encourage private broadcasters to include also Sater Frisian items in their programmes, it does not see
any further scope for intervention.
Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (c) (ii) - Broadcasting of Television Programmes (ii)

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;

671.
As only a relatively small segment of the population is the target group of
television programmes in the Sater Frisian language, there have been no regular
broadcasts so far. In compliance with the programming mandate (Section 5, para. 2,
in conjunction with Section 3, of the NDR Inter-State Treaty), the NDR regional
programme (i.e. N3) sporadically airs broadcasts about Sater Frisian [Seelterfräisk].
672.
In response to the recommendation made by the Committee of Experts in
No. 234 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that measures aimed at encouraging and/or facilitating the broadcasting of programmes on a regular basis
should be considered, reference is made to Nos. 665 - 670 above.
- 209 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (d) - Audio and Audiovisual Works (d)

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in the regional or minority languages;

673.

The aforementioned programming principles [cf. the comments on subparas. (b) and (c) of para. 1] - as laid down in the NDR Inter-State Treaty for
public service broadcasting, and in the Land Broadcasting Act for private
broadcasting - are designed also to provide motivation for producing and
disseminating audio and audiovisual works in the Sater Frisian language. Upon
application, the Land of Lower Saxony, in view of supporting such productions within
the framework of cultural promotion, grants subsidies to the production costs.
674.

In response to the Committee's request in No. 235 of the Monitoring Report
[MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] for examples of cases where financial assistance has been
provided [for works in Sater Frisian], it is reported that Lower Saxony Land ensures
that also productions in the Sater Frisian language are subsidized within the framework of cultural promotion. Three films in the Low German language were subsidized
through the nordmedia Fonds GmbH which is operated jointly by the Länder of Lower
Saxony and Bremen and other partners. On the other hand, productions in the Sater
Frisian language could not be subsidized under these schemes for the simple reason
that no applications for pertinent project funding have so far been submitted. Lower
Saxony will continue to draw attention to the availability of promotional funding and
will endeavour to encourage pertinent productions.
Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (e) (ii) - Newspaper Articles (ii)

to encourage and/or facilitate the publication of newspaper articles in the regional
or minority languages on a regular basis;

675.
Freedom of the press as guarantueed by the Constitution on principle allows
no scope for direct [state] action/influence. Moreover, with a view to competitiveness,
it is not possible to impose binding requirements on publishing houses. On appropriate occasions, the Land Government repeatedly makes appeals to include and
present the Sater Frisian language also in press publications. This appeal is
addressed both directly to publishing houses and through the Verband Nordwestdeutscher Zeitungsverleger [Association of North West German Newspaper Publishers].
676.
Therefore, articles in Sater Frisian also appear in the home-editions of the
regional newspapers read in Saterland.
The following dailies are published in this region:
General-Anzeiger, Rhauderfehn

("Gazette" - around 10,830 copies)
- 210 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

Münsterländische Tageszeitung, Cloppenburg
("Münsterland Daily" - some 20,000
copies)
Nordwest-Zeitung, Oldenburg
("North West Newspaper" - some 130,000 copies)
677.
In response to the statement of the Committee of Experts in No. 236 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that, in order to be able to conclude that this
undertaking is fulfilled, it would need further information on how the authorities are
encouraging or facilitating the publication of newspaper articles [in Sater Frisian] on a
regular basis, Lower Saxony provides the following information:
Due to the constitutional guarantee of freedom of the press, it is not possible to
stipulate any requirements to be met by publishers concerning the content of their
newspapers. Such decisions are made by the publishing companies on the basis
of their autonomous competence and, of course, with due regard to their readers'
response.
Notwithstanding the aforementioned facts, the Land Government will continue to
encourage the Verband Nordwestdeutscher Zeitungsverlage [Association of North
West German Newspaper Publishers] and, on relevant occasions, individual newspapers
to publish articles in the Sater Frisian language.
Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (f) (ii) - Financial Assistance for Audiovisual Productions (ii)

to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions
in the regional or minority languages;

678.
For the examples of cases where financial assistance has been provided - as
requested by the Committee of Experts in No. 237 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG
(2002) 4 final] - cf. the comments in No. 674 above.
Art. 11, para. 2 - Freedom of Direct Reception of Broadcasts, and Freedom of Expression
Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television broadcasts
from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or
minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from
neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure that no restrictions
will be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of information in the written press
in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of
the above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to
such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in
a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for
the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the
reputation or rights of others, for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or
for maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.

679.
For the relevant implementation measures, cf. the detailed comments on
paragraph 1 of Article 11, and under Nos. 226 - 239, above.
- 211 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

Article 12
Cultural Activities and Facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities - especially libraries, video libraries, cultural
centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film
production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries, including
inter alia the use of new technologies - the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such
languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play
a role in this field:

Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (a) - Types of Expression, and Access to Works (a)

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority
languages and foster the different means of access to works produced in these
languages;

680.
The Land of Lower Saxony generally takes a particular interest in promoting
initiatives in the cultural sphere, and especially with regard to the literature of the
regional and minority languages. Literature and language play a central role in the
identification of the individual and of the community. Thus, the notion of 'language'
must not be confined to the standard language; rather, it also includes a minority language such as Saterland Frisian or the languages of the other ethnic groups living in
this Land. On this basis, Sater Frisian literature can be included in all areas of literature promotion (promotion of production, distribution and reception) in Lower Saxony
Land. [Applications for] Promotion of writing and also the publication of literary works by
publishing houses of Lower Saxony are evaluated by an expert jury. So far, no applications [regarding Sater Frisian] have been filed - possible reasons being that there are
only a little over 2,000 speakers of the Sater Frisian language (of a population of
12,400 inhabitants of the Saterland, the smallest speech island in Europe) and that
tradition of Sater Frisian has been mainly oral.
681.
In Saterland Gemeinde, the association for the preservation of Saterland
local/ regional traditions, Seelter Buund e.V., pursues a wide range of activities for
the cultivation of Sater Frisian [Seelterfräisk] and of the Saterland culture; in instances,
these activities are Land-subsidized.
682.

The [Lower Saxony] Ministry of Scientific and Cultural Affairs advises Saterland
Gemeinde [the local authority union] and Seelter Buund on the planning of events. For instance, an Internet project and a Sater Frisian song programme are under preparation.
683.

In addition, Land-subsidized institutions such as the Literaturrat [Literature
Council] or the Literaturbüros [Literature Offices] are encouraged to include Sater Frisian
in their activities and events.
- 212 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (b) - Access to Works in the (Minority) Languages (b) to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in
regional or minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing,
post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;
684.
Within the framework of literature promotion, translators are allocated funds
for the translation of literary works. This generally applies to translations both into and
from Sater Frisian. Also, a grant can be obtained for a study placement at a translators' centre.
685.

The Arbeitsstelle Niederdeutsch und Saterfriesisch [Workshop for Low German
and Sater Frisian] of Carl von Ossietzky University in Oldenburg intensively deals with
research into Sater Frisian. The Workshop developed a "Sater Frisian Dictionary";
the 2nd enlarged edition is under preparation. Upon request, the Workshop also offers
translation services.
Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (c) - Access to Works Produced in Other Languages (c)

686.

to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages
by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling
activities;

In this regard, cf. the comments in Nos. 684 and 685 above.

Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (d) - Taking Account of the Regional or Minority Language in
Cultural Activities (d)

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of
various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of
regional or minority languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or
for which they provide backing;

687.
Saterland Gemeinde and the associations and units representing the Saterland Frisian interests can ensure that the knowledge and use of the Sater Frisian language and the Saterland culture are adequately included in their cultural activities.
688.

In response to the Committee's question in No. 242 of the Monitoring Report
[MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] as to whether the Seelter Buund is responsible for organizing
and supporting cultural activities as required under this Article, Lower Saxony reports
that the association Seelter Buund has key responsibility for the varied and broad
spectrum of cultural activities in the Saterland. It was only for this reason that the
Land was able in 2002 to make it possible, with federal funding, for Seelter Buund to
buy the former railway station of the Saterland locality of Scharrel. It is planned to
convert this station into a Sater Frisian cultural centre.

- 213 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (e) - Employment of Staff Proficient in the Language(s)
Concerned (e)

689.

to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting
cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of the regional
or minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest of the
population;

In this regard, cf. the comments in Nos. 687 and 688 above.

690.

In addition, Katholisches Bildungswerk Saterland [Saterland Catholic Educational
Association] offers courses for language learning and extending the knowledge of this
language. Other planned projects, e.g. the song programme mentioned in the context
of paragraph 1, sub-paragraph (a), above, serve to consolidate proficiency in the language.
Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (f) - Participation of Representatives of the Group Speaking the
Given Language in Cultural Activities (f)

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or
minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

691.
As already stated under Nos. 687 - 690 above, many full-time and voluntary
helpers are involved in the planning and organization of activities/events in the minority/regional language. Participation in the annual Land festival organized by Lower
Saxony, i.e. "Tag der Niedersachsen" ["Day of the People of Lower Saxony"], is generally
possible and has been encouraged.
Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (g) - Creation of Archive Bodies (g)

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for
collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the
regional or minority languages;

692.
Carl von Ossietzky University in Oldenburg employs a specialist for the Sater
Frisian language, who also carries out extensive documentation work. The Oldenburg
University Library and the Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek in Göttingen have a wide
range of Frisian literature.
693.
In No. 245 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], the Committee of
Experts asked for additional information which is provided in the following: the libraries of the Göttingen and Oldenburg universities hold around 20 - 30 volumes of Sater Frisian literature - and this is the actual number of publications available in this
language. The library and media centre of the planned new Sater Frisian cultural
centre are not yet completed, and consequently no figures are available on this
matter.
- 214 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

Article 12, para. 2
Paragraph 2
In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are
traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language
justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in
accordance with the preceding paragraph.

694.

Pertinent cultural events/activities can be organized outside the Saterland if

there is a demand for it, for instance on the occasion of meetings on the subject of
regional or minority languages. As stated above, participation in the annual festival
"Tag der Niedersachsen" [Lower Saxons' Day] organized in varying places of the Land is
possible.
Article 12, para. 3
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for
regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.

695.

Cf. the comments provided by Schleswig-Holstein Land in No. 615 above.

696.
For measures relating to Germany's cultural policy abroad, cf. No. 505
above.

- 215 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

Article 13
Economic and Social Life
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake within the whole country:
(a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without justifiable reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to
economic or social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical documents such as instructions for the use of products or installations;
(b) to prohibit the insertion - in internal regulations of companies and private documents of any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or minority languages, at
least between users of the same language;
(c) to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority languages in
connection with economic or social activities;

697.

The obligations under paragraphs (a) and (c) have been accepted by the

Land of Lower Saxony. These obligations are in compliance with the established law
of the Federal Republic of Germany and thus are fulfilled nation-wide for all regional
or minority languages. Therefore, no special measures had to be taken by the
Länder.
Art. 13, para. 1, sub-para. (d) - Facilitating the Use of the Regional or Minority Language
(d)

to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by means other
than those specified in the above sub-paragraphs.

698.
In Germany, freedom to use one's own language - in private and in public - is
ensured by Art. 2, para. 1, of the Basic Law, which guarantees the right to free development of one's personality. Use of the minority languages in public is generally accepted by the German population. No reservations exist in this respect.
699.
Use of Sater Frisian [Seelterfräisk] by the Saterland Frisians is gradually increasing since school-children are taking a greater interest in learning this language
and children and the grandparent generation have started to communicate in Sater
Frisian again.
700.
There are many and various ways in which the state promotes the learning
and use of minority languages (cf. the comments on the various obligations). In particular, efforts are encouraged also among the general public to keep these languages
alive by using them within the family and in extra-familiar everyday-life situations. In
this regard, the cultural value of the minority languages for Germany's cultural life is
particularly emphasized so that, on the basis of the resultant self-esteem and selfassurance, the younger generation will be more willing to adopt these languages and
pass them on.

- 216 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Frisian

701.
As regards the comment of the Committee of Experts in No. 250 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that, due to the lack of information, it was not in a
position to conclude that this undertaking was fulfilled, reference is made to the general comments in No. 249 above. In addition, it is pointed out that the purchase, with
public funds, of the Scharrel station for use as a cultural centre in the Saterland conveyed the clear message that cultivation of the Sater Frisian language is a matter of
importance to the Land Government. This centre is open to all citizens, and its planned activities have an effect upon all spheres of daily life.
702.
In addition, Niedersächsischer Heimatbund (NHB) invited entries for a competition regarding activities to implement the European Charter (Low German and
Sater Frisian). This competition was advertised both through the press and a leaflet
describing the Charter. The projects entered for the competition covered all fields of
economic, cultural and social life. The Saterland association for the preservation of
local and regional traditions, i.e. Seelter Buund, won 1st place among 105 coentrants.

- 217 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

- 218 -

Part D: Frisian

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

D.2.5

Part D: Romanes

The Romany language in the speech area of the Federal Republic and
of the various Länder

703.
Under the Second Act to Implement the European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages, which entered into force on 19 September 2002 [cf. Annex 1 to
the present report], the Land of Hesse accepted 35 obligations for the protection of the
Romany language. Thus protection of Romany under the provisions of Part III of the
Charter is ensured in the Land of Hesse.
Article 8
Education
704.
The Central Council [of German Sinti and Roma] and other associations of Sinti
and Roma take the view that, also out of regard for the experience undergone by the
survivors of the genocide, Romany should neither be taught nor learnt by non-Sinti/
non-Roma within the public educational system.
705.
A different position is taken by other Roma associations which come out in
favour of the inclusion of Romany in school education and wish to support measures,
like those taken in European neighbouring countries, for the development of a written
form of this language.
706.
The Central Council of German Sinti and Roma favours supplemental
instruction for interested children of German Sinti and Roma, where teachers coming
from the minority deal with school subjects in the Romany language so that the
children's knowledge of Romany will be enhanced. Within the Länder, however, only
limited numbers of teachers with sufficient language proficiency are available. The
Central Council also favours language courses for members of the minority on a
private basis and as part of adult education, to be carried out by teachers coming
from the minority. The Sinti-Allianz [Sinti Alliance], however, sees imparting of their
mother tongue Romany - also in this field - as the exclusive responsibility of the
families and family clans of the Sinti community, and takes the view that instruction in
the mother tongue is not possible since the Sinti's language does not have a written
form and consequently no literature exists in this language.
707.
Use of the Romany language in the publicly maintained school system is
confined, for the reasons already given, to pilot projects for children of German and
foreign Roma in those cases where larger numbers of them live close to each other.
The organizations of German Sinti and Roma set great store by having the existing
state-run and (state-)acknowledged system of schools and education used for the
- 219 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

children of the German Sinti and Roma without any limitation as has been the case
so far. Therefore, they object to separate schools or school classes for Sinti and
Roma only. Thus, they consider state-promoted measures for the preservation and
promotion of Romany to be the sole responsibility of the minority itself. Obviously this
also is the parents' wish since the children of the German Sinti and Roma go to local
regular and/or secondary schools.
708.
Special possibilities, which are also designed to include the cultural traditions
and the language of this group, exist for promoting the schooling progress of Sinti
and Roma children in some of the Länder of the Federal Republic of Germany, for
instance in Baden-Wurttemberg, Berlin, Bremen, Hamburg, Hesse, Lower Saxony,
North Rhine/Westphalia, and Schleswig-Holstein; in instances these activities are
part of local projects. Such projects are carried out at primary schools, secondary
modern schools and Realschulen [secondary technical schools]. The experience gained in
this context has shown that, on a long-term basis, only those initiatives will be successful which are launched locally with the consent, will and participation, including
shared responsibility, of the persons concerned. In the field of teacher follow-up
training, in particular, regional efforts increasingly focus on taking account of the
concerns and interests of pupils coming from Sinti and Roma families. In this regard,
cf. the comments under No. 93 (Part A) above.
Article 8, para. 1
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are
used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching
of the official language(s) of the State:

Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (a) - Pre-School Education (i)
(ii)

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or

Both obligations have been accepted by the Land of Berlin.
709.
In consultation with the Berlin/Brandenburg Land Association of German Sinti
and Roma, implementation of these obligations is not pursued at present.

Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (a) (iii) - Pre-School Education (iii)

to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those
pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient; or

This obligation has been accepted by the Land of Hesse.
- 220 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

710.
The Hessian Land Association of German Sinti and Roma was informed that
such education was requested in a number of towns of Hesse. As a next step, the
Land Association therefore plans to carry out an in-depth local needs analysis as
soon as funds become available.
711.
As of January 2001, the Federal Government has allocated funds to the
Documentation and Cultural Centre of German Sinti and Roma in Heidelberg for
establishing an "Education Section" staffed with two employees. The cross-Land
tasks of this Section will include the development of materials for the supplemental
homework assistance and language classes to be taught by teachers coming from
this minority/ language group for interested children and, in addition, encouragement
to introduce such courses in Romany also in Hesse. The Hessian Land Association
of German Sinti and Roma will take part in these efforts. The Land Government will
co-ordinate the assignment/employment of suitable teachers with these
organizations. In the view of the Land Government, 8 to 10 participants coming from
this minority/language group will be sufficient to warrant the introduction of a pertinent
course. This also goes for the area of adult education.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (a) (iv) - Pre-School Education (iv)

if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school
education, to favour and/or encourage the application of the measures referred to
under i to iii above;

1. Baden-Wurttemberg
712.
The unqualified right to admission to a nursery school, which has been in
force under Federal law since 1 January 1999, generally applies also to the children
of Sinti and Roma. This claim is to be met by the providing bodies of the responsible
public child and youth services (i.e. Stadtkreise [municipalities] and Landkreise [rural administrative districts]).
713.
As a rule, the children's day-care centres maintained by local authorities and
by providing bodies of private-sector child and youth services do not offer the Romany language. However, this does not rule out that, if there is a demand for this, the
providing body of a nursery school could employ tutors/tutoresses for imparting the
Romany language.
714.
The amended regulation on nursery school promotion, which entered into
force as of 1 January 1999, does not rule out the employment of this type of staff. If
professional staff are not available in sufficient numbers for attending to such a
group, as laid down in the Baden-Wurttemberg Act on Nursery Schools, also other
- 221 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

persons (non-professional staff) may be employed for Romany language instruction
in children's day-care centres. To this extent, the providing bodies of nursery schools
have autonomy as regards staffing matters. The Land cannot exert any influence in
this respect.
2. Hesse
715.

In this regard, cf. the comments in Nos. 710 and 711 above.

3. Rhineland-Palatinate
716.
So far, no wishes to this effect have been put to the Land by members of this
minority/language group.
4. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
717.
The Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg has adopted paragraph (a) (iv) as
a new voluntary commitment. So far, the Land has not received any pertinent wishes
expressed by members of this language group.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (b) - Primary Education (i) to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
(ii) to make available a substantial part of primary education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or
(iii) to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant
regional or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
(iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to
those pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered
sufficient;
1. Baden-Wurttemberg
718.

The Land has not explicitly adopted the obligation under sub-paragraph (b).

719.
So far, no demand for instruction in the minority language Romany has been
notified in Baden-Wurttemberg. Trained teachers able to give such instruction are not
available. In Baden-Wurttemberg, the children of Sinti and Roma are integrated into
the regular classes. In Heidelberg, a Land-subsidized advisory service of the [BadenWurttemberg] Land Association of German Sinti and Roma provides guidance to teach-

ers and to parents. In addition, co-operation is pursued with the school psychological
[child guidance] services of the Land. Additional financial support has been promised to
this Land Association.
- 222 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

720.
By letter of 5 June 2000, the [Baden-Wurttemberg] Ministry of Education and
Cultural Affairs promised that, in cases where such a demand exists, Romany
classes supplementing regular instruction (e.g. homework assistance or language
instruction) - to comprise 2-hour periods twice per week (for groups comprising 8 - 10
pupils) - will be offered on the basis of the Lehrbeauftragten-Modell
[Temporary/Substitute Instructors Model] at two or three sites (e.g. Heidelberg/Mannheim
area, Ravensburg).
2. Berlin
Berlin has accepted the obligations under sub-paragraph (b) (i) to (iv).
721.
In consultation with the Berlin/Brandenburg Land Association of German Sinti
and Roma, implementation of the obligations (i) to (iii) is not pursued at present.
722.
The obligation under sub-paragraph (b) (iv) will be implemented only if and
where the language group so requests. This wish has not been expressed during the
period under review.
3. Hesse
The Land of Hesse has accepted the obligation under sub-paragraph (b) (iv).
723.

In this regard, cf. the comments in No. 711 above.

4. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
Hamburg has accepted the obligation under sub-paragraph (b) (iv).
724.
Since 1992, Hamburg has made contracts of employment also with German
Roma and Sinti to fill positions based on the separate job description "Roma and
Sinti as Teachers and Social Workers".
725.
At seven schools in Hamburg (one elementary school and six
secondary modern schools and Realschulen [secondary technical schools]), Romany is
offered also for German Sinti and Roma by four Roma teachers and Roma
school social workers. Teaching in the mother tongue is integrated into regular
instruction, by having Roma teach the classes with the support of a "team partner". In
part, educational materials are bilingual. In this regard, care is taken to include the
history and the literature of the German Roma and Sinti in classroom instruction.

- 223 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

726.
Another focus of the educational work with Roma children is musical education. If they so wish, children can take part in dancing, singing and guitar lessons and
are familiarized also with the music of German Roma and Sinti in its various forms.
Also non-Roma can take part in this musical education.
727.
In addition, if the parents and children so wish, small learning groups are
taught in the mother tongue. Parent-teacher talks are also conducted in Romany, as
are all guidance talks with pupils and with parents.

Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (c) - Secondary Education (i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
to make available a substantial part of secondary education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or
to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those
pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered
sufficient;

1. Baden-Wurttemberg
728.
None of the obligations under sub-paragraph (c) has been explicitly adopted
by this Land.
In this regard, cf. the comments in Nos. 718 - 720 above.
2. Hesse
729.

In this regard, cf. the comments in No. 711 above.

3. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
730.

In this regard, cf. the comments in No. 717 above.

Art. 8, para 1, sub-para. (d) - Technical and Vocational Education (i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

to make available technical and vocational education in the relevant regional or
minority languages; or
to make available a substantial part of technical and vocational education in the
relevant regional or minority languages; or
to provide, within technical and vocational education, for the teaching of the
relevant regional or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those
pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered
sufficient;

- 224 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

1. Hesse
731.

In this regard, cf. the comments in No. 711 above.

2. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
732.
Hamburg has newly adopted this obligation. No information on any
experience is yet available.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (e) - University and Other Higher Education (i)
ii)

to make available university and other higher education in regional or minority
languages; or
to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher
education subjects; or

The obligations under sub-paragraph (e) (i) to (ii) have been accepted by Berlin.
733.
In consultation with the Berlin/Brandenburg Land Association of German Sinti
and Roma, implementation of these obligations is not pursued at present.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (e) (iii)
(iii)

if, by reason of the role of the State in relation to higher education institutions,
subparagraphs i and ii cannot be applied, to encourage and/or allow the provision
of university or other forms of higher education in regional or minority languages
or of facilities for the study of these languages as university or higher education
subjects;

1. Baden-Wurttemberg
734.
Baden-Wurttemberg has notified adoption of this provision in the sense of
"undertake ... to allow" since, in this sense, it is met under the established law with
reference to the freedom of science and research, as guaranteed under Article 5,
para. 3, of the Basic Law, and to the autonomy of institutions of higher education
deriving from those constitutional provisions.
2. Berlin
735.
In consultation with the Berlin/Brandenburg Land Association of German Sinti
and Roma, implementation of this obligation is not pursued at present.

- 225 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

3. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
736.
Hamburg has newly adopted this obligation. No information on any experience
is yet available.
4. Hesse
737.

In this regard, cf. the comments in No. 711 above.

5. North-Rhine/Westphalia
738.
The Land of North Rhine/Westphalia notified adoption of this provision in the
sense of "undertake ... to allow" since, in this sense, it is met under the established
law with reference to the autonomy of institutions of higher education as guaranteed
under Article 5, para. 3, of the Basic Law.
6. Rhineland-Palatinate
739.
Rhineland-Palatinate notified adoption of this provision in the sense of
"undertake ... to allow" since, in this sense, it is met under the established law with
reference to the autonomy of institutions of higher education as guaranteed under
Article 5, para. 3, of the Basic Law.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (f) (iii) - Adult Education (iii)

if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult education,
to favour and/or encourage the offering of such languages as subjects of adult and
continuing education;

This obligation has been accepted by the Federal Republic of Germany.
740.
The provision of sub-para. (f) (iii) is met at the national (i.e. federal) level by the
public funding of the Documentation and Cultural Centre of German Sinti and Roma
since, on the basis of this funding support and by virtue of the principle of self-management, it is up to the responsible representatives of this minority/language group,
when deciding on the Centre's activities, to include pertinent measures in the field of
adult education and to implement them within the limits of the overall funds available.
741.

Baden-Wurttemberg, while not having explicitly adopted this obligation,
meets the requirement of this provision by being the only Land co-funding the
Documentation and Cultural Centre of German Sinti and Roma located in Heidelberg,
i.e. in the Land of Baden-Wurttemberg, with a share of 10 % of the Centre's total
- 226 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

expenses. This financial support is seen as an encouragement to offer Romany as a
subject of adult and continuing education. This funding makes it possible, in the
context of self-management, for the responsible representatives of this ethnic group
to adopt, organize and implement adult education measures when deciding on the
activities to be pursued by the Centre.
The Hesse Land Association of German Sinti and Roma was informed that such education was requested in a number of Hessian towns. As a next step, the Land Association therefore plans to carry out an in-depth local needs analysis as soon as funds
become available.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (g) - Teaching of the History and Culture Education (g)

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is
reflected by the regional or minority language;

This obligation has been accepted by the Federal Republic of Germany.
742.
On account of the historical events during the Nazi rule of force, the history
and the culture of the German Sinti and Roma, which is reflected in the Romany
language, is included in school education throughout the Federal Republic.
743.
Under the federal structure of the Federal Republic of Germany, implementation of this provision is incumbent on the Länder, in particular. Within the Länder's
educational system, promoting the knowledge of the culture, history, languages and
religion of the respective minorities/language groups as well as of the majority population is part of the curricula of publicly maintained and private schools and of the
mandate of the Land Centres and Federal Centre for Political Education.
744.
As regards imparting of knowledge of the history and culture of the German
Sinti and Roma who live dispersed in almost all parts of the Federal Republic, the
following examples can be given:
745.
In Hesse, school education includes the history and culture of the Sinti and
Roma, as provided under the framework curricula for schools. On behalf of the Hessian Ministry of Education and Cultural Affairs and in co-operation with Fritz-BauerIntitut, the Hessian Land Institute for Pædagogics has developed pertinent educational materials. In 1998, the Hessian Ministry of Culture established the Pädagogisches Büro Nationale Minderheiten: Sinti und Roma [Educational Bureau for National
Minorities: Sinti and Roma] and integrated it within the Hessian Land Institute for Pædagogics. A priority element of the mandate therefore is follow-up training of the teachers of Hessian schools with regard to the history and culture of the Sinti and Roma,
- 227 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

both in a narrower and broader sense. However, in addition to its responsibilities
within the Hessian Land Institute for Pædagogics, the Educational Bureau was assigned an additional task by the Hessian Ministry of Education and Cultural Affairs,
namely implementation of this matter at the university level and in society at large.
Against this background, the Educational Bureau, under the auspices of the Hessian
Land Institute for Pædagogics, carried out the following activities during the period
under review:
• organization of follow-up training seminars for Hessian teachers
• advisory services for classroom instruction projects of various schools
• organization and monitoring of pertinent in-school further education (e.g. a Pædagogical Day for the entire teaching staff of a school)
• development of teaching materials:
- teacher guidance material "Sinti and Roma in Films", ed. by Charlotte Bernard
and Marlis Sewering-Wollanek; Pädagogisches Büro nationale Minderheiten:
Sinti und Roma / Hessisches Landesinstitut für Pädagogik. Wiesbaden 2001. (=
Materials for Classroom Instruction, 135A).
- various hand-outs for school classes
• presentation of the [permanent] Exhibition organized by the Documentation and Cultural Centre of German Sinti and Roma on the subject of "The Genocide of Sinti
and Roma during the Nazi Era"; this activity was carried out in co-operation with
the Association of German Sinti and Roma / Hesse Land Association, the municipality of Marburg, the Marburg Philipps-Universität, the Marburg Cineplex, and the
Land Theatre in Marburg. This project networked the three aforementioned fields
of activity (further training of teachers; university activities; society) in such a way
that they complement each other. 750 school children visited the Exhibition and
were introduced to this particular subject.
• further education organized within the Hessian Land Institute for Pædagogics
• follow-up training courses at Studienseminare [institutions for the professional training of
teachers]

Under the remit to raise public awareness of matters related to Sinti and Roma, the
following activities were carried out during the period under review:
• advisory services and monitoring of exhibitions organized by other bodies:
- "Roma in Rumänien" [Rroma in Romania], photo exhibition, Marburg, November
2001
- "Vom Verschwinden der Kindheit" ["About the loss of childhood"], Marburg, February - March 2003. As part of the programme accompanying this exhibition, the
Educational Bureau presented the film "Abschied von Sidonie" ["Farewell to Sidonie"] (by Karin Brandauer) and a lecture.
- interviews with the press and local radio stations
- lectures, e.g. for the Fulda Fachhochschule [university of applied sciences]
- participation in pertinent working panels (Working Panel "Sinti and Roma" of the
Fritz-Bauer-Institut; membership of the Gesellschaft für Antiziganismusforschung [Society for the Study of Anti-Gypsy Attitudes])

- 228 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

Other activities envisaged for the year 2004 include, inter alia:
• Joint presentation of the exhibition organized by the Association of German Sinti
and Roma / Hesse Land Association on the 600 years of the history (of persecution) of Sinti and Roma in Hesse, with an accompanying cultural programme. The
target groups of this exhibition are school children and teachers, in particular.
• Funding of a publication containing reports by contemporary witnesses and edited
by the Hesse Land Association: more than 40 reports by Hessian Sinti about their
persecution under National Socialism.
• Teacher guidance material containing stories and fairy tales of the Sinti and Roma.
• Establishment of a co-ordinators' network of all Hessian teachers dealing with subjects concerning Sinti and Roma, with the aim of interrelating and enhancing their
work so as to achieve synergy effects.
The relevant section of the Marburg Philipps-Universität carried out the following activities during the period under review:
• Seminars held at the Department of Historical Science / Institute for East European History; these regularly cover the history and present situation of East European Rroma in the narrower and wider sense.
• Seminars held at the Department of Pædagogics, which deal with the history and
present situation of the German Sinti and Roma, their place in German society and
at school.
• Monitoring of assessed essays prepared by students on these subjects; over the
past few semesters, an increase in the number of such coursework papers was indeed observed.
• Administering intermediate examinations [required for entry to the final examination for a
university diploma] which by now, although only infrequently, also include subjects
related to the Sinti and Roma.
746.
The educational offers by North Rhine/Westphalia Land are primarily aimed
at imparting the history and culture of the Sinti and Roma. For instance, materials for
classroom instruction and regional follow-up training - which provide information on
the culture group and history of the Sinti and Roma - were developed, with the participation of the local Sinti and Roma, in the cities of Hamm and Cologne. The involvement of Roma in parental counselling in Cologne, in connection with literacy programmes, helps to enhance the confidence-building process between schools and
families.
747.

In Baden-Wurttemberg, the following measures have been agreed by the
Ministry of Education and Cultural Affairs in co-operation with the BadenWurttemberg Land Association of German Sinti and Roma: At the Land Institute
for Education and Instruction in Stuttgart, a Working Group Sinti und Roma
in Deutschland [Sinti and Roma in Germany] will be established, to co-operate with the
Documentation and Cultural Centre of German Sinti and Roma in Heidelberg.
Teachers and educators, representatives of the "Union of German Sinti and Roma - 229 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

Baden-Wurttemberg
Land
Association"
and
of
the
Heidelberg-based
Documentation and Cultural Centre are represented on this Working Group. The
Working Group is to give new impulses for the inclusion, in school education, of the
history, culture, and suffering of German Sinti and Roma. The Documentation and
Cultural Centre will be included in the number of non-school educational institutions,
e.g. with the task of preparing school trips to Heidelberg. The Land Institute for
Education and Instruction is preparing a brochure to be used in class for analyzing,
and attempting to come to terms with, the history of the Sinti and Roma. In addition,
the Land Government endeavours to induce educational publishing houses to take
increased account of the Sinti and Roma in textbooks and other educational media.
748.
In imparting knowledge of the culture of the majority population and of
national minorities and ethnic groups in schools and in the extra-curricular sector, an
important role is played by the public institutions for political education, i.e. the
Federal Centre (BpB) and the Land Centres for Political Education. The materials
compiled by these Centres with regard to issues of the co-existence of the various
cultures represented in Germany are used as instruction material both in schools and
in adult education.
749.
Within the Senate Authority for Schools, Youth and Sports in the Land of
Berlin, staff members from both the schools and youth services sectors, deal with the
current situation of Sinti and Roma. They are represented on an interdepartmental
Regional Committee. The provisional Framework Curricula for Education and Instruction at the Berlin Schools for the subjects 'history' and 'political science' include, of
course, the Sinti and Roma in the treatment and discussion of the Nazi ideology and
of its enforcement by means of persecution and extermination. The Berlin schools
also avail themselves of the opportunity to invite Sinti and Roma as external speakers/lecturers. The Landesinstitut für Schule und Medien (LISUM - Land Institute for
Schools and the Media) operates a media rental service which makes video cassettes on
this subject available to Berlin schools.
750.
Information on the activities and situation of the German Sinti and Roma is
provided by the Land Government of Schleswig-Holstein primarily through the aforementioned Minority Report, which was published in brochure form.
751.
In Bavaria, inclusion of the history of the Sinti and Roma in classroom
instruction is ensured by the relevant curricula and is expressly laid down especially
in the more recent curricula. The Land Centre for Political Education provides
teachers with materials suited for use in classroom instruction and will also - probably

- 230 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

by the end of 2003 - publish a wall newspaper on subjects related to the Sinti and
Roma.
The persecution and murdering of Sinti and Roma are also subjects regularly covered by the activities referring to memorial sites. Study trips are organized, for schools
of all types, to the KZ memorial sites and to regional concentration camps and KZ
workcamps. The Union of German Sinti and Roma (Bavaria Land Association) is invited to take part in the development of specific models for visits by school children to
these memorial sites.
The new curricula for all types of schools place greater emphasis than before on intercultural education. This is also to include treatment of the language, culture, history and religion of German Sinti and Roma.
752.

In Hamburg Land, political education activities increasingly provide for public
information regarding the history and identity of this minority traditionally resident in
Germany. Thus in Hamburg, a number of books and brochures were published on
the subject of the living together of different cultures and nationalities; among these is
the publication entitled "Wir sprechen viele Sprachen" ["We speak many languages"] (a
reading book with picture writing, which is also used as a first reader in classes
attended by Roma). In addition, the Hamburg Senate published a brochure entitled
"Roma and Sinti in Hamburg" which is designed to foster understanding of the culture
and history of the Roma and Sinti in Hamburg.
753.
The Lower Saxony Land Centre for Political Education, within the framework
of activities related to memorial sites, deals with the history of the persecution of the
Sinti and Roma during the Nazi era. It holds meetings on this subject, and carries out
research on the fate suffered by the Sinti and Roma in the concentration camp of
Bergen-Belsen. Discrimination against the Sinti and Roma in post-war Germany was
the subject of several meetings which also dealt with matters related to indemnification for wrongs suffered during the Nazi era.
754.

In Baden-Wurttemberg Land, a brochure entitled "Zwischen Romantisierung

und Rassismus: Sinti and Roma 600 Jahre in Deutschland" ["Between romanticizing and
racism: 600 years of Sinti and Roma living in Germany"] was published in November 1998
jointly by the Baden-Wurttemberg Land Centre for Political Education and the Union
of German Sinti and Roma - Baden-Wurttemberg Land Association. It contains articles by writers and scholars, and is primarily intended for teachers and professionals in adult education. It is intended to impart the basic and background knowledge that helps to counter the development of prejudices and to develop and raise
public awareness.

- 231 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

755.
The Rhineland-Palatinate Land Centre for Political Education, together with
the State Pædagogical Centre, developed educational materials on the subject of
"Sinti and Roma - Eine deutsche Minderheit" ["Sinti and Roma - A German minority"]. A key
feature of these materials is that, rather than developing a "minority science" [a body of
knowledge about minorities] as seen from the perspective of the majority population, the
perspectives of both the majority and the minority are represented to the same extent.
756.

The Bundeszentrale für politische Bildung (BpB - Federal Centre for Political
Education) also dealt intensively with this subject-matter, especially in various publications of the series "Informationen zur politischen Bildung" ["Information on Political Education"] which reach a large number of teachers/educators and other multipliers.
757.
The Federal Government and the Länder endeavour to further improve the
education and information currently offered, outside the traditional settlement areas,
on the subject of national minorities and ethnic groups. The national minorities and
ethnic groups regard the education/information activities outside the central settlement areas as insufficient and, in particular, miss a nation-wide survey concerning
the four [minority language] groups concerned. In this regard, cf. No. 104 above.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (h) - Basic and Further Training of Teachers (h)

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of
paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;

This obligation has been accepted by the Federal Republic of Germany.
758.
As regards the general situation of Romany in a school context and the realization of the self-management principle through the promotion of the Documentation
and Cultural Centre, reference is made to the implementation measures described
above with regard to Article 8. Also, reference is made to the detailed description of
the information materials regarding the culture and history of this minority/language
group, which are used for teacher follow-up training and are included as educational
material in school instruction.
759.
In teacher follow-up training, in particular, coverage of the interests of this minority/language group has become a regional focus.
760.
Various schools in Hamburg, with a larger share of Roma children, have
Roma employed as teachers and/or school social workers. The Institut für
Lehrerbildung und Schulentwicklung (LI - Teacher Training and School Development
Institute) organizes follow-up training for Roma working at Hamburg schools.

- 232 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

761.

Since 1993, the Institut für Lehrerbildung und Schulentwicklung (LI - Teacher
Training and School Development Institute) in Hamburg has promoted and supported school
education of Roma and Sinti children. This includes:
- conceptual development of school programmes also for German Roma and Sinti
children;
- follow-up training of teachers and of Roma employed in schools;
- development of educational material;
- production of an information film on school-related issues, also in the Romany
language of the German Sinti, for Roma and Sinti parents;
- counselling for parents, pupils, schools and the competent authority.
762.
In Hesse, the aforementioned Pädagogisches Büro Nationale Minderheiten:
Sinti und Roma [Educational Bureau for National Minorities: Sinti and Roma] offers follow-up
training for teachers and supports projects carried out by schools. As a first step, the
subjects relating to the history and present-day life of the Sinti and Roma and to antiGypsy attitudes were incorporated in the framework curricula for sociology, history
and social studies, which were adopted in 1995. Subsequently, under a 2-year
project, educational materials were developed for history instruction and made available to schools in the 1998/99 school year. In 2001, the Bureau developed material
designed for teachers on the subject of "Sinti and Roma in films - Information on
documentaries and feature films".
The Educational Bureau is to create, in the Hessian schools, the conditions for introducing the history and present-day life of the Sinti and Roma, the subject of antiGypsy attitudes, and the culture of the Sinti and Roma in a form adapted to the respective age groups and school subjects. Teachers are to be provided with reliable
information on this subject matter which so far has been neglected by scholarly research and which is subject to quite a few stereotyped ideas. The target group of
these awareness-raising efforts is the majority population so as to reduce information
deficits and prejudices on a long-term basis. Therefore, they are designed to have
both a Land-wide and a regional impact. Follow-up training for teachers includes
lectures and seminars, research and supply of literature, and the introduction to, and
presentation of, newly developed educational material. In addition, the Bureau gives
advice to schools, and initiates and co-ordinates regional and local projects. It disseminates current research findings and co-operates with scholarly institutions and with
its counterparts in other Länder and with institutions and organizations of the Sinti
and Roma. Events and meetings help to develop a dialogue between the minority
and majority populations.

- 233 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

Recruitment of members of the minority, who did not take the state examination for
teachers, for teaching Romany to Sinti and Roma is made possible and facilitated by
the opening of schools [to such instructors], as stipulated in the Hessian Schools Act,
and by the extension of schools offering whole-day classes.
763.

In North Rhine/Westphalia, similar activities are carried out for teacher follow-

up training. For instruction and regional follow-up training, materials were developed
to provide information on the culture and history of the Sinti and Roma. A teacher
follow-up training project carried out in Hamm covers the discussion and analysis of
the experience made with the project, and co-operation between various projects and
an exchange of experience with other projects (Hamburg, Bremen, and Denmark and
the Netherlands). In addition, the related documentation provides for the information
of, and exchanges with, individuals and groups other than those involved in such
projects.
764.

In Lower Saxony, as part of the follow-up training scheme "interkulturelles
Lernen" [intercultural learning], regionally and centrally organized teacher follow-up
training courses are occasionally offered which impart knowledge of cultural, social
and historical aspects of the situation of the Sinti and Roma to teachers, and also
offer didactic/methodological aids in view of promoting schooling progress and
integration. The Lower Saxony Association of German Sinti, as well as local
initiatives, are involved in designing and organizing these follow-up training courses.
765.

In Rhineland-Palatinate, the State Pædagogical Centre and the Land Centre
for Political Education developed information material on the subject of "Sinti and
Roma - a German Minority". This material is made available to the schools of this
Land.
766.
In Bavaria, the central state agency for teacher follow-up training
continuously deals with the problems of ethnic linguistic minorities. Current
educational objectives are tolerance, living together harmoniously, understanding,
and respect for linguistic and cultural minorities. Land-organized teacher follow-up
training courses, which also cover intercultural education, regularly deal with these
subjects. This includes follow-up training of teachers with regard to the culture,
history, language and religion of the German Sinti and Roma.
767.

In the Land of Berlin, the Landesinstitut für Schule und Medien (LISUM - Berlin
Land Institute for Schools and the Media) organizes a number of follow-up training courses
on the subject of "Intercultural Learning", which include the language group of the
Sinti and Roma.
- 234 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

As part of its Working Papers series, LISUM published "Geschichte der Sinti und
Roma in Deutschland; Darstellung und Dokumente" ["History of the Sinti and Roma in Germany; Description and Documents"], and in the series Didaktische Materialien ["Didactic
Materials"], the volume entitled "Von Berlin nach Lodz und Auschwitz, Materialien zum
nationalsozialistischen Massenmord" ["From Berlin to £ódŸ and Auschwitz - Materials on the
Nazi-era Massacre"]. Also, in co-operation with the publishing house Hentrich & Hentrich, the volume "...die vielen Morde" (Dem Gedenken an die Opfer des Nationalsozialismus) ["...those many murders" (In Remembrance of the Victims of National Socialism)] was published and distributed at Berlin schools. A large number of documents is
dedicated to the memory of the Sinti and Roma as one of the seven groups of
victims.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para (i) - Supervisory Bodies (i)

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken
and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or
minority languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings which will be
made public.

767a. The Central Council of German Sinti and Roma points out that [implementation
of] Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (i), should - in view of the historical experience with
investigating/spying and the genocide - be subject to the proviso that such
supervisory bodies are not responsible for monitoring or prescribing the contents (i.e.
the teaching material, course content, and texts used in classroom instruction) of
language instruction given by Sinti or Roma teachers to children and adults of this
minority. These bodies must have the task of controlling the technical and
organizational requirements and processes for supplementary homework assistance
and catch-up tuition and for other group work (numbers of groups and pupils;
compliance with the time schedule for lessons; etc.).
1. Berlin
768.
The prerequisite for implementing this provision is that the minority/language
group must, with regard to the obligations under Article 8 of the Charter, specify their
requirements for instruction in the Romany language. As regards the present status,
cf. the pertinent comments on the preceding provisions of Article 8.
2. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
769.

The Hamburg Institut für Lehrerbildung und Schulentwicklung (LI - Teacher
Training and School Development Institute) also takes care of the counselling of specialized
teachers who receive follow-up training or additional qualification for teaching in the
- 235 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

regional language Low German and the minority language Romany. The Institute
keeps a list of the relevant courses offered by Hamburg schools; information on such
activities is given in the periodical "LI Magazin" ["LI Magazine"]. With regard to any extension required, or the qualification, of the offered courses, the responsible lecturers
of the Institute confer with the supervisory school authorities and with the 'German
Language' Section of the Senate Authority for Schools.
3. Hesse
770a. In this regard, reference is made to the above comments in No. 768 under "1.
Berlin".
Article 8, para. 2
Paragraph 2
With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the regional or
minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a
regional or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the
regional or minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.

This obligation has been accepted by the Länder of Berlin, Hesse and North Rhine/
Westphalia and, as a newly assumed voluntary commitment, by the Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg.
770b. As regards colleges and universities, this obligation - in the sense of "undertake ... to allow" - is met for all languages in the entire territory of the Federal Republic by virtue of Article 5, para. 3, of the Basic Law (autonomy of institutions of higher
education).
On account of the situation of this minority/language group in terms of school education, as discussed in detail in Nos. 704 - 708 above, this provision is at present not of
relevance in practice.

- 236 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

Article 9
Judicial Authorities
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents using
the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to the
situation of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the
present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of justice:

Art. 9, para 1, sub-para. (b) - Civil Proceedings in civil proceedings:
(iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

Art. 9, para 1, sub-para. (c) - Proceedings before Courts concerning Administrative
Matters (c) in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:

(iii)

to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

Both obligations have been accepted by the Federal Republic of Germany.
771.
With the proviso that documents and evidence drafted in a minority language
must be presented in a form obviating misunderstandings or errors with regard to
their translation, this obligation is met by the legal situation prevailing in Germany and
all of its Länder. Therefore, no special measures have been taken.
772.
As regards proceedings before administrative courts, it should be noted that
these courts are obliged to conduct ex officio investigations and, where necessary
and appropriate, will on their own initiative rely on the services of interpreters. Thus,
the members of a given language group suffer no prejudice by the use of their language.
773.
For Baden-Wurttemberg, the additional information is provided that, over the
past years, the Ministry of Justice has learnt of only one case where, in civil proceedings, a court contacted the Ministry of Justice in search of a qualified interpreter for
the Romany language, who was then located with the help of the Bundesverband der
Dolmetscher und Übersetzer e.V. [BDÜ - Federal Association of Interpreters and Translators,
reg'd].
774.
Generally, the existing procedural regulations ensure that qualified
interpreters will be called in if a person appearing in court does not have a full
command of the German language, and/or for translating legal documents and
evidence submitted in such proceedings. In its Official Gazette, the Baden- 237 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

Wurttemberg Ministry of Justice - wishing to provide a practical aid - included an
interpreter for the Romany language in a list of interpreters for rarely used languages;
at the same time, all courts and Public Prosecutor's Offices were requested to give
the names of interpreters for rarely used languages who are not yet included on the
list.
Art. 9, para. 2, sub-para. (a) - Validity of Legal Documents The Parties undertake:
(a) not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because
they are drafted in a regional or minority language; or

775.
This obligation has been accepted by the Federal Republic of Germany and
is met by the prevailing law in Germany and all of its Länder.

- 238 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

Article 10
Administrative Authorities and Public Services
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of
regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the
situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:

Art. 10, para. 1, sub-para. (a) (v) - Submission of Documents (v)

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a
document in these languages;

The obligation under sub-paragraph (a) (v) has been accepted by the Land of
Schleswig-Holstein.
776.
The legal basis for the adoption of this obligation by Schleswig-Holstein Land
is Article 82a, para. 2, of the Land Administration Act. This discretionary regulation
provides for the general possibility to submit applications, petitions, records, deeds or
other documents in a foreign language, i.e. a language other than the official language.
"Section 82a - Official language
(1) The official language is German.
(2) If applications or petitions, records, deeds or other documents drafted in a
foreign language are submitted to an authority, the latter may require a
translation to be produced. (...)"
777.
Schleswig-Holstein adopted this obligation for all four of its minority/regional
languages. In a letter of 16 July 1998 to the Minister-President [of Schleswig-Holstein],
the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma objected to the adoption of this undertaking and asked for withdrawal of its notification to the Council of Europe. In her
reply, the Minister-President stated that acceptance of this obligation was merely an
offer by the State. It was left to the minority to make use of that offer or not. Since
Schleswig-Holstein had entered into this undertaking also for its other minority and
regional languages, renunciation, confined to Romany, of the protection afforded
under this provision might give rise to the allegation that this constituted a form of
discrimination. In 2000, the Land Association of German Sinti and Roma informed the
State Chancellery that it did not share the Central Council's view and wished for
Schleswig-Holstein Land to uphold acceptance of this undertaking.
Article 10, para. 2
Paragraph 2
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who are
users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below, the
Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:

- 239 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

Art. 10, para. 2, sub-paras. and (b) - Use of a Regional or Minority Language, and
Applications to Local and Regional Authorities (b)

the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written
applications in these languages;

This obligation has been accepted by the Land of Schleswig-Holstein.
778.
The legal basis for the adoption of this obligation by Schleswig-Holstein Land
is Article 82a, para. 2, of the Land Administration Act. This discretionary regulation
provides for the general possibility to submit applications, petitions, records, deeds or
other documents in a foreign language, i.e. a language other than the official language.
"Section 82a - Official language
(1) The official language is German.
(2) If applications or petitions, records, deeds or other documents drafted in a foreign language are submitted to an authority, the latter may require a translation to be produced. (...)"
779.
Schleswig-Holstein accepted this provision for Low German and Romany.
After this had been notified to the Council of Europe, the Central Council of German
Sinti and Roma, in a letter (of 16 July 1998) to the Minister-President, objected to the
acceptance of this obligation and requested the withdrawal of its notification to the
Council of Europe.
780.
As regards use of the Romany language in dealings with public authorities, it
should also be pointed out that the German Sinti and Roma see Romany as a language used within the families and family clans of the Sinti and Roma. In their dealings with German authorities, they use the German language and object to their own
language being learnt and used by administrative officials who are not members of
this minority. However, the German Sinti and Roma wish that there should be no
problems involved in the use of Romany in contacts of Sinti and Roma as administrative staff members, on the one hand, and as citizens seeking advice, on the other.
Art. 10, para. 2, sub-para. (e) and (f) - Use of a Regional or Minority Language in Debates
of their Assemblies (e)
(f)

the use by regional authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;
the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

These obligations have been accepted by the Land of Hesse.

- 240 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

781.
In a press release on the decision taken by the Land Government on 14 July
1998, it was pointed out that speeches in the Romany language may be made in the
assemblies of local authorities. In this context, reference was made to several instances when debates were conducted in the Low German language in the German
Bundestag. In the view of the Hessian Land Government, recognition of minority
rights of Hessian Sinti and Roma and the entry into force of the anti-discrimination
provisions of the Regional/Minority Language Charter and of the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities will generate a growing interest and facilitate representation, through democratic parties, on local councils and regional parliaments. If two or more members of the national minority are represented on such
councils/assemblies and occasionally use their minority language, use of that language is admissible under the Charter. As required, the German version of statements in that language is to be included in the minutes. No information on relevant
practical experience is available.
Article 10, para. 3
Paragraph 3
With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting
on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which regional or minority languages
are used, in accordance with the situation of each language and as far as this is reasonably
possible:

Art. 10, para. 3, sub-paras. (c) - Requests in the Minority Language (c)

to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request in these languages.

This obligation has been accepted by the Land of Hesse.
782.
In administrative practice, no case has so far become known where a request
to this effect was submitted by a member of this minority.
Article 10, para. 4
Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the
Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:

Art. 10, para. 4, sub-para. (c) - Appointment of Public Service Employees having a
Knowledge of a Regional or Minority Language (c)

compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a
knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which
that language is used.

- 241 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

1. Baden-Wurttemberg
783.
If there is any relevant demand and if a staff member within the Land Administration expresses a wish regarding such an appointment, the scope for complying
with the request will be examined. So far, however, there have been no requests to
this effect at the level of the supreme Land authorities.
2. Hesse
784.
ees.

So far, no requests to this effect have been made by public service employ-

3. Schleswig-Holstein
785.
With a view to implementing this obligation, an announcement to this effect
was made at the Personalreferentenkonferenz (PRK - Conference of Personnel Officers) in 1999 and again in 2003. The PRK brings together the personnel officers of

the supreme Land authorities at regular meetings with the aim of co-ordinating and
harmonizing the essential cross-departmental decisions in the field of personnel management.
If a staff member within the Land Administration expresses a wish regarding such an
appointment, the scope for complying with the request will be examined. So far, however, there have been no requests to this effect at the level of the supreme Land
authorities.
Article 10, para. 5
Paragraph 5
The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or minority
languages, at the request of those concerned.

786.
This obligation has been accepted by the Federal Republic of Germany. In
this regard, cf. the comments in Nos. 220 - 225 above.

- 242 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

Article 11
Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in
which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that
the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this field,
and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:

Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (b) (i) - Radio Broadcasting (i)

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one radio station in the
regional or minority languages; or

This obligation has been accepted by the Land of Berlin.
787.
There are no legal provisions preventing implementation of this provision.
However, the minority/language group so far has not made any use of this possibility
so that this provision is not of relevance in practice.
Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (b) (ii) - Radio Broadcasting (ii)

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;

1. Berlin
788.
In view of ensuring pluralism of opinions among approved private broadcasters, Section 19, para. 1, of the Inter-State Treaty between the Länder of Berlin
and Brandenburg on Co-operation in the Field of Broadcasting of 29 February 1992,
as amended on 1 January 1999, stipulated the following: "The private broadcasters
licensed in the area of application of this Inter-State Treaty shall reflect the essence
of the plurality of opinions in the contents of their programmes. The relevant political,
philosophical/ideological and social actors and groups shall be given adequate scope
for expressing their opinions in the respective generalist (overall) programmes and in
specialist (thematic) programmes with a focus on information; opinions of minorities
shall be taken account of."
789.
The Inter-State Treaty between the Länder of Berlin and Brandenburg on Cooperation in the Field of Broadcasting also laid down a provision on "minority programmes". Section 45 of the Inter-State Treaty reads as follows: "In statutes adopted
by it, the Media Council can lay down the overall conditions for experimental programmes on a cable TV channel and a low-capacity FM broadcasting channel, in
which special account is taken of the interests of minorities. If in that context foreignlanguage programmes are planned, the overall programme shall foster the living together of foreigners and the German population in Berlin and Brandenburg. Before
- 243 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

adopting statutes, the Berlin-Brandenburg Land supervisory authority for private
broadcasters [MABB] will, in co-operation with the Land public-service broadcasting
corporation, identify the demand for such programmes and study the scope for developing them."
790.
The radio programme MultiKulti of Rundfunk Berlin-Brandenburg (RBB)
which also broadcasts a section in the Romany language of the Roma of South
Eastern Europe (Sundays, at 21.30 - 22.05 hours), addresses this programme mainly
to Roma living in the Greater Berlin region and, in particular, to foreign Roma.
2. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
791.
There are no special offers for Romany at present. As regards the practical
possibilities generally existing for this language group, reference is made to the comments in Nos. 226 - 239 above.
3. Hesse
792.
In the Land of Hesse, Section 13, para. 1, of the Act on Private Broadcasting
stipulates that the programmes shall contribute towards "the protection of ethnic, cultural and linguistic minorities".
4. Schleswig-Holstein
793.
In 1999 and again in 2003, the Minister-President of Schleswig-Holstein Land
encouraged the radio and TV station programme directors of Norddeutscher Rundfunk (NDR), Zweites Deutsches Fernsehen (ZDF - Second German Television, or Channel II), DeutschlandRadio, Radio Schleswig-Holstein (R.SH), NORA (NordOstseeRAdio), delta radio and POWER RADIO Nord as well as the Unabhängige Landesanstalt für Rundfunk und neue Medien (ULR - Independent Land Supervisory Authority
for Broadcasting), the TV stations RTL and SAT1, the Gesellschaft zur Förderung
audiovisueller Werke in Schleswig-Holstein mbH (MSH - Limited Liability Company for
the Promotion of Audiovisual Works in Schleswig Holstein) and Kulturelle Filmförderung
[registered association Cultural Film Promotion, Schleswig-Holstein] that "further avenues
should be explored for integrating contributions in the minority languages and in the
regional language Low German into their programmes, as a service for the citizens
and in support of this element of Schleswig-Holstein's culture". Since the German
Sinti and Roma minority use, and pass on, their language only within the family and
their minority, radio broadcasts in Romany are not to be expected for the time being;
or at any rate, the Land Government does not know of any such plans.
- 244 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

794.
In addition, the following provisions have been laid down:
• The broadcasting corporation under public law (Norddeutscher Rundfunk - NDR)
has the legal mandate to report on the cultural diversity and the special features of
the respective Land and to give its support to the protection of minorities.
• Adequate room must be given in the programme to the North German region, its
culture and language.
• Programming principles for private broadcasting: Broadcasting programmes shall
contribute (...) to the protection and promotion of minorities (...).
• Protected minorities have access to the media, and scope for participation, on the
same conditions as other groups of society. The provisions of the Land Broadcasting Act promote programming diversity and the variety of broadcasters.
• The Land Broadcasting Act was amended in 1999. Under this amendment, the
previous Assembly of the supervisory authority ULR [Schleswig-Holstein Land broadcasting institution for private broadcasters] was replaced by a Media Council. Any socially relevant group, organization or association of supraregional standing is entitled to make nominations for the election of the Media Council.
• In addition, the ULR operates two radio broadcasting "Open Channels" in Schleswig-Holstein. Through these Open Channels, anybody who is not a broadcaster
him/herself, can disseminate his/her own contributions via radio broadcasting.
Legal Bases:
Inter-State Treaty on Norddeutscher Rundfunk [NDR State Treaty] (of 26 February
1992): Section 3, para. 3; Section 5, para. 2, 1st sentence; Section 7, para. 2,
3rd sentence;
Inter-State Agreement on the Public Corporation Zweites Deutsches Fernsehen
(ZDF) (of 15 December 2000): Section 5, para. 2;
Land Broadcasting Act (of 22 May 2002): Section 17, para. 2, nos. 1 and 2; Section 24, para. 3; Section 34, para. 1, 1st - 3rd sentences; Section 54, para. 3.

Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (c) (ii) - Broadcasting of Television Programmes (ii)

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;

1. Berlin
795.

In this regard, cf. the comments in No. 788 above.

2. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
796.

In this regard, cf. the comments in No. 791 above.

3. Hesse
797.
In the Land of Hesse, television programmes in Romany can be broadcast
over the 'Open Channel'. At present, such facilities exist in the cities of Kassel, Gießen and Offenbach/ Frankfurt.
- 245 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

798.
The Land Government will inform the Hesse-based Hessischer Rundfunk
(HR) of the obligations entered into under sub-paras. (b) (ii) and (c) (ii) and, while
observing the constitutional rule of governmental non-intervention in broadcasting, is
prepared to initiate a dialogue between the Hesse Land Association of German
Sinti and Roma and the Hessian Landesrundfunkanstalt [Land public service broadcasting
corporation]. The Central Council of German Sinti and Roma pointed out to the Land
Government that in the Council's view, programmes with Sinti and Roma music might
be a possibility.
4. Rhineland-Palatinate
799.
In Rhineland-Palatinate, individuals and groups can, on their own responsibility, air television programmes over the so-called 'Open Channel'. It is not known
whether any programmes in Romany have been broadcast so far.
5. Schleswig-Holstein
800.

In this regard, cf. the comments in Nos. 793 and 794 above.

Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (d) - Audio and Audiovisual Works (d)

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in the regional or minority languages;

This obligation has been accepted by the Federal Republic of Germany.
801.
As regards the production of such works and their dissemination outside the
broadcasting sector, state promotion of the Documentation Centre of German Sinti
and Roma meets this provision. On the basis of this funding support and by virtue of
the principle of self-management, it is up to the responsible representatives of this
minority/language group in this institution, when deciding on the Centre's activities, to
decide on the adoption of pertinent measures and to implement them within the limits
of the overall funds available.
Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (e) (i) - Newspaper (i)

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one
newspaper in the regional or minority languages; or

Preliminary remarks:
802.
There is little scope for state intervention on account of freedom of the press
as guaranteed by the Constitution (for additional reference, cf. the explanations in
No. 230 above).
- 246 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

803.
Publication of print media in the Romany language would be against the fundamental view of the German Sinti that their language should be used within their
families and family clans only, and that no written form should be developed. However, the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma regularly disseminates articles
and comments in German which are released to the press and also are made available to its affiliated associations for information. Other organizations of the German
Sinti and Roma also provide information through information services and/or circulars. Roma organizations also use their Romany language for this purpose. The
Documentation and Cultural Centre of German Sinti and Roma publishes a series of
booklets (in German).
1. Berlin
804.
At present, no newspaper of the German Sinti and Roma is published in Berlin. No requests to this effect have so far been addressed to the Land.
2. Hesse
805.
So far, the members of the minority in this Land have not expressed any
intention to create their own newspaper.
Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (e) (ii) - Newspaper Articles (ii)

to encourage and/or facilitate the publication of newspaper articles in the regional
or minority languages on a regular basis;

1. Federal Republic of Germany
806.
As regards the Romany language, the provision of subpara. (e) (ii) is met by
the state-provided promotion of the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma and of
the Documentation and Cultural Centre of German Sinti and Roma. On the basis of
state-provided promotion of the press activities of the two institutions and under the
principle of self-management, it is for the responsible representatives of this ethnic
group in the two institutions to decide on the release of articles in Romany to the
press and to disseminate them within the framework of the overall funds available.
2. Berlin
807.

In this regard, cf. the comments in No. 804 above.

808.

[blank]

- 247 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (f) (ii) - Financial Assistance for Audiovisual Productions (ii)

to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions
in the regional or minority languages;

This obligation has been accepted by the Federal Republic of Germany.
809.
Direct financial assistance by the state is problematic, due to freedom of
broadcasting as guaranteed by the Constitution (in this respect, cf. the comments in
Nos. 226 - 230 above).
810.
This provision is met, as regards the Romany language, by the stateprovided promotion of the Documentation and Cultural Centre of German
Sinti and Roma since, on the basis of such promotion and under the principle of selfmanagement, it is up to the responsible representatives of the ethnic group in this
institution to use the available public funds also for audiovisual productions.
Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (g) - Training of Journalists (g)

to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using regional or
minority languages.

This obligation has been accepted by the Federal Republic of Germany.
811.
The state-provided promotion of the Documentation and Cultural Centre of
German Sinti and Roma meets this provision with regard to the Romany language.
On the basis of such promotion and under the principle of self-management, it is up
to the responsible representatives of the ethnic group in this institution to use such
public funds also for basic and follow-up training in the Romany language and/or to
organize other professional follow-up training with regard to the use of the minority
language.
Art. 11, para. 2 - Freedom of Direct Reception of Broadcasts, and Freedom of Expression
Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television broadcasts
from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or
minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from
neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure that no restrictions
will be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of information in the written press
in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of
the above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to
such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in
a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for
the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the
reputation or rights of others, for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or
for maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.

This obligation has been accepted by the Federal Republic of Germany.
- 248 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

812.
As regards the fundamental conditions governing freedom of expression and
reception of broadcasts, reference is also made to the detailed comments in Nos.
226 - 239 above. Within the limits of the law as described in those paragraphs, this
obligation is met by constitutional provisions and ordinary laws in Germany.

- 249 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

Article 12
Cultural Activities and Facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities - especially libraries, video libraries, cultural
centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film
production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries, including
inter alia the use of new technologies - the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such
languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play
a role in this field:

Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (a) - Types of Expression, and Access to Works (a)

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority
languages and foster the different means of access to works produced in these
languages;

1. Baden-Wurttemberg
813.
Baden-Wurttemberg meets this obligation by promoting the Documentation
and Cultural Centre of German Sinti and Roma. In this way, the Centre can launch
initiatives which are typical of the forms of cultural expression specific to the minority
language Romany, and it can facilitate access to relevant works by providing, in particular, its own publications.
2. Berlin
814.
At the former Kongresshalle - which was built in 1957 in the Berlin Tiergarten
district and is a world-famous landmark of this city - the cultural centre Haus der Kulturen der Welt presents a large variety of exhibitions, films, readings, concerts, dance
or theatre performances, lectures and symposia. The providing bodies of this Haus
are the Land of Berlin and the Federal Government. It soon gained a high international reputation and a wide public: these events draw an audience of more than
250,000 every year. The Romani Rat e.V. [cf. Romani Union Berlin-Brandenburg] (which for
its presentation on the Internet uses the URL address of the web site www.romaniunion.com), together with the Roma P.E.N. Zentrum, organized a 'European Festival
of Roma and Sinti Music' at this location on 22 - 25 May 2003.
815.
In 1990, the Land Association established a social services/youth work Counselling Bureau. The staff members of this Bureau are Sinti. Its main tasks are social
counselling and general assistance with the enforcement of indemnification claims of
victims of the Nazi regime who are members of this national minority. In addition,
awareness-raising activities forming part of school and out-of-school youth education
as well as adult education, or presented at public events, are carried out with the aim
of providing basic information about Sinti and Roma in order to reduce misconceptions and prejudices.
- 250 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

3. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
816.
Through its Senate Authority for Cultural Affairs, Hamburg assists cultural initiatives and artists of minorities, including Sinti and Roma, in the organization of cultural projects and events. The aim is to help minorities with the preservation and further development of their culture. Priority is given to promoting intercultural projects,
i.e. projects involving, or reaching out to, people from different backgrounds.
4. Hesse
817.
The Land Government declared its willingness to foster the means of access
to works produced in the Romany language, with regard to cultural institutions and
activities, especially libraries, cultural centres, museums, theatres, and literary works
and film productions.
The first "Roma and Sinti Symphony Orchestra", directed by Ricardo Sahiti, was
founded in Frankfurt/Main in 2002. The orchestra, which is composed of Sinti and
Roma from Germany as well as of musicians from various foreign countries, in 2002
and 2003 already gave two extraordinarily successful concerts in Frankfurt, which
received wide publicity. Guest performers were musicians of international renown,
e.g. Robby Lakatos. The orchestra is the first to apply itself to the classical section of
Roma and Sinti music. Well-known composers wrote concertinos specifically for this
orchestra. The Central Council and the Documentation and Cultural Centre of German Sinti and Roma in Heidelberg provide organizational support to the orchestra.
5. Lower Saxony
818.
Lower Saxony Land sees literature and language as an essential element of
the identification of the individual and the community. Therefore, the Land subsidizes
many associations and unions with regard to various activities designed to cultivate
their minority language which is spoken in Lower Saxony. The Ministry of Scientific
and Cultural Affairs is interested in promoting initiatives in the area of culture, especially literature. The Ministry encourages relevant events.
819.
The focus of the above activities is on the the regional language Low
German. No applications have so far been filed for promotion of Romany. In talks
with the organizers of events, the Land regularly draws their attention to the existing
and necessary scope for implementation with regard to the Romany language.

- 251 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

6. North-Rhine/Westphalia
820.
Since 1993, this Land has provided financial promotion for the Roma
"Pralipe" Theatre in Mülheim/Ruhr. The actors involved are Macedonian Roma who
cannot be classed with the autochthonous German Sinti and Roma. By giving guest
performances of stage plays in Germany and neighbouring countries, this theatre
company, which originally was domiciled in the Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, helps to preserve essential elements of the Roma's identity, such as
language, tradition and cultural heritage. Special grants by the Land Government
in 1998 enabled the "Pralipe" Theatre to go on an additional tour of guest
performances to present its plays to a larger audience. With the support of the Land it
is possible to present types of expression specific to the respective languages and to
foster access to works produced in those languages.
821.

Here it should be pointed out that the Pralipe Theatre in October 1998 re-

ceived the Lorca Award of the International Institute of Mediterranean Theatre. At the
same time, the Theatre, together with the former Ministry of Education and Cultural
Affairs of North Rhine/Westphalia Land, was awarded a prize by this Institute for their
commitment in fighting xenophobia.
7. Rhineland-Palatinate
822.
In Rhineland-Palatinate, as part of the overall activities to foster and maintain
culture, the Sinti and Roma "Aven" festival, which is regularly held in Landau, is supported with funds of the registered association "Kultursommer e.V.". Another event
subsidized by Kultursommer e.V. was the 2003 music festival "Horizonte", with the
participation of Sinti and Roma groups. Also, local events (e.g. the photo exhibition
"Schnuckenack-Reinhardt") are financially supported. Since 1999, the Land Association of German Sinti and Roma has received institution-based financial support which
is also used for promoting the Romany language.
8. Schleswig-Holstein
823.
Implementation of this obligation is primarily accomplished indirectly by the
Land-provided promotion of the Secretariat and Advisory Bureau of the Land Association of German Sinti and Roma in Kiel.
824.
To give a specific example: in 1997, the Ministry for Education, Science, Research and Cultural Affairs and the Land Association of German Sinti and Roma organized an expert meeting within the framework of a cultural project. Sinti and Roma
from several European countries discussed issues related to the self-perception and
- 252 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

the culture of the Sinti and Roma as well as aspects of any potential loss, or preservation, of culture. The meeting was also attended by representatives from other national minorities and ethnic groups of Schleswig-Holstein Land. The Official Residence for Guests of the Land Government was made available for the duration of the
expert meeting. The meeting concluded with a musical programme. Since 1998, a
specific title of the Land Budget (departmental budget of the Ministry for Education,
Science, Research and Cultural Affairs) has been assigned to the cultural work of the
German Sinti and Roma.
Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (d) - Taking Account of the Regional or Minority Language in
Cultural Activities (d)

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of
various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of
regional or minority languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or
for which they provide backing;

1. Baden-Wurttemberg
825.
This obligation is met by Land funding provided for the Documentation and
Cultural Centre of German Sinti and Roma in Heidelberg, with a share of 10 % of the
Centre's total expenses.
2. Berlin
826.
The Werkstatt der Kulturen (WdK - Multicultural Workshop) established in 1993
and funded by the Berlin Senate - which is known as the initiator and organizer of the
"Karneval der Kulturen" - perceives itself as a theatre of cultural diversity as well as a
forum for encounter and political dialogue in Berlin. The culture and language of the
Sinti and Roma are regularly presented in the WdK's programme which covers
music, theatre, dance, performance, and photography. An exemplary case is the initiative "Zukunftsmusik" [lit. "music of the future", otherwise only used in its figurative meaning
"dreams of the future"] which promotes musically talented children and adolescents
coming from Sinti or Roma families. The providing body of this initiative is the WdK,
in close co-operation with the Berlin-Brandenburg Land Association of German Sinti
and Roma. The methodology and didactics are based on early childhood musical
education within the families (tradition of oral passing on of qualifications) and on the
particular standards required by the freely improvised music that is part of the culture
of the Sinti and Roma. Offers to take part in this project help to promote contacts
among the Sinti and Roma living in Berlin. Since March 1999, the Romani Union Berlin-Brandenburg e.V. has organized a series of readings under the motto "Die Welt
der Roma-Literatur" ["The World of Roma Literature"]. This series was followed up, during
- 253 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

the period under review, by the Romani Rat e.V. with monthly readings held in the
Rat's rooms in Schöneberg Kulturhaus, a (municipal) cultural (and civic) centre for
decentralised cultural work, which is subsidized by the (Schöneberg) city district and
the Senate Authority for Education and Cultural Affairs.
3. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
827.
The Hamburg Senate Authority for Cultural Affairs, in handling applications
for support for Romany literary projects, gives equal priority to such projects and to
those related to standard German and Low German. However, hardly any
applications for literature promotion have been filed. Moreover, the Authority's
'Intercultural Projects' Section has an additional mandate also in the field of Romany
and encourages the subsidized organizations to take special account of the Romany
language.
4. Hesse
828.
The Hesse Land Government promotes the cultural work of the Hessian
Land Association of German Sinti and Roma. In co-operation with that Land
Association, events were held under the motto "ROM SOM" covering the tradition of
the poetry, music and narrative art of the Sinti and Roma (at Museumszentrum in
Lorsch on 28 May 1999; in Darmstadt on 20 August 1999; and in Rodgau on 31
October 1999). Further cultural activities referring to the history and literature of the
Sinti and Roma were organized by the Land Association at the Frankfurt
Literaturhaus on 5 March 1999 and in Wiesbaden on 30 January 1999 and
23 September 1999.
On the occasion of commemoration ceremonies at the local level, individual artists
from the minority gave performances. In addition, Sinti and Roma artists gave public
performances organized in co-operation with the Hesse Land Association of German
Sinti and Roma. To give a few examples: A concert to celebrate the founding of the
Roma and Sinti String Orchestra in Frankfurt/Main on 3 November 2002. On 19 December 2002, in Darmstadt, the Roma theatre Pralipe gave a guest performance of
the play "Die Tinte unter meiner Haut" ["The ink under my skin"].
5. Lower Saxony
829.

In this regard, cf. the comments in No. 818 above.

6. North-Rhine/Westphalia
- 254 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

830.
With the funding - already described in No. 820 above - provided to the
Pralipe Theatre, which performs in Romany, the Land of North Rhine/Westphalia at
the same time ensures that the bodies responsible for organizing cultural activities
make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge of the culture of this
minority in the undertakings organized by these bodies.
7. Rhineland-Palatinate
831.

In this regard, cf. the comments in No. 822 above.

8. Schleswig-Holstein
832.
With the promotional funds provided by Schleswig-Holstein, the Land
Association of German Sinti and Roma ensures that appropriate allowance is made
for incorporating the knowledge and use of the Romany language and the culture of
the German Sinti and Roma in its own cultural activities.
833.

The Land Association was a partner in the project Kulturen, Sprachen,

Minderheiten: Die deutsch-dänische Grenzregion - Beispiel einer Konfliktlösung
["Cultures, Languages, Minorities: The German-Danish Border Region - An Example of Conflict
Management"] sponsored by Schleswig-Holstein Land as part of the World Exhibition

EXPO 2000. For this reason, also staff of the Land Association took part in
preparatory meetings. Cf. also No. 841 below.
Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (f) - Participation of Representatives of the Group Speaking the
Given Language in Cultural Activities (f)

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or
minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

1. Baden-Wurttemberg
834.

In this regard, cf. the comments in No. 825 above.

2. Berlin
835.
The Berlin Senate encourages the representatives of the Sinti and Roma as
well as individual members of this group to continue their active participation in the
diversified cultural scene of the city districts and of the Land (in this regard, cf. the
comments in No. 826 above).
836.

Since December 2002, the Regionale Arbeitsstelle für Ausländerfragen
[Regional Workshop for Foreigners' Issues] in Berlin has, as part of the measures designed
- 255 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

to promote the self-organization of Roma and Sinti by means of employment and
protection of livelihoods, trained 'school helpers' who - as mediators between
schools, on the one hand, and the Roma and Sinti families, on the other - promote
mutual understanding of the cultural background of the respective other side. This is
to ensure continuous school attendance and to enhance the educational
opportunities of the members of this group.
Another provider (Die Wille gGmbH) trains members of this group as social advisers
and family advisers who help other Sinti and Roma in their dealings with public authorities in order to eliminate intercultural misunderstandings and provide for actual use
of the existing opportunities.
3. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
837.
The Hamburg Senate Authority for Cultural Affairs is willing to encourage
representatives of this language group to participate in the work of cultural institutions
and in the planning of cultural activities. So far, however, pertinent requirements have
only rarely been notified by the language group.

4. Hesse
838.

In this regard, cf. the comments in No. 828 above.

5. Lower Saxony
839.

In this regard, cf. the comments in No. 818 above.

6. North-Rhine/Westphalia
840.
Promotion of the Pralipe Theatre encourages representatives of this
language group to participate directly in the planning of cultural activities, and they
actually make use of this opportunity in practice.
7. Schleswig-Holstein
841.

As a central cultural event, Schleswig-Holstein-Tag [a day dedicated to the special
character of Schleswig-Holstein] is organized every two years in different places of this
Land. The organizations and associations of the minority of German Sinti and Roma
are also invited to participate in this event and to take part in arranging and organizing it. Since 1995, the Land Association of German Sinti and Roma has been a
- 256 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

member of the festival's organizing body Landeskuratorium Schleswig-Holstein-Tag
and has regularly taken part in this Land festival.
Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (g) - Creation of Archive Bodies (g)

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for
collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the
regional or minority languages;

This obligation has been accepted by the Federal Republic of Germany.
842.
Given the funding provided by the Bund [Federal Administration] and by BadenWurttemberg Land to the Documentation and Cultural Centre of German Sinti and
Roma, this obligation is met nation-wide with regard to the Romany language since
the tasks of this Centre include collecting, keeping copies of, and publishing such
works.

Article 12, para. 2
Paragraph 2
In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are
traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language
justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in
accordance with the preceding paragraph.

843.
In the Federal Republic of Germany, cultural activities conforming with the
law in force are not subject to any permit procedure or restrictions. Thus, the above
obligation is already fulfilled by the system of law in the Federal Republic of
Germany. In addition, several Länder have adopted this provision additionally in the
sense of "undertake ... to allow"; such adoption does not entail any requirement for
special implementation measures. In this context it should be noted that the
Sinti and Roma live dispersed in the various Länder, with concentrations in the large
cities (in this regard, reference is made to the detailed comments in Part A,
section A.3.4, Nos. 33 seqq.), so that for this reason alone, it is not possible for the
Länder to confine their measures to a particular region of the respective Land.
This obligation has been accepted by the Länder of Baden-Wurttemberg, Hesse,
North-Rhine/Westphalia and Schleswig-Holstein.
Article 12, para. 3
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for
regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.

844.
Adoption of this obligation has been notified by the Federal Republic of
Germany for the entire federal territory since activities in the Romany language or
- 257 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

related to the culture reflected by Romany - e.g. guest performances by theatre
companies or musical performances - can be organized in the context of Germany's
cultural policy abroad. Examples are the following activities:
-

Häns'sche Weiss Ensemble (Sinti jazz), South East Asia tour in 1991, and HispanoAmerica North in 1994 (Goethe-Institut)
Möttes Band (Roman and Ricardo REINHARD; Sinti music and Yiddish songs), in
York in 1998 (Goethe-Institut)
Pralipe (Roma Theatre), at the Festival of Central European Culture in London in
1998.

- 258 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

Article 13
Economic and Social Life
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake within the whole country:
(a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without
justifiable reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to
economic or social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical
documents such as instructions for the use of products or installations;
(b)
to prohibit the insertion - in internal regulations of companies and private documents of any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or minority languages, at
least between users of the same language;
(c)
to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority languages
in connection with economic or social activities;
(d) to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by means other
than those specified in the above sub-paragraphs.

845.
The obligations under sub-paragraphs (a), (c) and (d) have been accepted
by the Federal Republic of Germany. They are in compliance with the established law
of the Federal Republic of Germany and thus are already fulfilled nation-wide for all
regional or minority languages.
846.
Implementation of the provision of sub-para. (d) is accomplished, for
instance, by the promotional funds provided by the Bund [Federal Administration] and by
Baden-Wurttemberg Land to the Bureau of the Central Council of German
Sinti and Roma, which is active in political and social life nation-wide, since the
structures established for the self-management of the users of regional or minority
languages increase the practical scope for using the respective language outside the
family. Similarly, the funds provided by the Länder for the contact and counselling
bureaus operated by Land Associations or clubs of German Sinti and Roma - and
given that such funding at the same time encourages and facilitates the use of the
Romany language - constitute compliance with the aforementioned obligation.

- 259 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Romanes

Article 14
Transfrontier Exchanges
The Parties undertake:
(a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the States
in which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if necessary to seek
to conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster contacts between the users of
the same language in the States concerned in the fields of culture, education,
information, vocational training and permanent education;

847.
Acceptance of this provision has been notified by the Federal Republic of
Germany for the entire federal territory. The Framework Convention for the Protection
of National Minorities, upon its entry into force for the Republic of Austria, complies
with this provision of the Charter with regard to the Romany language. Co-operation
between the Documentation and Cultural Centre of German Sinti and Roma and the
Kulturverein Österreichischer Roma [Cultural Association of Austrian Roma], which is also
state-subsidized, has developed for a number of years already. Both sides keep up
continuous exchanges of information and share each other's publications. This cooperation also extends to the fields of culture, education, vocational training and permanent education.
In co-operation with Roma organizations from a number of European countries
(Austria, Poland, Hungary, Slovakia, Czech Republic, Netherlands, Yugoslavia, and
others), the Documentation and Cultural Centre of German Sinti and Roma organized
the Permanent Exhibition on the Genocide of Sinti and Roma in Nazi-Occupied
Europe, which is located at the Auschwitz Memorial Site and was opened on
2 August 2001. The exhibition is housed in "Block 13" of the so-called "principal
camp" of the former concentration and extermination camp Auschwitz. At a number
of meetings held during the design and build-up phase of this exhibition, the participation of Roma representatives from the various countries resulted in an international
cultural exchange, e.g. music presented in the Romany language of the Ukrainian
minority. On the occasion of the international memorial day of the Roma and Sinti,
which for many years already has been held every 2nd August at Auschwitz-Birkenau,
the Polish Roma Association regularly presents an accompanying cultural programme. Every year, delegations comprised of 25 to 30 persons of the Documentation Centre and of the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma take part in the
Memorial Day ceremonies and attend the performances of the accompanying programme and in this context participate in a transfrontier cultural exchange. For the
travel of delegations comprising 150 members to commemoration ceremonies on
particular anniversaries in Auschwitz, the Federal Foreign Office grants supplementary funds.

- 260 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

D.2.6 Low German

848.
Low German (Low Saxon; Niederdeutsch; Plattdeutsch) is protected under
Part III of the Charter in the following Länder: Free Hanseatic City of Bremen, Free
and Hanseatic City of Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Lower Saxony
and Schleswig-Holstein. In the Länder of Brandenburg, North Rhine/Westphalia and
Saxony-Anhalt, Low German falls under the protection afforded under Part II, since
the required quorum of 35 obligations is not attained.

Article 8
Education
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are
used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching
of the official language(s) of the State:

Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (a) - Pre-School Education (i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or
to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those
pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient; or
if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school
education, to favour and/or encourage the application of the measures referred to
under i to iii above;

The Länder noted below have accepted the obligation under sub-paragraph (a) (iv).
1. Brandenburg
849.
In Brandenburg Land, pre-school education is the responsibility of local authorities. Under the Act on Financing Local Authorities, these latter receive funds, inter
alia, for the purpose of promoting institutions and measures in the field of pre-school
education, e.g. day-nurseries or children's day-care centres.
850.
The Low German language is spoken in the northerly Landkreise of
Uckermark, Prignitz, Ostprignitz-Ruppin and Oberhavel. Not only does the Land
Government not discourage the use of the Low German language in pre-school
education, but it even takes a very positive approach to this matter. However, no
statistics are available on the extent to which Low German is used (in response to
No. 84 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final]).
- 261 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

851.
Official statements by the government, pertinent comments by politicians in
positions of responsibility, and appreciative acknowledgement of the work done with
regard to minority-related matters are aimed at creating a climate in which Low German will win recognition as an autochthonous form of expression of Northern Germany and the northern region of Brandenburg, and at inducing parents and providing
bodies of children's day-care centres to take an interest in the inclusion of the Low
German language in children's pre-school development. In this way, the Land helps
to increase acceptance of Low German in society, to make this language appear as
an integral part of regional identity, and to reduce any inhibitions concerning use of
this language.
2. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
852.
In March 1999, the [Senate] Authority for Education and Sports (BBS) wrote to
all Hamburg schools and asked them, and schools in rural areas in particular, to
accept cultivation of the Low German language as an educational mandate. The extent to which the Hamburg pre-school establishments have complied with this request
is not known since these are not subject to any reporting requirements.
853.
As regards the comment of the Committee of Experts in No. 287 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], it is reported that the concept for the subject 'German' in pre-school education is being developed by the competent Senate Authority
for Education and Sports in the context of the preparation of the 'Directives on Education and Instruction in Pre-School Classes'.
On the basis of Hamburg's voluntary commitment to Article 8, Low German will be
made a regular element of pre-school education, which will support or encourage
activities aimed at learning Low German or reinforcing knowledge of this language.
This comprises inclusion of Low German songs, dances, rhymes and riddles in preschool education.
3. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
854. Bremen has organized advisory services for children's day-care centres wishing
to integrate Low German into pre-school education.
855. In response to the Committee's request in No. 254 of the Monitoring Report [MINLANG (2002) 4 final] for further information, it is reported that increased early-childhood
education in nursery schools and other pre-school facilities is to be provided under
the plans for the pre-school sector, with particular regard to the PISA Study [Programme for International Study Assessment / for Indicators of Student Achievement]. This includes
- 262 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

promotion of the development of language proficiency of all children so that the level
of their linguistic skills will be raised before enrolment in an elementary school.
4. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
856. In response to the request of the Committee of Experts in No. 321 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] for additional information on any planned activities, the following is reported:
The Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania Act on Children's Day-Care Centres was
amended, and at present hearings are held on the amendment. The Land Government will gradually introduce day-care offers for all children from age 2 onwards, with
the aim of creating a legal entitlement. The educational mandate will be extended
and will cover the detailed subjects of the pre-school year. As of the 2004/2005
school year, the Land Government will introduce the free-tuition pre-school year. This
will cover 4 hours per day over a period of 10 months.
Within the framework of this initiative, Landesheimatverband Mecklenburg-Vorpommern e.V. [Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania Land Union for Local and Regional Traditions]
is working on a pilot project entitled "Disseminating and learning the fundamentals of
the Low German language by individuals and educators in pre-school facilities - Low
German language course". In the Landkreise of Mecklenburg-Strelitz and Ostvorpommern, in the region Ludwigslust/Schwerin/Nordwestmecklenburg, the Neubrandenburg region and municipality, and in neighbouring Landkreise, nursery-school
educators, school teachers, childminders ["day mothers"] and other persons interested
in Low German will be familiarized with the didactics and methodology aimed at promoting language learning by children of age 3 onwards, during the period March
2003 - October 2003 and February 2004 - November 2004, respectively.
The 40 nursery-school teachers, teachers of lower secondary school, and educators
for leisure/recreation activities will receive an official certificate on their participation
in, and successful completion of, this training course of about 66-hours' duration. In
addition to the on-going courses, four basic 'Low German' courses have started in
Greifswald, which are organized by the Landesheimatverband Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, the Ländliche Erwachsenenbildung Mecklenburg/Vorpommern/Usedom [RuralArea Adult Education for Mecklenburg/Western Pomerania/Usedom] and the Hanseatic City of
Greifswald. Four nursery schools offer a course of about 48-hours' duration to more
than 44 nursery-school teachers. Under this project, it is also planned to develop
teaching and work materials and to prepare a documentation on the entire pilot
project.

- 263 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

Thirty-one children's day-care centres operated by the social services provider Volkssolidarität Mecklenburg-Vorpommern e.V. have regular project activities and/or work
panels for Low German. In addition, some 100 pre-school children followed introductory Low German courses under a relevant project. As a spin-off, three short children's films were produced in co-operation with Rostocker Offener Kanal (ROK-TV).
Film scripts - working title: "Mecklenburg customs and traditions are still alive" - are
under preparation for about 4 films. Eight children's day-care centres run by the German Red Cross (DRK) also offer regular instruction in the Low German language and
culture.
5. Lower Saxony
857. In the period 1997 - 2000, the Model Test "Bilingualism in Nursery Schools" was
run at 36 nursery schools in Ostfriesland [Lower Saxony]. The success of this test is an
encouragement to continue the use of Low German in pre-school education. The
available report on the first year of the model test also provides a general account of
the results obtained so far. Bilingual education is at present continued at 34 nursery
schools which are networked through the Plattdütskbüro [Low German Office] of Ostfriesische Landschaft and whose educators are invited to half-day further education
courses twice a year. In its Further Training Programme for 2000, the Lower Saxony
Land Youth Welfare and Youth Service Office, in co-operation with [the public-law corporation] Ostfriesische Landschaft, for the first time offered two Land-wide further
training activities on the subject of bilingualism (standard German/Low German) in
children's day-care centres.
858. In response to the request of the Committee of Experts in No. 355 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], the following information on further measures is
provided:
In the period from 1 April 2001 to 31 March 2003 the project "Mehrsprachigkeit in der
Vor- und Grundschulperiode" ["Multilingualism in the Pre-School and Primary Education
Stages"], which was supported by EU funding, was carried out with Ostfriesische
Landschaft as the lead body acting for seven speech communities of four European
countries. Within the framework of this project, a training course for educators on
"Early multilingualism, including the regional language Low German" was developed
in co-operation with the Emden Berufsbildende Schulen 1. The course was tested in
the 2001/2002 school year and offered as a 'required elective' course, for which
marks were given. The course material was published in loose-leaf format (ring
binder) so that additions can easily be included. A comprehensive concept was
developed for the follow-up material.
- 264 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

6. Saxony-Anhalt
859. Pursuant to the Decision of 19 November 1991 adopted by the Landtag of
Saxony-Anhalt (Parliamentary Publication 1/24/908 B), the Land Government is obliged to promote, in particular, the Low German language, together with its cultural
traditions. The Directives on the Allocation of Grants, inter alia for the cultivation and
preservation of local/regional customs, explicitly lay down that promotion of Low German - in the form of musical, literary or language-related activities in the pre-school
and extracurricular sectors, for instance in clubs, workshops and self-organized
groups - is eligible for allocation of funds. On the basis of these Directives, natural
persons and associations can receive Land funding to a maximum amount of 70 per
cent of the expenses eligible for allocation of funds.
860. For a major part, cultivation of the Low German language in Saxony-Anhalt is
pursued by dedicated individuals, clubs, societies or interest groups, among whose
stated aims are the cultivation, fostering and preservation of Low German as part of
the general local/regional milieu. The activities range from everyday use of the language to Low German workshops and dialect meetings in which major numbers of
children and youngsters from the various regions take part.
The extent to which the many and various offers are actually used by pre-school establishments run by local authorities is not known since these establishments are not
subject to any obligation of reporting.
861. In response to the request of the Committee of Experts in No. 102 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] for statistical material on the implementation of
this provision, the following information is provided:
Statistical data on the extent to which Low German is used and/or cultivated in preschool education in Saxony-Anhalt are not collected. For cost-benefit reasons, it is at
present not possible to introduce Land-wide subject-specific surveys.
Inclusion of Low German in pre-school education is primarily dependent on the language proficiency of those who work in this area - both within the family and, above
all, in the public sector (nursery schools, children's day-care centres). In this respect,
the situation in Saxony-Anhalt varies considerably; variations exist within one speech
area from one place to another, or even from one care centre to another.
Consideration is given to asking local authority providing bodies for a sample survey
of the extent to which Low German is actually used. Notwithstanding, it will not be
possible to deduce any statistical validity regarding the entire Land or even one particular speech area from such a survey.
- 265 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

However, a Land's scope for exerting an influence on the development of language
proficiency in pre-school facilities is
a) very limited (i.e. possible only in the sense of 'encouragement'); and
b) development of language proficiency is pursued by the private and local authority
providers of pre-school education rather marginally because in a pre-school context
they are confronted with other, quite different demands and pressures.
7. Schleswig-Holstein
862. No binding curricula exist in Schleswig-Holstein for pre-school education
(children's day-care centres). Thus, children's day-care centres include Low German
in their offers on a voluntary basis only. Thanks to the persuasive arguments put
forward by the Nedderdüütschzentrum för Sleswig [Low German Centre] in Leck, by the
Arbeitsgemeinschaft Deutsches Schleswig (ADS - Working Group "German Schleswig
Region") and the Niebüll Schule für sozialpädagogische Berufe [school for social education
professions], around 50 % of the children's day-care centres in the Schleswig region of
the Land have indeed provided for Low German education. The pre-school teachers
regularly attend further education courses at the Low German Centre in Leck. Some
150 educators speak and disseminate the Low German language in children's daycare centres. In addition, there are many "adoptive parents" or "sponsorships" for
Low German use in children's day-care centres. Valuable support is also provided by
the activities of Sleswig-Holsteensche Heimatbund (SHHB - Schleswig-Holstein Union for
Local and Regional Traditions).
863. In pre-school education, children are to be tutored, assisted and educated according to their developmental level and on the basis of a holistic approach. The professional staff and the other staff members in children's day-care centres and other
day-care establishments support, complement and expand family-based education.
They orient themselves by the needs of the children and families and co-operate with
parents/guardians. The aim of the work in children's day-care centres is, inter alia, to
foster the living together of children from different national and cultural backgrounds.
864. Since 1998, the Arbeitsgemeinschaft Deutsches Schleswig (ADS - Working Group
"German Schleswig Region") has offered Low German as part of a Language Encounter
Project at several of its nursery schools (at present: fourteen).
865. In 2001, a working group of the North German Länder, which was composed of
administrative staff, held a meeting in Hamburg with the aim of sharing and further
developing teaching offers for children's cay-care centres and schools. In November
2001, a specialist conference was held in Ratzeburg on "Continuing education in the
- 266 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

Low German language for educators and teachers". The meeting's focus was on the
co-ordination of the work carried out in the North German Länder and the exchange
of teaching materials. The latter can be obtained from the two Zentren für Niederdeutsch in Leck and Ratzeburg. It is planned to hold such meetings also in future, in
order to achieve, in the long term, a uniform quality standard as regards implementation of the Charter throughout Northern Germany. In early 2003, a Working Group on
"Low German at School" was established.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (b) (iii) - Primary Education (iii)

to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

1. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
866. As regards the recommendation of the Committee of Experts in No. 255 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that measures should be taken to ensure
that Low German forms a part of the curriculum in its own right, it is reported that
'Low German as a regional language' is included in the framework curricula for primary schools. At one elementary school, a 'learning workshop' was set up to provide
advisory support to other elementary schools for the integration of Low German in
classroom instruction.
2. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
867. All Hamburg curricula for the subject 'German' provide that Low German should
occasionally be included in classroom instruction, for instance in connection with
grammatical phenomena or in literature classes. The extent to which such suggestions are taken up in class largely depends on the interest taken by the teacher in
the subject and on his/her proficiency in the Low German language. It may be assumed that Low German is included in primary education to a larger extent than in
secondary education since elementary schools can use more learning-by-play forms
of instruction (songs, sketches) and their pupils are less inhibited or prejudiced in accepting (the use of) Low German.
868. At two-year intervals, the Low German reading competition "Jungs un Deerns
leest Platt" ["Boys and Girls reading Low German"], which is supported by Hamburger Sparkasse [Hamburg Savings Bank] and is very popular among its 'established clientele' at
some 50 schools, is organized for grades 3 to 10 and for the upper secondary grades
[of grammar schools]. The final event of the competition, which meets with much atten-

tion by the media, is held as a matinée at the Ohnsorg-Theater. In the years be- 267 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

tween, the reading competition "Schoolkinner lest Platt" ["School Children reading Low
German"] is organized for the same age groups in the Bezirk of Harburg/Wilhelmsburg/
Süderelbe. The organizing body is the Vereen Plattdüütsch leevt e.V. [Registered Association "Low German is Alive"], and the sponsor is Hamburger Bank. This competition, too,
is attended by many participants from the regional schools of all types. Both competitions are promoted by the [Senate] Authority for Education and Sports (BBS) with publications, publicity, jury work and by payment of fees to the co-ordinators.
869. In response to the comment of the Committee of Experts in No. 288 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that there was insufficient information for the
Committee to assess whether sufficient teaching of Low German would actually be
ensured as an integral part of the curriculum, the following information is provided:
As confirmed by the Monitoring Report, Low German literary texts, songs, rhymes
and riddles as well as reflection on the use of the Low German language (with the
inclusion of language history in lower secondary school) are actually "an integral part
of the curriculum" under the provisions of the existing curricula and of the future
framework curricula for 'German' in primary schools. (cf. Article 8, para. 1, sub-para.
(b) (iii), of the Charter)
However, practical application is largely dependent on the language proficiency of
the respective teachers - or of the pupils as well. Classroom instruction must also
take account of the subjects that are of interest to teachers and to pupils. Therefore,
integration of Low German in the school subject 'German' must continue to be in the
form of optional offers which at the same time must be appropriately included in
classroom instruction. Therefore, any directive by the competent Senate Authority for
Education and Sports, which would cover many commitments regarding the content
of instruction, could not be enforced in all schools throughout Hamburg Land.
The applicability of any binding regulation for all schools would be quite impossible
especially in those places where teachers would have to use the Low German language even though they have no command of it. While initially it is quite sufficient to
take an interest in it and to go into aspects of this language, speaking or reading by
persons lacking the required qualifications or having an amateur's interest in the language can produce significant mistakes which should be avoided by all means. As a
general rule, therefore, proficiency in this language must be achieved, inter alia: by
involving those pupils, parents, relatives and colleagues who have a command of this
language, and by inviting Low German authors to talks and readings. In addition, this
can be achieved by optional participation in further teacher training.
Despite these problems as regards implementation, the new framework curricula for
'German' will include Low German as a "required part of the school curriculum".

- 268 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

3. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
870. In response to the statement of the Committee of Experts in Nos. 322 - 324 of
the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that what has been reported so far is not
sufficient as regards fulfilment of the undertakings accepted for the teaching of this
language at schools, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania provides the following information:
The Land Government has provided good conditions for classroom instruction of Low
German. As already stated in the Initial State Report, the following options regarding
Low German in classroom instruction continue to apply unchanged also in the years
2001 - 2003.
871.

Low German instruction:

Low German and the regional literature and culture are an integral part of the framework curricula of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania for all types of schools and all
grades, primarily as a component of the subject 'German'.
In Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Low German instruction can be given in the following forms: In primary school, Low German forms part of the subjects 'local history
and geography, and elementary science', 'German' and 'music'. Those sequences of
the subject 'local history and geography, and elementary science' which deal with the
respective immediate regional background of children and adolescents are designed
to familiarize these pupils with the Low German language and the regional culture. In
addition, Low German can be offered as an alternative subject in primary schools if
the latter cannot offer the subject 'philosophy for children'.
In the "orientation stage" [5th and 6th grades], Low German forms part of the subjects
'German', 'music' and others. In addition, Section 6 (b) of the "Third Ordinance of
15 June 2001 to amend the Ordinance on Approved Subject Hours in Schools Providing General Education" lays down that the subject 'German' for the 5th grade shall
include 'performing/interpretative arts' and 'Low German' and that interaction with the
subjects 'arts' and 'design/handicraft' shall be ensured in such a way as to provide
the bases for artistic-literary education.
For the lower secondary grades of 'Regional Schools', secondary modern schools,
Realschulen, combined secondary modern and secondary technical schools, and
comprehensive schools, Low German is to be included in subject-specific classroom
instruction and in the teaching of optional compulsory [required elective] subjects and/or
elective extra subjects from grade 7 onwards.
Gymnasien offer Low German as part of subject-specific instruction and the teaching
of elective extra subjects and, from grade 9 onwards, as an optional compulsory [re- 269 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

quired elective] subject and, in the upper (secondary) classes, in the form of project

courses. In addition, Low German can be included in cross-subject education at
schools of all types and in nearly all, or mostly in, liberal arts subjects. Thus, the objectives of dealing with Low German and the regional culture can be achieved
through inclusion in various regular subjects, or by specific cross-subject instruction,
as part of projects or out-of-school education.
872. Priorities of classroom instruction regarding Low German and regional culture:
The 1999 framework curriculum for elementary schools and all secondary schools
providing general education defines the priorities of classroom instruction related to
Low German. For one thing, this framework curriculum is designed to apply across
the spectrum of types of school and of age-groups; and at the same time, its rational
form - reduced to a priority selection of objectives, learning fields and subject matter leaves teachers a wide scope for developing their own ideas as regards the design of
classroom instruction. The following learning fields listed in the framework curriculum:
- communication/production;
- Low German in literature and other media;
- language-related reflection
form the basis of Low German instruction, which is designed individually as regards
the topics and subject matter covered, and of the concrete organization of classroom
instruction in those subjects where aspects of Low German or of the regional culture
can be included. These three learning fields should not be considered in isolation
from each other but, to the extent possible, should be part of integrative instruction.
873. Specific projects and new developments:
As of the 2001/2002 school year, a Working Panel on Schools, which was set up by
the Minister for Education, has the task of supporting the Low German Consultative
Council of the Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania Ministry of Education. The specific
responsibility of this Working Panel is overarching networking of the activities aimed
at promoting Low German in schools. This Working Panel brings together representatives of various institutions (universities, L.I.S.A. [Land Institute for Teacher Follow-up
Training], schools, Wossidlo-Archiv, Niederdeutsche Bühne [Low German Theatre]) whose
task is, on the one hand, to make an inventory of the situation as regards promotion
of Low German in schools and, on the other hand, to derive conclusions from these
findings for concrete action.
Examples of the work results of the Working Panel on Schools are as follows:
•
analysis of pre-school education
•
participation in the drafting of the Administrative Ordinance on "Low German in
Classroom Intruction"
- 270 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

•

Part D: Low German

preparation of a questionnaire-based survey of 'Low German instruction in
schools of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania Land'

As a first step, the Working Panels on Schools inventoried the actual situation as regards promotion of Low German and established the requirements existing in this
respect. With reference to nursery schools, it is noted that the further education for
nursery-school teachers offered by the Benedict-School is well accepted as well as
useful and effective. However, this further training is not offered for the entire Land,
but only for the Western Pomerania region. It is therefore important that these offers
should be consolidated in a pro-active perspective.
With reference to schools, it is noted that the existing legal and other general conditions for the promotion of Low German are good and sufficient.
At the suggestion of the Niederdeutsch-Beirat [Low German Consultative Council] and the
Working Panel on Schools, the Administrative Ordinance on "Low German in Classroom Instruction" was drafted. The aim is to designate Low German Advisers at the
four State Education Offices and at schools providing general education.
However, tutoring and guidance regarding the Low German activities of the individual
teachers of the schools of the entire Land of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
should be expanded on a pro-active basis and be consolidated. It is necessary to
establish structures which will provide for systematic, continuous guidance and tutoring regarding Low German instructors. For this reason, the Landesinstitut für Schule
und Ausbildung (L.I.S.A. - [Land Institute for Teacher Follow-up Training]) prepared a draft
decree to regulate the hours during which Low German Advisers in the regions/Landkreise are released from their regular duties. The Working Panel on Schools had a
discussion on this draft decree. The Ministry of Education, Science and Cultural Affairs has not yet made a final decision on the matter.
The Low German Consultative Councils of the Länder of Schleswig-Holstein and
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania have agreed to set up a cross-State Working
Group on Low German in School Education. This Working Group, which is composed
of three competent specialists each, from Schleswig-Holstein and MecklenburgWestern Pomerania, initially has the task to work towards the co-ordination and networking of Low German activities and to develop model projects for Low German.
The members of the inter-State Working Group on Low German in School Education
are already appointed.
874. Survey on the current status of Low German in schools:
Another problem encountered in surveying the requirements in Mecklenburg-Western
Pomerania is the availability of data on the situation regarding Low German class- 271 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

room instruction. The results of a Land-wide survey on this matter date back to 1997.
Therefore, the next project of the Schools Working Group is the development, application and evaluation of a representative questionnaire on measures for the promotion of Low German. The results are planned to be available at the start of the 2004/
2005 school year and to provide a further basis for the improvement of school instruction.
4. Schleswig-Holstein
875. According to the education targets (Section 4 of the Schleswig-Holstein Schools
Act), schools shall, inter alia, foster an open attitude among young people towards
cultural diversity.
876. Already in 1992, the Ministry of Education once more stressed the importance
of Low German for the education of pupils in Schleswig-Holstein and adopted policy
guidance to be followed by the schools of this Land. The "Low German in School"
Decree of 7 January 1992 provides the framework for the promotion of the Low German language and for mandatory inclusion of the culture of Northern Germany, which
ows its special character to Low German. The curricula comprise modules for Low
German.
The IQSH [Institute for Quality Development at Schools] is responsible for the training
and further education of teachers in Schleswig-Holstein. The IQSH assigned some of
its tasks to five Regionalseminare [Regional Teacher Training Colleges]. Each of these colleges has a regional commissioner for Low German with responsibility for counselling
and further education within his/her respective Regional College. A Land Commissioner for Low German attends to Land-wide counselling and co-ordination of further
training activities.
Independently of the IQSH, the respective Kreis Schools Offices in Schleswig-Holstein appoint a teacher to represent the Low German interests at the Kreis level.
877. A mandatory task of schools is to impart knowledge of the Low German literature and language in subjects suited for the purpose and to include those spheres of
life, which are determined and influenced by Low German, in classroom instruction.
In addition, schools shall foster the ability to speak Low German and encourage use
of the Low German language.
The Regional Commissioners for Low German (cf. No. 864 [?876] above) invite the
training colleges and trainee teachers to briefings on Low German.

- 272 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

878. For primary schools, Low German is included in the curriculum. Thus, the keynote theme "Früher und Heute erforschen" ["Exploring the Past and the Present Time"] comprises the subject "Das Niederdeutsche als die Weltsprache des Nordens" ["Low German as the World Language of the North"] (referring to the period of the Hanseatic League)
and "Landessprache heute kennen lernen" ["Getting to know today's vernacular"].
879. Schools carry out a reading competition "Schüler/innen lesen Platt" ["Pupils reading Low German"]. On the occasion of the 1998 competition, the Schleswig-Holstein
Sparkassen- und Giroverband [savings banks and their clearing association] distributed
75,000 readers to elementary and secondary modern schools, Realschulen [secondary
technical schools] and Gymnasien [grammar schools] and comprehensive schools.
880. In No. 394 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], the Committee of Experts does not consider this undertaking fulfilled. Schleswig-Holstein takes the view,
however, that the undertaking is fulfilled by the fact that Low German, as a task area
of general educational importance, is included as an integral part of the curriculum
and, in addition, is confirmed as such by a pertinent decree. Significant regional differences and, above all, the fact that there are only relatively few teachers speaking
Low German, preclude the introduction of a general regulation stipulating the extent
to which Low German must be included in classroom instruction.
881. The Committee was not in a position to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled. The Land Government therefore assumes that the Committee's assessment is
due to an interpretation of the undertaking which differs from that of the Land Government. The Land Government takes the view that the undertaking is fulfilled by the
fact that Low German, as a task area of general importance, is included as an integral part of the curriculum and, in addition, is confirmed as such by a pertinent
decree. Significant regional differences and, above all, the fact that there are only
relatively few teachers speaking Low German, preclude the introduction of a general
regulation stipulating the extent to which Low German must be included in classroom
instruction.
882. As regards the Committee's assumption that no statistics have been collected, it
is pointed out that the part-time expert supervisor for Low German, the Kreis commissioners for Low German, the IQSH [Institute for Quality Development at Schools] and the
Kreis Schools Offices do indeed carry out surveys on the implementation of this
decree. The Ministry has been provided with the survey results of the Kreise of Nordfriesland, Lauenburg, Dithmarschen, Schleswig-Flensburg, Kiel, Rendsburg/Eckernförde, Pinneberg, Segeberg and Stormarn. These surveys give an overview of the
number of Low German-speaking teachers and the subject matter covered by, and
- 273 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

the extent of, Low German classroom instruction, and the ways in which Low German
is included in instruction. The findings of these surveys were collated by the Zentrum
für Niederdeutsch in Leck so that the Land Government is very well aware of the
decree's implementation.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (b) (iv) - Primary Education (iv)

to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those
pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient;

1. Brandenburg
883. Low German is not offered as a regular subject of classroom instruction in Brandenburg. However, such instruction is not the only means for school-based promotion
of the Low German language and culture; at the Brandenburg schools it is also possible to organize activity groups where interested pupils can study the Low German
language and culture. Activity groups of this type are established at three schools in
the northern region of the Land. On demand, additional activity groups can also be
established at other schools.
884. Also, 'local history and geography' lessons can familiarize pupils with the special
cultural features of their home region. In the northern Landkreise of Brandenburg,
which have received decisive stimuli from the Low German language and culture, instruction of this type is ensured.
885. In response to the statement of the Committee of Experts in No. 85 [MIN-LANG
(2002) 4 final] that what has been reported so far is not sufficient as regards fulfilment
of this undertaking, the following information is provided:
As before, elementary schools do not offer Low German as a regular subject of classroom instruction; the demand for Low German education continues to be met solely
by the option of taking part in activity groups. Statistical data on the number of existing Low German activity groups and on the number of pupils making use of this option are not available and can be obtained only with extreme difficulty. No information
is available on any cases where requests by parents or pupils for the establishment
of additional activity groups would not have been met.
886. Low German (Low Saxon; Niederdeutsch, or Plattdeutsch) is the ancestral language of the German North and thus of northern Brandenburg. It is thus part of the
autochthonous culture which, under Section 4, para. 5, sub-para. 11, of the Brandenburg Schools Act (BbgSchulG), is included in the targets and principles of education
and instruction in Brandenburg schools. Consequently, inclusion of the Low German
- 274 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

language is ensured by local history/geography instruction - e.g. explanation of place
names; performance of children's stage-plays written by local/regional authors; readings of region-specific texts (legends, folktales, short stories); information on events
and facts of local history - or by classroom instruction in other regular subjects of
school education; however, in view of the diversity of region-specific particularities, it
is not possible to lay down exact qualitative and quantitative requirements or to inventory the actual Low German activities.
887. Schools have the general option to establish activity groups, and they support
such groups by providing classrooms and teachers for the purpose. In addition to
regular classroom instruction, activity groups can devote themselves to the in-depth
study and learning of the Low German language and culture. At present, two Brandenburg schools offer Low German activity groups: The Pestalozzi-Grundschule in
Prenzlau (Uckermark) offers one Low German activity group for participation by a
number of grades/age-groups. At the elementary school in Berge (Prignitz), a guest
teacher from among the staff of the local Realschule teaches an elective-subject
course of 4 hours/week. This course, too, is offered to various grades/age-groups
and even includes the lower secondary grades.
2. Saxony-Anhalt
888. The Framework Curricula for the subject 'German' recommend use of Low German literature and/or of texts characterized by vernacular forms of expression, with
due regard to the particular local features and forms of the German language (especially Low German), and phased instruction in the vernacular. However, teachers are
not under an obligation to follow these recommendations since conditions and circumstances vary from one region to another. As a general rule, such instruction is to
be based on the pupils' current proficiency in the language and on the situation within
the respective learning group.
889. All schools in the Low German speech area of Saxony-Anhalt - as a suggestion
for classroom instruction and out-of-school activities - received the brochure "Niederdeutsche Texte aus Sachsen-Anhalt" ["Low German Texts from Saxony-Anhalt"] which in
1992 was developed by the Arbeitsstelle Niederdeutsch [Workshop for Low German] of
what then was the Teacher Training College (now Otto von Guericke University) in
Magdeburg. Also, the Arbeitsstelle Niederdeutsch at the Institute for German/Germanic Philology of Otto von Guericke University in Magdeburg in 1992 and 1997
published brochures entitled "Niederdeutsch im Unterricht - Arbeitshilfen für den
schulischen Umgang mit dem Niederdeutschen in Sachsen-Anhalt" ["Low German in
classroom instruction in Saxony-Anhalt"]. The 1997 brochure includes a CD, with Low
- 275 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

German text samples, which was produced by the Landesinstitut für Lehrerfortbildung Sachsen-Anhalt (LISA - Land Institute for Follow-up Training of Teachers). A second
edition of this brochure was published in 2002.
890. In addition, the activities to be encouraged in schools can, on the one hand, be
carried out within the framework of activity groups and optional-subject courses and,
on the other, take the form of out-of-school activities. The latter are supported, for
example, by the following promotional programmes:
-

Programme: "Gesundes Leben, gesunde Umwelt, Schule als kultureller Lernort"
["A healthy life; a healthy environment; schools as a place of cultural learning"];
Directive on the Promotion of Youth-Related and Educational Projects for Guidance on Lifestyle Choices;
school-based leisure-time education as a contribution, at publicly maintained
schools and by private providing bodies, to social prevention.

In addition, the schools in Saxony-Anhalt are urged to co-operate with non-school
providing bodies/organizers, especially in the case of out-of-school activities.
891. The traditional Low German reading competition, which since 1995 has been
organized annually - under the auspices of the Ministry of Education and Cultural
Affairs - by the Landesheimatbund Sachsen-Anhalt e.V. [Saxony-Anhalt Land Union for
Local and Regional Traditions] and the Arbeitsstelle Niederdeutsch of Otto von Guericke
University in Magdeburg throughout this Land at all elementary and secondary
schools and Gymnasien [grammar schools] in the Low German speech area of SaxonyAnhalt Land, has in the meantime become an important factor in promoting the Low
German language. The past few years have seen a marked increase in the numbers
of pupils participating in the competition: while in 1997 and 1998, 40 schools in
Saxony-Anhalt took part in the Low German reading competition, their number rose
to 45 already in 1999. The majority of these schools had already established activity
groups for the cultivation and fostering of Low German; in some cases, the institution
of such activity groups in schools was prompted by this competition so that the latter
has in the meantime become an important factor in promoting the Low German language in Saxony-Anhalt. Every two years, a brochure containing suitable texts is developed for this competition and, through the Ministry of Education and Cultural Affairs, is distributed to all schools in the Low German region of the Land. These brochures can also be used in German lessons since they contain age-appropriate texts.
892. Another - out-of-school - form of promoting the proficiency of interested and particularly talented children in the Low German language was the first Mundartcamp
[Dialect Camp] - open for participation nation-wide - organized by the Landesheimat-

- 276 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

bund Sachsen-Anhalt e.V. [Saxony-Anhalt Land Union for Local and Regional Traditions] in
Schierke in Saxony-Anhalt from 30 July - 8 August 1999.
Follow-up Mundartcamps were organized in Gardelegen in 2000 and in Klietz in
2001, respectively. These camps, too, were supported by Land funding.
In 2002, a novel form of out-of-school activities promoting the Low German language
was introduced when the Landesheimatbund [Land Union for Local and Regional Traditions],
in co-operation with the Arbeitsstelle "Niederdeutsch" of Otto von Guericke University, organized a theatre competition for children and adolescents.
In 2003, the Landesheimatbund organized a Low German theatre workshop for
children and adolescents in Magdeburg. Those activities, too, were supported by
Land funding.
893. In response to the request of the Committee of Experts in No. 103 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] for further information on the presence of Low
German in primary education, the following information is provided:
In the 2003/2004 school year, a statistical survey is made, as part of the annual
school statistics, of participation in Low German activity groups in two Schools Office
districts which are relevant in terms of Low German instruction: the Gardelegen
Schools Office district for the Landkreise of Salzwedel and Stendal, and the Halberstadt Schools Office district for the Landkreise of Halberstadt, Quedlinburg and Wernigerode. However, extrapolation of figures for the whole Land is not possible on this
basis because Low German is used mainly in the northern region of this Land. The
results of this statistical survey will be available in late 2003/early 2004.
No statistical data can be collected on the extent to which teachers actually include
Low German literature or vernacular texts as recommended by the framework curriculum for the subject 'German'. But in this respect, too, the instruction offered is
largely dependent on the teachers' language proficiency. Therefore, the Land Government - in co-operation with the Arbeitssstelle "Niederdeutsch" of the Landesheimatbund and the Magdeburg Otto von Guericke University - increases the offers of
pertinent further education for teachers, both at the regional and in-school levels.
894. As regards newly launched promotional programmes, reference is also made to
the programme "Kultur in Schule und Verein" ["Cultural activities pursued by schools and
clubs"], which was introduced in 2001 and which in future - first positive experience is
already available - will help to further improve familiarization of pupils with Low German in an out-of-school context. At the same time, the programme aims - not only, of
course, with regard to cultivation of the Low German language - at getting children
and adolescents interested in subjects which, in the long term, i.e. after completion of
school education, will make them aware of, and committed to, their ties with this cul- 277 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

tural region and thus its language. Therefore, the Low German Working Group discussed the possibility of long-term co-operative agreements between the relevant
providing bodies - e.g. the Landesheimatbund - and the Ministry for Education and
Cultural Affairs. The earliest date for the entry into force of such agreements would
be the 2004 fiscal year.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (c) - Secondary Education (i)
(ii)
(iii)

to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
to make available a substantial part of secondary education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or
to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

The following Länder have accepted the obligation under sub-paragraph (c) (iii).
1. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
895. In response to the statement of the Committee of Experts in No. 256 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that for lack of information it was not possible
to conclude that the undertaking is fulfilled, the following information is provided:
Lower secondary grades (secondary education stage I)

The Bremen framework curriculum for 'German in secondary education stage I' prescribes Low German as a mandatory part of education in regional culture, the aims of
which are threefold:
- acquiring in-depth knowledge of regional culture and history;
- acquiring language proficiency with regard to regional culture and history; and
- integrative and complementary acquisition of in-depth knowledge of the regional
culture and history, and of Low German language proficiency.
As a rule, the majority of readers (especially for grades 5 - 7) authorized for Bremen
schools contain Low German texts.
Low German activity groups are offered by lower secondary schools [secondary education stage I].
Upper secondary grades (secondary education stage II)

As of 1990, upper secondary grades of selected Gymnasien offer a one-year Low
German course, forming part of the basic course [at the 6th form level] 'German', as an
Abitur credit subject. The Senator for Education supports this measure by assigning
class hours covering this extra teaching load.

- 278 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

2. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
896. In a Circular addressed to all Hamburg schools, attention was drawn to the
possibility to offer Low German, on a facultative basis, in the lower secondary grades
[secondary education stage I], depending on the type of school, as part of a two-year or
even four-year course, as a required elective subject. For this purpose, the [Senate]
Authority for Education and Sports (BBS) published guidance material entitled "Plattdüütsch för Lüüd in Hamburg un ümto" ["Low German for People in Hamburg and its Environs"] which provides the didactic bases and examples for learning the Low German
language, as well as many Low German texts, sketches and songs for classroom
use. So far, little information is available on the extent to which use has been made of
these facilities, since schools are not subject to any obligations of reporting.
897. Upon request, a two-semester elementary course 'Low German' can be offered
in the second stage of secondary education [i.e. upper secondary grades]. For this purpose, the Authority for Schools, in co-operation with schools and Hamburg University,
developed an educational concept. So far, no request to this effect has been submitted. However, on the basis of the Circular mentioned in No. 898 below, it will be
possible to register pertinent requirements as indicated by respondents in the reply
form attached to the Circular.
898. In response to the conclusion of the Committee of Experts in Nos. 290 and 291
of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that this obligation is not fulfilled because the optional elements do not provide for the teaching of Low German as an integral part of the curriculum, the following information is provided:
For secondary education stage I and upper secondary grades of Gymnasien, as is
the case for elementary schools, the Low German language and literature will continue to be an integral part of the subject 'German' under the provisions of the current
framework curricula. As of the 2003/2004 school year, the framework curricula for the
subject 'German' for secondary education stage I and elementary schools will enter
into effect for the testing phase. Also, the framework curriculum for the upper secondary grades of Gymnasien will be applicable as of the 2004/2005 school year for the
testing phase. The problems encountered in implementation are the same as in the
case of elementary schools: therefore, mandatory Low German elements of classroom instruction will, in addition to optional inclusion of Low German, be provided for
the lower secondary grades.
The courses mentioned in the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] and to be provided for by the competent educational authority as part of the compulsory group of
subjects taught at schools, are offered only to a very limited extent for lack of demand. In order to create greater demand, the competent educational authority will
- 279 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

address another circular to the Hamburg Schools to encourage establishment of such
courses. The circular informs about the possibility to establish Low German courses
for primary school classes up to the upper secondary grades [secondary education
stage II]. The answers given by schools in the reply form attached to the circular will
be gathered for a compilation which in future will enable the Authority to furnish detailed information on the Low German courses offered.
3. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
899. In this regard, cf. the comments in Nos. 870 - 874 above.
4. Schleswig-Holstein
900. Reference is made to the comments in No. 876 above.
901. The curricula which entered into force as of 01 August 1997 establish Low German as a task area of general educational importance; various subject-specific curricula (German, history, political science, etc.) explicitly include the Low German language.
902. The IQSH [Institute for Quality Development at Schools] and the Centres for Low
German in Leck and Ratzeburg assist schools by providing, inter alia, guidance
material for designing/organizing classroom instruction, and readers for use in class.
In addition, a network of Land, Regional and Kreis Commissioners is available.
903. In No. 395 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], the Committee of Experts states that, on account of the lack of information as to how many secondary
schools actually teach Low German within regular school hours, it cannot conclude
that the undertaking is fulfilled.
In this case, too, the Land Government considers its obligation to be fulfilled. It was,
not least, on account of the fact that Low German is not a compulsory subject that the
Land Government accepted only the obligation to include Low German as an 'integral
part of the curriculum'. In view of the non-availability of pertinent Land-wide statistics,
various Kreise - in co-operation with the Schools Offices - carried out a survey of
schools of all types so as to be better able to provide information on this matter in
future.
904. The decree is binding upon the schools. Consequently, schools are under the
obligation to include Low German in classroom instruction. The expert supervisor for
Low German monitors compliance with the decree and pursues this task in close
contact with the Kreis School Offices. Practical help with the inclusion of Low German
- 280 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

in classroom instruction is provided by the IQSH [Institute for Quality Development at
Schools] with its "guidance material on Low German in the curricula" and by the Zentren für Niederdeutsch [Centres for Low German, in Leck and Ratzeburg] with the Low German teaching materials and learning aids developed by them. This combination of
regularization and aid gives the organization of school instruction a binding character.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (c) (iv) - Secondary Education (iv)

to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those
pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered
sufficient;

1. Brandenburg
905. As regards the conclusion of the Committee of Experts in No. 86 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that this undertaking is not fulfilled, reference is
made to Nos. 883 - 887 above.
In addition, it is reported that the school in Berge (Prignitz) offers 4 hours/week of
Low German instruction as an optional [elective] subject for the elementary school and
lower secondary grades [secondary education stage I].
2. Saxony-Anhalt
906. In this regard, cf. the comments in Nos. 888 - 894 above.
907. The survey initiated in 1999 by the Arbeitssstelle "Niederdeutsch" of the Magdeburg Otto von Guericke University to assess Low German use by, and language
proficiency and skills of, school children was not completed in this form, but was integrated into an on-going extended survey that covers both pupils and adults.
For the result of this study, cf. No. 1234 below.
908. In response to the statement of the Committee of Experts in No. 104 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that this undertaking is not fulfilled, the following information is provided:
It is especially in the field of secondary education that the Land Government, jointly
with the Arbeitsstelle "Niederdeutsch" [Workshop for Low German], intensifies the efforts
aimed at increased use of Low German in classroom instruction; in particular, this includes offering and making use of the teacher guidance material developed by the
Arbeitsstelle "Niederdeutsch". In secondary education (where Low German is offered
primarily in optional-subject courses), competition of Low German with other offers is
much greater than in primary education and therefore is chosen less often. In this
- 281 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

respect, too, the extent to which pupils or their parents opt for Low German is largely
dependent on the teachers' language proficiency.
Also, additional teaching materials and aids related to didactics and methodology are
developed with the help of Land funding, e.g. a Low German first reader in 2003/04,
with the aim of enhancing implementation of the undertaking in classroom instruction.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (d) (iii) - Technical and Vocational Education (iii)

to provide, within technical and vocational education, for the teaching of the
relevant regional or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

1. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
909. German language/literature instruction at vocational/technical schools, which
now is mostly called 'Language and Communication', largely focuses on working-life
processes. In this respect, there is little room for interfacing with Low German.
Wherever feasible, however, the Low German language is taken into account.
910. In response to the statement of the Committee of Experts in No. 292 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that this undertaking was not fulfilled, the following information is provided:
Within technical and vocational education, the main reason for the non-availability of
Low German courses or projects is lack of demand on the part of pupils and teachers
(cf. the comments in No. 898 above) also in schools for trainees of the restaurants/
catering trade and the care sector. At these schools, too, a possible solution would
be to set up courses or activity groups.
The aforementioned circular will also be sent to vocational schools in order to increase their interest in providing Low German courses. If a given vocational school
offers optional compulsory subjects, Low German can be included among these.
There is a chance that, with the support given by the Authority [for Education and Sports],
it will be possible, in particular, to get the vocational/technical schools for the aforementioned professions interested in such educational offers.
2. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
911. As regards the statement of the Committee of Experts in No. 324 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that this undertaking was not fulfilled, reference
is made to the comments in Nos. 870 - 874 above.

- 282 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (e) (ii) - University and Other Higher Education (ii)

to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher
education subjects; or

1. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
912. Bremen University regularly offers Low German language/literature courses.
The subjects covered by these courses are learning of the Low German language,
Low German literature and comparative linguistic studies of Low German / standard
German. These courses also deal with aspects of the history and culture of the Low
German language.
2. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
913. Hamburg University offers seminars in/on the Low German language and literature. Low German can be chosen as a minor for the examination for the Master's
Diploma. This choice does not, however, exist under the teacher examination regulations.
3. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
914. In Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, colleges/universities offer a large variety
of Low German courses.
915. At Rostock University, the courses offered by the Chair for Low German Philology are integrated in all Germanic philology courses of study for the Master's diploma, as a major subject, as a minor (to be discontinued), B.A. / M.A., and all teaching
professions. In some cases, credits for participation in Low German courses can be
transferred to the following courses of study and/or study modules: "Verbal communication and defective communication", communicative competence, studium generale
[courses in general education], inter-disciplinary studies. For the entire spectrum of Low

German philology (linguistics, study of literature, medievalist studies, Low German
didactics), this implies that seminar papers, written exams for the Master's Diploma
and doctoral theses are written on Low German subjects.
Over the past few semesters, the following Low German studies were offered:
-

Seminars for Low German language learners (beginners, advanced learners)
Lectures "Overview of the Low German language and literature"
Compulsory (advanced) seminars / Seminars on the following subjects:
- present-day Low German (language system / social, functional aspects /
geographic speech area)
- the problem of language contact and language change in Mecklenburg
- 283 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

- Low German legends, folktales, proverbs, Sagwörter [Low German type of
wellerism]

- contemporary Mecklenburg dialect writers, especially aspects of the sociological study of literature
- the authors Fritz Reuter and John Brinckman
- problems "Low German in the classroom subject 'German' "
- "Low German under National Socialism (Nazi era)"
- Low German medievalist studies ("Narrenschyp" ["The Ship of Fools"], "Redentiner Osterspiel" ["The Redentin Easter Play"], "Reynke de Vos" ["Reynard the
Fox"]; language and communication at the time of the Hanseatic League)
- linguistic stages: "Middle Low German", "Old Low German" (Old Saxon)
- advanced seminars ("Oberseminare") in connection with the DFG* project
„Atlas frühmittelniederdeutscher Schreibsprachen“ [Linguistic atlas of early
Middle Low German written languages], especially problems related to cartography, use of new media, etc.
For all students wishing to graduate as teachers, attendance of the lecture „Überblick
über die Niederdeutsche Sprache und Literatur“ ["Overview of the Low German Language
and Literature"] is a requirement to be met for admission to examinations in the subject
'German'. This lecture - which is also popular with Master's diploma students, B.A./
M.A. students and foreign students - makes students take an interest in Low German
with the result that all other Low German study offers are much in demand and greatly accepted by students; this is also reflected by students' opting for Low German as
a major or for the Low German module when selecting a subject for a thesis (State
examination, Master's diploma, doctoral thesis) and by their selection of examiners.
For a B.A./M.A. degree programme, students can select the module "Low German",
or credits gained for Low German courses can be transferred to other modules (depending on their subject matter).
Thanks to funds obtained from third parties, a Low German songbook for pre-school
and school children was printed. In co-operation with the Hochschule für Musik und
Theater [Academy of Music and Theatre Studies], a project group (four Germanic philology
students, four music students) developed an excellent songbook which is, in compliance with the sponsors' wish, distributed to pre-school establishments and schools
with the aim of promoting the learning of the Low German language. The inclusion of
music instruction, choir singing, etc. to promote Low German has proved very successful.
Co-operation with universities and colleges in the Baltic region on Low German was
continued:
partnership of Germanistics Institutes, with the Riga University;
*

Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (German Research Foundation)

- 284 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

participation, also by young scholars, in the international symposia on "Low German in Scandinavia" held in Sweden in 2000;
"German Language and Literature in the Baltic Region", Riga 2002.
On the basis of, and thanks to, this co-operation, Master's theses or doctoral theses
also cover subjects related to the status of Low German in Scandinavia and in the
Baltic countries.
916. At the Greifswald Ernst Moritz Arndt University, a discussion is underway on
whether, and in what form, the professorship for Low German Philology should be
maintained.
In terms of the professorship for "Low German Philology", the study offers are ensured by the Germanist scholar Professor Dr. Schiewe. He holds a professorship for
Germanist Linguistics, with a focus on 'linguistic varieties'.
Actual language teaching is the task of one of his academic assistants.
The Greifswald and Rostock universities concluded a co-operation agreement which,
inter alia, also covers mutual exchanges of lectures. At Rostock University, the Chair
of Low German Philology is held by Professor Dr. Rösler. At present, the Faculties of
Humanities of the two universities are looking into the question of whether Dr. Rösler
could support the relevant department of the Greifswald Ernst Moritz Arndt University
- at least temporarily - with some of her teaching responsibilities.
917. The Institute für Volkskunde (Wossidlo-Archiv) [Institute of Folklore (Wossidlo Archives), Rostock University] carries out extensive scholarly activities promoting knowledge of Low German.
918. Lectures/courses on folklore [study of the material culture and customs], covering
linguistic/Low German aspects

For many years already, staff members of the Institute regularly offer (usually eight)
courses covering 16 hours/week per semester, which are attended by around 250
students. Some of these courses deal with regional folklore, i.e. aspects of Low German folk culture. As the Institute's teaching and research activities give priority to
research on folk narrative art, some of the courses use Low German source texts
which, however, are analyzed from a folklore point of view rather than in terms of
linguistics. Occasionally, use is also made of recordings of Low German archival
texts which are recorded separately by a working panel (cf. below). Such courses can
be integrated into the subject 'German' (B.A./M.A., Master's diploma, all teaching professions), the subject 'elementary school pædagogics (language teaching, classroom
instruction covering several learning fields) or are offered as a separate Inter-Disciplinary Module or as part of studium generale [courses in general education].
see www.phf.uni-rostock.de/ ivk/Lehrangebot.html
- 285 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

919.

Part D: Low German

The unpublished works of Richard Wossidlo (1859-1939)

The Institut für Volkskunde [Institute of Folklore] developed from the collection of Richard
Wossidlo (1859 - 1939), the founder of Mecklenburgian folkloristics. Wossidlo assembled a folklore collection for all of Mecklenburg, which today is unequalled in the
German speech area and which also throughout Europe is matched by only few comparable collections. The collection's worth lies in the central recording of the oral
repertoire of the Mecklenburg people, which he collected, either by himself on the
spot or with the help of numerous assistants, during the period between 1883 and
1939. Almost all of his notes were taken in the Mecklenburg dialect, and consequently, even today, they largely meet the standards of criticism of sources.
The starting point of Wossidlo's chronicling was the collection of synonyms in the
Low German language; in this way, Wossidlo created the basis for the large-region
Mecklenburgisches Wörterbuch [Mecklenburg Dictionary]; the dictionary's source material
is also attended to by the Institute. Before long, however, Wossidlo added genres of
folk narrative to his collection; later he recorded the many and various manifestations
of local/regional customs, folk beliefs and folk medicine, and described regional types
of foodstuffs, clothing and housing, the working life of peasants, day-labourers,
craftsmen, fishermen and seamen, and many more subjects. Altogether, he collected
two million "note-papers". Together with his collection of linguistic material, these
created a body of information on the culture and lifestyles of the Mecklenburg people,
which - when compared to the pertinent research on other regions - stands apart because of its unusual breadth and depth.
see www.phf.uni-rostock.de/ivk/WossNachl.html; and
www.phf.uni-rostock.de/ivk/Wossidlo.html
920. Mecklenburgisches Wörterbuch [Mecklenburg Dictionary]
In 1919/1920, a Chair of the Low German and Dutch/Flemish Languages was founded at Rostock University. This was done with the expectation of compiling the Mecklenburgisches Wörterbuch (MWB - Mecklenburg Dictionary), the need for which had been
perceived for quite some time already. This full professorship was conferred on the
linguist and dialectologist Hermann Teuchert (1880 - 1972) who shaped the linguistics profile of the German Philology Department of Rostock University well into the
post-War years. In 1965, Dr. Jürgen Gundlach took over as editor up to the publication of the seventh, and last, volume which appeared in 1992.
The Mecklenburg Dictionary sets a standard since it unites the qualities of a Low
German dictionary covering a large region, on the one hand, and the character of an
illustrated ethnological encyclopedia, on the other. Although Hermann Teuchert had
his own surveys carried out and he actually edited the Dictionary, its source basis
- 286 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

largely stems from Richard Wossidlo's work. In 2001, the MWB's alphabetically sorted Zettelarchiv [archives of notes] was taken over by the Institut für Volkskunde (Wossidlo-Archiv) where it can now be used together with Wossidlo's systematically arranged Zettelsammlung [collection of notes].
www.phf.uni-rostock.de/ ivk/MWB.html
921. Fachbibliothek Volkskunde [Specialized Library of Folklore]
The Fachbibliothek Volkskunde [Departmental (Specialized) Library of Folklore] stems from
Richard Wossidlo's private library. With 11,500 books, and a journal collection of approximately 2,800 volumes, this specialized library is the largest in MecklenburgWestern Pomerania dedicated to folklore research. In addition to Mecklenburgica,
including the library of one Low German association, it contains the most important
folkloric/ethnological journals and publication series in the German speech area and
in Northern Europe. On the occasion of its integration into Rostock University, the
library was incorporated into the existing network of specialized departmental libraries of Rostock University. While new acquisitions are already accessible through the
online catalogue of the University Library, the older holdings will be successively entered into the catalogue. Eight work places (with Internet terminals for access to the
Online Public Access Catalogue [OPAC]) are available to users.
www.phf.uni-rostock.de/ ivk/bibliothek.html
922. Making Low German archival holdings accessible to the public
Since its integration into Rostock University, efforts have been made to make the
Low German archival holdings accessible to the academic community and to the
public at large. A number of projects, for which the Ministry for Education provided
co-funding, are aimed at achieving this objective:
923. Recording of Richard Wossidlo's collection of notes on microfilms
With the funds obtained in response to a call for donations, it is intended to record
Richard Wossidlo's Zettelsammlung [collection of notes], comprising around two million
notes, on microfilms. Recording on microfilms is envisaged in view of the value of this
body of data, both in terms of national culture and in an international context, and for
the specific reason that it is threatened by a critical rate of paper decay. In addition,
this sub-project is supported by volunteers who were involved in founding the Gesellschaft zur Förderung des Wossidlo-Archivs [Society for the Promotion of the Wossidlo Archives] which supports the (overall) project. Under a follow-up project, for which funding is not yet secured, the microfilm recordings are planned to be transferred to digital
recording media. A subsequent project stage is planned to cover in-depth processing
of digital material with the aim of providing linkage; the adaptation of the pertinent
- 287 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

special reference catalogue to the modern specialized nomenclature; and the development of user guidance.
The project's aim is processing, and making accessible, Richard Wossidlo's extensive correspondence with individuals who contributed to his collection and with the
academic community, as well as his autobiographical writings. For the context of the
collection, analysis and appraisal of this part of Wossidlo's work are indispensable.
924. In-depth digital acquisition of the Mecklenburgisches Volksliedarchiv
Under this project, the Mecklenburgisches Volksliedarchiv (MVA - Archives of Mecklenburg Folk Songs), which comprises around three thousand songs of Mecklenburgian
oral tradition, are registered by means of a database specifically developed for the
purpose (Access). This database offers the advantage that the various items of information on the songs can be sorted and that it also permits relational linkage of these
data. In addition to input of refined primary (basic) data, this requires in-depth acquisition of at least part of the song material. Thus, not only the incipita (introductory
words of songs), the respective originator of the given notes, and the data related to
the recording itself are given in alphabetical order, but it is also possible, for instance,
to separately retrieve the song genres recorded by a given collector.
At the same time, a large-format scanner saves the paper slips with handwritten
melodies so that they can be retrieved over a monitor.
see www.phf.uni-rostock.de/ivk/projekte.html
925. Gesellschaft zur Förderung des Wossidlo-Archivs e.V. [Society for the Promotion of
the Wossidlo Archives, reg'd]

The Gesellschaft zur Förderung des Wossidlo-Archivs [Society for the Promotion of the
Wossidlo Archives] was founded in Rostock on 26 August 2002. Under its statutes, it
gives priority to the promotion of measures for the preservation and scholarly use of
Richard Wossidlo's unpublished works and dissemination of his works. The founders
adopted some of the objectives laid down for the Wossidlo-Stiftung which was founded in 1929 and, in 1954, was de facto integrated in the Wossidlo-Forschungsstelle
[Wossidlo Research Institute] which had been established as a field branch of the Berlin
Academy of Sciences. Although this Society is of a scholarly nature, it also has an
important bridging function linking research and preservation activities.
see www.phf.uni-rostock.de/ivk/Gesellschaft.html
926. "Arbeitskreis Wossidlo-Archiv" of "Förderkreis Seniorenakademie"
The Working Panel "Wossidlo Archives" was set up in 2000 as a spin-off to the
project "Archivtexte - hörbar gemacht" ["Archival texts made audible"]. The aim of this
project is to make audible Low German archival texts since their pronunciation can
be recorded in writing only insufficiently. The project only includes source texts as are
- 288 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

handed down by word of mouth. In addition, a series of Low German fairy tales are
published, together with the respective information booklets. The first CD was already
reproduced, confined to a small number of copies.
927. IGA 2003 (Internationale Gartenausstellung - International Horticultural Exhibition):
Low German Popular Botany

This project was a spin-off of a folkloristic seminar spread over two semesters which,
at its end, was followed up by a 'summer academy' (i.e. a series of lectures) held in
the lecture hall of the German Pavilion at the IGA. As initiated by the seminar, the
Low German names are given for plants outside the German Pavilion; these
Low German botanical names were researched and/or checked in the WossidloArchiv and the MWB-Archiv [archives of the Mecklenburg Dictionary]. The subjects of the
lectures are based on these botanical names.
see www.phf.uni-rostock.de/ivk/Kommentare (the IGA website is still under preparation)
928. Low German folkloristic activities of the Landesheimatverband [Land Union for
Local and Regional Traditions]

The Subject-Matter Group "Low German" and the Subject-Matter Group "Regional
Folklore and Customs", which are directed by the Land Union, organize joint meetings and conferences. The latest meeting was held in Rostock in November 2002 on
the subject of "Low German Folk Traditions". (cf. the most recent report in Heimathefte 1/2003, pp. 42 - 43)
929.

Publications

The scholarly publications of the Institute (IVK), including Low German items, can be
accessed over the Internet, either directly or under the sites of IVK scholars:
www.phf.uni-rostock.de/ivk/Neumann2.html
www.phf.uni-rostock.de/ivk/schmitt2.html
www.phf.uni-rostock.de/ivk/steusloff2.html
930. Press and public relations work
Cf. the Institute's homepage for recent press reports on the Institute and the related
information on Low German activities:
www.phf.uni-rostock.de/ivk/presse.html
4. Lower Saxony
931. Two major universities in Lower Saxony offer courses on Low German. The
Low German Language and Literature Department of Deutsches Seminar [Institute for
German] of Göttingen University is responsible for the independent course of study
'Low German Language and Literature' where the Low German language and lite- 289 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

rature are studied in the component subject areas of linguistics, literature, and medievalist studies. Main study fields are, inter alia, historical and contemporary dialectology of Low German, and sociolinguistic research on Low German and Frisian. The
professor holding this chair is the editor of "Niedersächsisches Wörterbuch" ["Lower
Saxon Dictionary"] which on a continuing basis is developed further by the Göttingen
University Arbeitsstelle directed by this professor. As the Chairman of Ostfälisches
Institut [Eastphalia Institute], the professor holding the chair also dedicates his efforts to
the cultivation of Low German as used in Ostfalen.
932. [deleted: paragraphs contained in the 1st State Report]
5. Schleswig-Holstein
933. As part of the course of studies for the teaching profession, a requirement stipulated by the Universities in Kiel and Flensburg for admission to examinations in the
subject 'German' is proof of attendance of a course in Low German or Frisian. In addition, Low German may be selected as a supplementary subject for all courses of
study for the teaching profession.
934. Germanistisches Seminar [Institute for German/Germanic Philology] of Kiel University
has its own Low German Language and Literature Department. For the major part,
the credits obtained for courses/lectures of this Department can be taken over for the
course of study in German/Germanic philology. Within the latter course of study, a
main subject can be chosen from the Low German study field. The same can be
done in the 'German' course of study for grammar school teachers. In addition, Low
German exercises in subject-specific didactics are offered also to students graduating as teachers for other subjects.
935. Within the framework of university education, the Low German Language and
Literature Department offers a wide range of courses and lectures also for students
enrolled in other faculties. For instance, one course per semester is held specifically
for students of theology, on the subjects of Low German preaching and parochial
work. The annual "Internationaler Wissenschaftlicher Ferienkurs der Universität Kiel"
["International Academic Holiday Course of Kiel University"] entitled "Deutschland heute - Sprache, Gesellschaft, Staat, Kultur" ["Present-Day Germany - Language, Society, State, Culture"]
offers a series of courses and lectures on Low German, which are attended by the
foreign participants of the holiday course.
936. In response to the criticism expressed by the group of Low German speakers,
Schleswig-Holstein once more points out that extensive offers for the study of Low
- 290 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

German are available at Kiel University. Flensburg University offers lectures on the
Low German language and practical courses and seminars in the Low German language. In Flensburg, the offers are, however, not yet sufficient in quantitative terms to
properly allow students to meet the requirements stipulated in the currently applicable
teacher examination regulations (2 hours/week of Low German or Frisian).
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (e) (iii) - University and Other Higher Education (iii)

if, by reason of the role of the State in relation to higher education institutions,
subparagraphs i and ii cannot be applied, to encourage and/or allow the provision
of university or other forms of higher education in regional or minority languages
or of facilities for the study of these languages as university or higher education
subjects;

This obligation has been accepted by the Land of North Rhine/Westphalia.
937. In North Rhine/Westphalia, universities or colleges can offer instruction in Low
German or a course of study in the Low German language. However, Low German is
not (yet) offered as a separate subject of study/course of study. In view of the strained financial situation, it remains to be seen how things will develop in the course of
future semesters.
938. Within the framework of their mandates, the Low German Language and Literature Department of Münster University and the Faculty of Linguistics and Literature of
Bielefeld University, in particular, dedicate their efforts to the cultivation of the Low
German language and literature.
Research priorities of the Low German Language and Literature Department of Münster University during the period 1997/1998 included, for instance, "Niederdeutschhochdeutscher Sprachwechsel" ["Low German/High German language transition"], "Niederdeutsche Toponomastik" ["Low German Toponomastics*"], "Studien zur mittelniederdeutschen Literatur" ["Studies on Middle Low German Literature"], and "Studien zum
Werk von Augustin Wibbelt" ["Studies on Augustin Wibbelt's Work"].
To give another example: Münster University during the 1996/1997 [winter] semester
held seminars on the subjects of "Von Emden bis Maastricht: Sprache im deutschniederländischen Grenzraum" ["From Emden to Maastricht: Language in the German/
Dutch border area"] and "Münsterländer Plattdeutsch" ["Münsterland Low German"], and
during the 1998/1999 [winter] semester offered lectures on "Niederdeutsch in der
Schule" ["Low German in school"]; during the 1999/2000 [winter] semester it held seminars on "ältere Sprachstufen des Deutschen (Niederdeutsch)" ["early linguistic stages
of German (Low German)"] and on "Dialektologie des Niederdeutschen" ["Study of Low

*

study of the body of all place names; toponymy research [Translator's Note]

- 291 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

German Dialects and Dialectal Variations"], and during the 2003 [summer] semester a

literature reading course "Contemporary Westphalian Low German Poetry", and an
introductory seminar on "Low German in the media".
Over the past few years, the Research Group 'Study of Literature' of Bielefeld University has dealt with the following research subjects: 'Low German and National Socialism [Nazism]', 'Low German cultural scene'/'Low German literature', Reference Grammar of Low German Usage, and the Low German spoken by repatriates. Thus,
during the 1999/2000 semester, Bielefeld University offered a lecture on "Niederdeutsche Autorinnen des 20. Jahrhunderts" ["20th Century Female Authors writing in Low German"]. In the 2003 summer semester, a seminar was held on the subject "Sprachinselforschung: American Low German/Niederdeutsch im Mittleren Westen der USA"
["Speech Island Research: American Low German/Niederdeutsch in the Midwest of the
U.S.A."]. During the 2003/04 winter semester, Bielefeld University will offer a seminar

on "Middle Low German as a language used for drafting deeds/legal documents and
as a legal language".
Also, research is carried out at Bielefeld University on the subject: "Sprachinselforschung: Niederdeutsch in den USA" ["Speech Island Research: Low German in the U.S."]. For
more than six years already, the university's linguistics section has worked on documenting spoken Low German as used in the U.S. Midwest ("American Low German")
and already now has what may be regarded the largest body of documents on American Low German.
Also, the Bochum Ruhr-Universität and Paderborn University regularly offer seminars
on Low German subjects.
The pertinent study offers are not yet secured in institutional terms. The present financial situation at the universities will not allow a positive development in the near
future as regards intensification of the pertinent offers and thus precludes institutional
backstopping.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (f) (i) - Adult Education (i)

to arrange for the provision of adult and continuing education courses which are
taught mainly or wholly in the regional or minority languages; or

This obligation has been accepted by the Free Hanseatic City of Bremen.
939. The adult education centres of the Land offer courses in/on the Low German
language and literature.

- 292 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (f) (ii) - Adult Education (ii)

to offer such languages as subjects of adult and continuing education; or

This obligation has been accepted by the Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg.
940. The Hamburg adult education centre at present offers two courses for learning
and practising the Low German language (one in the city district Hamburg-Mitte, and
one in the city district Hamburg-Ost).
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (f) (iii) - Adult Education (iii)

if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult education,
to favour and/or encourage the offering of such languages as subjects of adult and
continuing education;

1. Brandenburg
941. Section 4, paras. 1 and 2, of the Act to regulate and promote Continuing Education in Brandenburg Land (abbrev. BbgWBG, or WBG) of 15 December 1993 embodies the Land's obligation to promote continuing education and to support the recognized providing bodies of continuing education. Under Section 27 of the WBG, the
Land shall fund a share of the personnel expenses and of the cost of materials related
to basic educational services. In addition, courses organized by residential educational
institutions and model projects focusing on topical subjects can be subsidized. Care
must be taken to ensure diversity of providing bodies.
942. The Brandenburg part of the Low German speech area has four Kreisvolkshochschulen, i.e. the Kreis Adult Education Centres of Uckermark, Prignitz, OstprignitzRuppin and Oberhavel. Detailed programming is the responsibility of the respective
Kreis Adult Education Centres themselves. Generally the willingness to include the
Low German language and the Low German cultural heritage does exist. In instances,
however, language courses were not held on account of insufficient demand. Nevertheless, attempts will be made also in future, for instance in the Uckermark region, to
offer such courses. There also have been occasional activities in the framework of cooperation projects, for instance readings by Low German writers.
2. Lower Saxony
943. In Ostfriesland, Low German is offered by various adult education centres, both
for language learning and as proficiency consolidation and conversation courses.
944. As regards the request of the Committee of Experts in No. 357 of the Monitoring
Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] for information concerning the situation in other areas of
- 293 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

Lower Saxony, this Land stated that the adult education centres Land-wide offer
courses in/on the Low German language. In 2001, for example, more than 170
courses and events were held at 33 adult education schools (among others, in Hildesheim, Göttingen, Northeim, Hameln, Goslar).
3. Schleswig-Holstein
945. In Schleswig-Holstein, there are many possibilities of following continuing education for people wishing to learn and study Low German. In 2002, twenty-eight adult
education centres in this Land offered 52 courses for learning and practising the Low
German language. These courses were attended by a total number of 575 participants.
946. The Zentrum für Niederdeutsch [Centre for Low German] in Ratzeburg pursues
specific public information/education activities in this field.
947. Courses and seminars are also offered - in part with Land funding - by associations committed to the promotion of the Low German language, especially by Schleswig-Holsteinischer Heimatbund (SHHB) [Schleswig-Holstein Union for Local and Regional Traditions].

948. Moreover, other associations offer a large variety of activities: the Writing Workshops for biographical writing, fiction writing (stories), radio plays; recital and rhetoric
seminars, seminars on journalism and the media; orthography; club-based activities
organized by SHHB; or activities offered by Niederdeutscher Bühnenbund [Union of
Low German Theatres] and Amateurtheaterverband [Association of Amateur Theatrical Societies] as well as by SHHB with regard to Directing Workshops, meetings of amateur
theatre groups, etc.
949. [blank]
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (g) - Teaching of the History and Culture Education (g)

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is
reflected by the regional or minority language;

950. Under the federal structure of the Federal Republic of Germany, implementation
of this provision primarily is incumbent on the Länder. In the field of education in the
Länder, promoting the knowledge of the culture, history, languages and religion of
the respective minorities/language groups as well as of the majority population is part
of the curricula of publicly maintained and private schools. An important role in imparting knowledge of the culture of the language groups, in and outside schools, is
- 294 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

played by the state institutions for political education, i.e. the Federal Centre (BpB)
and the Land Centres for Political Education. In this regard, cf. the broader comments
in Nos. 179 - 184 above.
The undertakings entered into by the Länder ensure that also non-speakers of Low
German have access to this language.
1. Brandenburg
951. In Section 4, para. 5, sub-para. 11, of the Brandenburg Schools Act of 12 April
1996, the Land embodied the obligation of schools to ensure that, in imparting
knowledge, skills and value concepts, the readiness and ability of pupils to understand
their own culture as well as other cultures, also within their own Land, will be
particularly promoted. This includes imparting the Low German culture which, as an
autochthonous culture of Northern Germany, plays an important role in this respect.
The additional obligation to impart these cultural fundamentals also to those pupils
whose culture is not the Low German culture ensures that, at least in the Low German
speech area and cultural area, also those pupils whose family roots are not in the
Low German area will be instructed in the fundamentals of the Low German culture.
952. The educational objectives shall not be pursued in one classroom subject only,
but shall be included in all appropriate subjects. Thus, it must be ensured that both the
historic aspects of the Low German culture and the diversity of present-day forms of
cultural expression will be reflected in literature, music, visual arts, etc.
2. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
953.
In No. 259 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], the Committee of
Experts asked for further information regarding implementation of this undertaking in
the non-university sector ["the other areas"]. In this regard, cf. the comments in
No. 939 above.
954. Bremen at present reviews the pertinent curricula for compatibility with the
accepted obligation. Where any deficits are identified, the necessary adjustments will
be made.
3. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
955. In Hamburg, the Low German language was flourishing at the time of the Hanseatic League and determined daily life. History lessons in school draw attention to
this fact and inform about this particular part of history and culture. Depending on the
- 295 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

respective concept, such classroom instruction also makes use of the offers by
museums and other cultural institutions (e.g. Literaturhaus), or pupils are made
aware of such offers.
4. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
956. In response to the request of the Committee of Experts, in No. 326 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], for further information on the state of implementation, the following information is provided:
Under the Schools Act and other regulations in force, the Low German culture and
history shall be imparted to pupils in schools providing general education.
Over the past few semesters, Low German studies were offered in seminars and/or
compulsory (advanced) seminars:
- on the problem of language contact and language change in Mecklenburg and
Pomerania
- on Low German legends, folktales, proverbs, Sagwörter [Low German type of wellerism] in Mecklenburg and Pomerania
- on contemporary dialect writers, especially aspects of the sociological study of
literature
- on the authors Fritz Reuter, John Brinckman
- on "Low German under National Socialism (Nazi era)"
- on Low German medievalist studies ("Narrenschyp" ["The Ship of Fools"], "Redentiner Osterspiel" ["The Redentin Easter Play"], "Reynke de Vos" ["Reynard the Fox"]; language and communication at the time of the Hanseatic League)
Seminars and compulsory (advanced) seminars - offered at Greifswald University, in
particular - on the history of the Hanseatic League round off the cultural history
aspect of the regional language Low German.
The Fritz Reuter Literature Museum in his native town of Stavenhagen studied Reuter's reception/acceptance during the Nazi era. Another subject were Reuter's reception in music and/or his work's status in the cultural life of the two German states (i.e.
FRG and GDR before German re-unification).
The Institut für Volkskunde (IVK, Institute of Folklore - Wossidlo-Archiv) held courses on
"regional customs and traditions", on the region's inventory of tales and songs, on regional foodstuffs/cooking and housing, and on working life. One example was the
study of seafaring life on Mecklenburgian sailing ships as gleaned from Richard Wossidlo's collection. At the initiative of the Institute of Folklore (IVK - Wossidlo-Archiv),
the Low German botanical names were displayed for all plants shown by the German
Pavilion during the 2003 International Horticultural Exhibition (IGA) in the Hanseatic
- 296 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

City of Rostock. In connection with this project, Rostock University offered a seminar
on Low German popular botany.
In 2002, the project "routes of Brick Gothic" was carried out in the Hanseatic Cities of
Rostock, Greifswald and Stralsund. Under this project, both the Low German book
culture and the history of the Hanseatic League as well as the impressive brick architecture were explained to visitors.
5. Lower Saxony
957. Under the extended educational mandate laid down in the Lower Saxony
Schools Act as amended in 1993, pupils shall be enabled to develop their faculties of
perception and sensitivity and their capacity for expressing themselves, with the inclusion of the relevant regional variety of Low German or of Frisian. Implementation
of this mandate in classroom instruction can be supported by all school subjects.
Particularly suited are 'German', the subjects covered by the 'world history and geography' complex and by social sciences (history, geography, politics) as well as elementary science, arts, music, and religious instruction; for vocational/technical
schools, the preferred subjects are German and politics.
958. The Ministry of Education and Cultural Affairs - in co-operation with schools,
Niedersächsischer Heimatbund (NHB) [Lower Saxony Union for Local and Regional Traditions], the Landschaften or Landschaftsverbände [regional local authorities] and the Bezirk Governments - develops a differentiated support system. In detail, this involves
the following:
959.

Through the completed pilot project "Plattdeutsch in der Schule" ["Low German
in school"], the on-going school-based model test at the Obenstrohe (Varel) secondary school, which also includes "Niederdeutsch im Unterricht" ["Low German in Classroom Instruction"] as one of the priority subjects, is designed to give a clear idea of the
way in which, and the extent to which, the Low German language is imparted. Also,
following the "Model Test: Bilingualism in Nursery School", Low German is to be included in the instruction given at primary schools in Ostfriesland. The pilot project
"Low German in school" is described in a final report (Gerdes, Dirk: Pilotprojekt
„Plattdeutsch in der Schule“, Aurich, 1996) which also lists the many project-related
publications. After an inventory of the current status (Low German in our days; the
status of Low German in school education; Low German linguistic potential at Ostfriesland schools; teachers' attitudes towards the regional language and regional
identity), the report describes general conditions and curricular minimum require-

- 297 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

ments with regard to the re-integration of the Low German language in school education.
960. At the level of the Bezirk Governments, the Commissioners for Low German in
Classroom Instruction who were first designated in 1997 have, in co-operation with
representatives of the Landschaften and Landschaftsverbände or of local associations, begun to establish regional working panels. These panels are considered appropriate institutions for identifying existing activities, pursued in and outside school
with regard to the regional language, for mutually complementing them and improving
them for the school sector through regional further training.
961. Finally, the Bezirk Governments can, in the procedure for inviting applications
for a position, indicate school-specific requirements in addition to the subjects to be
taught by the applicant. During job interviews, these special requirements, e.g. Low
German in classroom instruction, can be taken into account.
962. At the schools level, education department officers, especially the Commissioners for Low German in Classroom Instruction, assist the various schools in their
efforts to develop a regional education concept, taking particular account of the regional language.
963. Within the framework of optional-subject courses and of courses in subjects
chosen from a compulsory group at Realschulen [secondary technical schools] and in
courses in required elective subjects at secondary modern schools, teachers already
make use of the possibility to offer Low German and to include it in marking.
964. The teaching material and learning aids developed by Ostfriesische Landschaft
within the framework of the pilot project "Plattdeutsch in der Schule" ["Low German in
school"] respond to the need of many teachers for appropriate educational material;
they are based on the extended educational mandate of schools, and take account of
the pupils' previous knowledge. Thus, in terms of their approach, they can be adapted to the work in other regions. The same goes for the questionnaires developed for
pupils and for teachers. With the development, by Ostfriesische Landschaft, of the
teaching and learning system and of the survey instruments, the Land Government
has provided basic prerequisites for modern promotion of the regional language,
which should now be applied in practice in the various regions. In this regard, cf. the
comments in No. 959 above.
965. The objective of supraregional specialist conferences (organized by Niedersächsischer Heimatbund (NHB) [Lower Saxony Union for Local and Regional Traditions] in cooperation with the Ministry of Education and Cultural Affairs) in a three-year cycle, is
- 298 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

to present the work of regional institutions from aspects of methodology/didactics and
to interlink those activities in a long-term perspective.
The third specialist conference was held in 2003:
Lecture on the "Utility of the Internet for an effective information structure".
Meetings of working groups:
• information structures
• continuous training
• regional projects
• projects regarding the regional language
The Lower Saxony Ministry of Education and Cultural Affairs and Niedersächsischer
Heimatbund [Lower Saxony Union for Local and Regional Traditions] plan a documentation on this specialist conference.
966. Under the "Leitbild für die Schulaufsicht in Niedersachsen" ["Model for Supervisory School Offices in Lower Saxony"], it is the responsibility, first of all, of the individual school to achieve the pedagogical, subject-related and organizational objectives specified by state authorities and agreed internally. This entails the task for
schools to develop their respective regional education concept on the basis of the
state-defined requirements and of their competencies for in-school and extracurricular activities. This can be done, for instance, in the course of the development of
the school programme. Aids are already provided by the results of the pilot project
"Plattdeutsch in der Schule" ["Low German in school"] and by further training measures
in various regions and at centres for environmental education, by the documentation
published by regional working panels or school discussion groups that deals with the
region, e.g. from a linguistic, geographic, historical or economical angle. Many
schools asked for the documentation on the findings of this pilot project.
6. North Rhine/Westphalia
967. In North Rhine/Westphalia, the Guidelines and Curricula issued by the Schools
Ministry encourage the discussion and study of specific regional aspects. Thus, the
Guidelines for the Lower Secondary Grades of Gymnasien [grammar schools] call upon
schools to develop a school programme which, inter alia, will cover the "cultural traditions of the local environment and home region". Regional languages are included in
the learning field "Reflexion über Sprache" ["Reflections on Language"] forming part of
the grammar school curriculum for the subject 'German'. Also the curricula for the
secondary grades and for the primary education level of schools of other types provide for inclusion of an adequate proportion of regional languages in German
lessons.
- 299 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

968. In addition, since the start of the new school year 1999, Low German lessons
have been given, or have been expertly supported, at Schalksmühle primary school
by several members of Niederdeutscher Arbeitskreis [Low German Working Panel] of
Geschichtsverein Schalksmühle [Schalksmühle Historical Society]. Also, a school in Lüdenscheid will offer Low German instruction in future. These lessons are taught by
part-time staff or volunteers.
7. Saxony-Anhalt
969. In Saxony-Anhalt, the Low German language has, for many centuries, determined daily life. The Framework Curricula for the subjects 'History' and 'German' take
account of this fact and recommend to provide information on the history, language
and culture, for instance in connection with regional or local topics.
For further details, cf. the comments above on sub-para. (b) (iv) [primary education].
8. Schleswig-Holstein
970.
The curricula of publicly maintained schools provide for many ways of
including Low German in classroom instruction. Thus, the 'German' curriculum
provides for "discussion and study of the languages and speech communities in
Schleswig-Holstein".
Reference is made to the comments in Nos. 875 - 882 and 900 - 904 above.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (h) - Basic and Further Training of Teachers (h)

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of
paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;

1. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
971. The Landesinstitut für Schule [Land Institute for Schools] offers regular teacher
follow-up training in the Low German language and culture.
972. In response to the statement of the Committee of Experts in No. 260 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that it would need more information in order
to be able to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled, the following is reported:
in 1998, Bremen University introduced the priority subject matter (main subject) "Low
German: regional language and regional culture" as an additional pædagogical qualification within the framework of teacher training. The subjects covered by this study
programme are: learning of the Low German language; Low German linguistics

- 300 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

(grammar, stylistics); the history of the Low German language; literature and culture;
regional history; and subject-specific didactics 'Low German'.
2. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
973. While teachers can study Low German at Hamburg University and select it as a
minor for the M.A. examination, this is not possible as regards the examination for the
teaching profession at Hamburg University (at other universities, however, such inclusion is possible, e.g. in Bremen). For the near future, it is planned to introduce the
mention "main subject Low German" in the State Examination certificates issued to
students who successfully fulfilled certain enrolment requirements regarding Low
German as part of the German Philology degree programme (Seminar Ia and Ib and
Seminar II, and selection of a Low German subject for either the special subject
(homework) paper, the written examination under supervision, or any part of the oral
exam). In addition, it is planned to offer an additional study programme 'Low German', probably covering three semesters, as an additional teaching qualification for
students and graduated teachers. A date for introducing this programme has not yet
been set because the organizational and funding arrangements are not yet in place.
On the other hand, most of the many teachers who would like to include Low German
in classroom instruction or plan such activities did not study this subject at university.
They mostly know the language from their childhood days.
974. The Landesinstitut für Lehrerbildung und Schulentwicklung (LI) [Land Institute for
Teacher Training and School Development] offers continuing education both on a regular
basis and within the framework of special activities. The one-time course "Platt in de
Grundschool" ["Low German in elementary school"] organized in August 1999 had fifteen participants while the "Plattdüütsche Schoolmesterkrink" ["Low German Teachers'
Circle"], which met every two weeks, was attended by six to twelve persons; in the

school year 2002/2003, it was attended by 15 persons.
975. In response to the statement of the Committee of Experts in No. 296 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that, on the basis of the information provided
so far, this undertaking could not be considered fulfilled, the following information is
provided:
As part of compulsory subject studies under the teacher training programme, Low
German is offered as a priority subject matter (main subject) by Hamburg University;
also, the State Examination paper may be written on a Low German subject.
At present, the mention 'main subject: Low German' is not yet included on the State
Examination certificate; however, if an examinee wrote his/her State Exam special
- 301 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

subject (homework) paper on a Low German subject, its title is given on the certificate, thus indicating the graduate's pursuit of such studies. As regards the planned
changes, cf. No. 979 above.
The Committee of Experts correctly states that, under the present State Examination
system, courses or examinations taken on/in Low German subjects are not shown on
the certificate and do not provide a specific/formal qualification as "teacher in/of Low
German".
Apart from the planned changes, efforts to include more explicit mention of study programmes followed, or examinations taken, in the specialized field of Low German
might be successful in the context of future re-organization of this teacher examination system, which would provide for greater university influence than is now the
case.
Possibilities in this respect exist already now within the framework of the 'German'
study programme, and would also be provided by an eventual amendment of the
examination regulations. The process of revising the modalities of teacher examinations is at present not yet completed: discussions and coordination talks are underway with the so-called Sozietäten established a year ago [2002] on the various study/
examination subjects. It is not yet foreseeable when this amendment will actually take
place. The speakers of the Institut für Germanistik I of Hamburg University and the
representatives of the authorities responsible for the subject 'German' will contribute
their ideas on Low German aspects to the future work of the Sozietät „Deutsch“.
3. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
976. University studies of Low German are based on the Training and Examination
Regulations of the Rostock and Greifswald Universities. Continuing training of teachers for schools offering general education is governed by the provisions of the
Schools Act. During the second training phase at the Landesinstitut MecklenburgVorpommern für Schule und Ausbildung (LISA - Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania Land
Institute for Schools and Training), teachers in training in the primary school sector or
for the subject 'German' in secondary schools can select and treat, from a pedagogical angle, topics specifically referring to Low German aspects, in their respective
special-subject paper or the trial lessons to be prepared for the Final State Examination. These are mostly instruction sequences which they tried out themselves in the
classroom. These activities build up on, and continue, the Low German training taken
up at Greifswald University and the course of study followed at Rostock University,
with Low German as a main subject.

- 302 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

977. Since 1992, follow-up training of teachers for Low German in schools has been
organized by the Landesinstitut Mecklenburg-Vorpommern für Schule und Ausbildung (LISA). The focus is on didactics/methodology support for teachers; in this respect, the principle of the trainees' self-initiative and own work - in addition to information and reading lists - is an important element.
978. In the 2000/2001 and 2001/2002 school years, L.I.S.A. gave priority support to
the following projects:
• further education on various Low German topics
• participation in, and as of 2002 chairing of, the "Schools" Working Panel
• participation in the preparation of a Low German reader for elementary schools (to
be published in 2003)
• publication of further education materials on strategies for imparting/teaching the
regional language Low German
• participation, also in a lead function, in conferences, including meetings across
Land borders, on Low German subjects
• launching inter-generation projects: a Low German children's group learning the
Low German language and performing plays in that language
• help with the writing of examination papers on school theatre performance of Low
German plays, and - in the 2003/2004 school year - follow-up monitoring of the
second phase of teacher training (so-called preparatory service) for 'Low German'
trainee teachers at elementary and secondary modern schools
• in co-operation with the Landesheimatverband [Land Union for Local and Regional Traditions], supporting the organization of the competition "Kinner snackt Platt" ["Children
talking in Low German"].
979. The subjects of teacher further education covered both linguistic-literary aspects
and regional history, geography and culture. Also for these courses and lectures,
various materials were developed and distributed to the participating teachers. A new
focus of attention emerged as a result of the regulation applying to the "orientation
stage" [5th and 6th grades], under which - inter alia - Low German and instruction in performing/interpretative play should be combined. On this basis, L.I.S.A. [Land Institute for
Teacher Follow-up Training] developed a further education programme entitled "TheaterSPÄLtied" [theatre playing time], initially comprising five courses which are professionally
supported by Niederdeutsche Bühne Schwerin [Schwerin Low German Theatre].
980. Another novel feature of the strategy for teacher further education is that Low
German follow-up training is given "on site" at the respective schools, thus providing
teaching staffs and further education institutions (e.g. SCHiLF - Schulinterne Lehrerfortbildung [In-School Teacher Follow-Up Training, provided by a theological college]) and
specialized groups with many new ideas for Low German classroom instruction. In

- 303 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

the 2001/2002 school year alone, 28 schools and their teaching staffs and/or specialized groups were given further training by L.I.S.A.
Since 2002, L.I.S.A. has participated in the development of a large body of Low German teaching materials. In co-operation with the Förderverein Seniorenakademie of
the Rostock Wossidlo-Archiv and with the involvement of native speakers, Low German legends, fairy/folk tales and other texts are recorded on digitalized sound recording media. L.I.S.A. attends to the screening, sorting and didactization of these materials for use by schools.
981. A new project of teacher further training in 2003 is a language-acquisition
course 'Low German for Teachers'. This course was realized in co-operation with the
Schwerin adult education centre, and is supported and certified by L.I.S.A.
4. North Rhine/Westphalia
982. The Circular [Decree] on "Niederdeutsch in der Schule" ["Low German in school"],
issued by the Münster Bezirk Government, contains guidance on the inclusion of regional linguistic culture in the curricula. In addition, the Münster Bezirk Government
offers teachers' follow-up training conferences on linguistic theory and practice. A
volume for use at such meetings and entitled "Niederdeutsch in der Schule - Beiträge
zur regionalen Zweisprachigkeit" ["Low German in school - material on regional bilingualism"] was published already in 1989. An up-dated/revised version of this material is at
present precluded by the financial situation of public-sector budgets, among others.
5. Saxony-Anhalt
983. Training and continuing education of teachers in Saxony-Anhalt in the field of
the Low German language are ensured, on the one hand, by Arbeitsstelle Niederdeutsch [Workshop for Low German] of Germanistisches Institut of Otto von Guericke
University in Magdeburg ("Teacher Training: Aspects of Language Cultivation, and
Facultative Offers for Participants Interested in Linguistics") and, on the other hand,
through follow-up and further training activities offered on a regular basis by Landesinstitut für Lehrerfortbildung Sachsen-Anhalt (LISA - Saxony-Anhalt Land Institute for
Follow-up Training of Teachers) in co-operation with Landesheimatbund Sachsen-An-

halt e.V. [Saxony-Anhalt Land Union for Local and Regional Traditions].
6. Schleswig-Holstein
984. Training and continuing education of teachers are regulated in Training and
Examination Regulations. In future, proof of attendance of a course in Low German
- 304 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

or Frisian will be required for admission to the First State Examinations in the subject
'German'.
985. As part of a supplementary course of study for the teaching profession for all
schools, which comprises about 20 hours a week per semester, an additional exam
can be taken in Low German and Frisian.
986. Within the limits of the capacities available, colleges and universities offer further training in Low German. In the 1998 summer semester, the Universities of Kiel
and Flensburg introduced Low German seminars for students training to become
teachers for all types of schools.
987. The Low German Language and Literature Department of Kiel University provides advisory services on a continuous basis, including counselling for teachers,
who also have access to the holdings of its library.
Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (i) - Supervisory Bodies (i)

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken
and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or
minority languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings which will be
made public.

1. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
988. The 'German Language' Section of the [Senate] Authority for Education and
Sports (BBS) was assigned the responsibility for the European Charter for Regional
or Minority Languages.
989. The Hamburg Landesinstitut für Lehrerbildung und Schulentwicklung (LI - Land
Institute for Teacher Training and School Development) also takes care of the counselling
of specialized teachers who receive follow-up training or additional qualification for
teaching in the regional language Low German and the minority language Romany.
The Institute keeps a list of the activities offered at Hamburg schools, which are reported in the Institute's periodical publication "LI Magazin".
With regard to any extension required, or the qualification, of the offered courses, the
responsible lecturers of the Institute confer with the supervisory school authorities
and with the 'German Language' Section of the Senate Authority for Schools.
990. In response to the comment of the Committee of Experts, in No. 297 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], that it concluded that the obligation was not
fulfilled, it is reported that in future, a staff member of the school supervisory section
- 305 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

of the competent Behörde für Bildung und Sport (BBS - Senate Authority for Education and
Sports) will be tasked with the co-ordination, in co-operation with all school supervisory bodies, of the measures to promote and further the Low German language and
literature in classroom instruction or other school activities. It is planned to have
regular reporting on this activity.
991. The Landesinstitut für Lehrerbildung und Schulentwicklung (LI) will be assigned
responsibility for teacher follow-up training measures (inter alia, continuation of the
Plattdüütsche Schoolmesterkrink ["Teachers' Circle", a Low German Working Panel] which
was created a number of years ago) and for other Low German activities.
2. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
992. In publications and on the occasion of further training activities or at meetings,
Landesinstitut Mecklenburg-Vorpommern für Schule und Ausbildung (LISA - Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania Land Institute for Schools and Training) provides information on

the situation of Low German at the general-education schools in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania.
993. In 1996, the Ministry of Education founded a Niederdeutsch-Beirat Mecklenburg-Vorpommern [Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania Low German Consultative Council].
This body has 15 members and is chaired by the Minister of Education. The members of the Niederdeutsch-Beirat represent all main subject areas (schools, science
and research, linguistic and cultural work). The Niederdeutsch-Beirat has the function
to discuss and network the various Low German activities in Mecklenburg-Western
Pomerania. For more efficient and effective use of the staffing and financial resources, knowledge of the main study areas in the various fields of activity relating to
Low German is essential. Moreover, there is an urgent requirement for discussing
and treating a large number of issues regarding the cultivation and promotion of Low
German.
In response to the Committee's comment in No. 328 of the Monitoring Report [MINLANG (2002) 4 final] that the obligation was not yet fulfilled, it is reported that the Low
German Consultative Council, qua supervisory body, will in future submit regular reports on the measures taken to further develop education in Low German in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania.
3. Lower Saxony
994. In November 1997, a Working Group was established, with representatives
from the Landschaften and Landschaftsverbände [regional local authorities], Nieder- 306 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

sächsischer Heimatbund (NHB) [Lower Saxony Union for Local and Regional Traditions]
and the schools offices. The task of this Working Group is to monitor the proper implementation of the obligations under the Charter which have been accepted by the
Land of Lower Saxony.
995. In response to the Committee's request for further information on the aforementioned Working Group, cf. No. 359 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4
FINAL], the following information is provided:
On account of its membership (departmental heads of Bezirk [district] governments,
representatives of Landschaften/Landschaftsverbände, of the Lower Saxony Ministry
of Education and Cultural Affairs, and Niedersächsischer Heimatbund), the existing
Working Group is qualified to implement the decree on "The Region in Classroom
Instruction", covering also the knowledge of the regional language and the related
linguistic skills.
An overview of the current activities in the four Regierungsbezirke of Lower Saxony
[Land administrative units, "districts", i.e. Braunschweig, Hannover, Lüneburg, Weser-Ems] is provided by the existing information structures, such as the ombudsperson systems and
the available inventories made in the Regierungsbezirke, as well as by the development of an Internet-based information and communications system.
The status of current debate is reflected by the minutes of the Working Group's discussions; by the documentation on the specialized conferences which are planned by
the WG and are held at three-year intervals; by subject-related publications in the
Schulverwaltungsblatt für Niedersachsen; and by the critical annual reports on the
status of the preservation of regional traditions and culture in Lower Saxony (socalled Rote Mappe - "red book"), which also contain comments on the Low German
language, and the Lower Saxony Land Government's response (so-called Weisse
Mappe - "white book") to these reports.
996. Responsibility for the preparation and regular publication of the report regarding
the provisions on education lies with the Lower Saxony Ministry of Education and
Cultural Affairs.
4. Schleswig-Holstein
997. For the supervision of the measures taken in primary schools, secondary modern schools and Realschulen [secondary technical schools], responsibility lies with the
supervisory school authorities of the Kreise [administrative districts] or kreisfreie Städte
[non-district municipalities]. For the Gymnasien [grammar schools] and comprehensive
schools, responsibility for supervision lies with the Ministry for Education, Science,
Research and Cultural Affairs. The tasks of the supervisory school authorities include
- 307 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

co-ordination and monitoring of measures taken for the promotion of Low German.
Responsibility for subject-specific matters lies with the Land Commissioners for Follow-up Training, the regional commissioners and the Kreis specialist commissioners.
Nordfriesland, for instance, has the "Plattdütsche Stuuv" ["Low German Parlour"], a
centre installed at the initiative of the supervisory school authority. It runs a lending
library for Low German writings. At the same time, it is a meeting place for teachers
interested in Low German.
998. As an important measure for cultivating and promoting Low German in and outside school, the two "Zentren für Niederdeutsch" ["Centres for Low German"] for the
Land regions of Schleswig (in Leck) and Holstein (in Ratzeburg) were established as
working centres by the Land Government in 1994. As of August 2000, the teachers
temporarily assigned to those Centres are released from their regular duties, amounting to two established posts.
The task of the two Centres for Low German is to advise the schools, providing
bodies for education and further education, and individuals, associations and other
organizations dealing with Low German, and to support and, where appropriate, to
co-ordinate their activities. This includes the development of support and guidance
materials for designing/organizing classroom instruction. A landmark activity is the
production of readers which were developed in close co-operation with the foundation Stiftung Mecklenburg. As part of their tasks, the Centres for Low German pursue
specific public information/education activities.
999. The Institut für Qualitätsentwicklung an Schulen (IQSH - Institute for Quality Development at Schools) also supports the schools. Five regional commissioners, one Land

and Further Training Commissioner and ten Kreis commissioners advise the schools
on matters regarding the regional language Low German. Cf. the comments in No.
876 above.
1000. In No. 400 of its Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], the Committee of
Experts concluded that this undertaking was not fulfilled. At the same time, it encouraged the authorities to establish a supervisory body designed to monitor the measures taken in developing education in Low German in Schleswig-Holstein and to draw
up periodic reports.
The Land Government does not perceive any need for establishing a special/separate supervisory body. Supervision is ensured in co-operation with those responsible
for the promotion of Low German in a school context, i.e. the public official responsible for expert supervision, the Schools Offices and the Zentren für Niederdeutsch. A
separate/independent supervisory body would be contrary to the intention to introduce 'lean government' (reduction of bureaucracy, of agencies and regulations).
- 308 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

1001. The Land Government submits reports on the situation of the Low German
language to the Schleswig-Holstein Landtag. This report covers both cultural and
school-related aspects of Low German. In addition, the Schleswig-Holstein Landtag
in 1992 set up a Consultative Council for Low German. The Consultative Council,
which is chaired by the Landtag President, meets at least twice a year. Its members
are representatives of the Landtag parliamentary groups, the Minister-President's
Commissioner for Low German, one representative of the Ministry for Education,
Science, Research and Cultural Affairs, and representatives of the Low German
community, associations and institutions. The Consultative Council deals with all
aspects of the Low German language and culture, including school matters.
Article 8, para. 2
Paragraph 2
With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the regional or
minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a
regional or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the
regional or minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.

1002. As regards colleges and universities, this obligation - in the sense of "undertake ... to allow" - is met for the entire territory of the Federal Republic by virtue of
Article 5, para. 3, of the Basic Law (autonomy of institutions of higher education).
1. North Rhine/Westphalia
1003. This obligation is met in North Rhine/Westphalia in the sense of "undertake
... to allow". Any instruction - at colleges and universities - in the regional language
Low German is, of course, "allowed" also in Land regions other than those where the
regional language is spoken. A state-imposed ban, with regard to institutions of higher education, would not be compatible with the constitutional provisions of Article 5,
para. 3, of the Basic Law.
1004. In response to the statement of the Committee of Experts in No. 119 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that for lack of information it was not possible to conclude that the undertaking is fulfilled, the following information is provided:
A systematic analysis of the various education offers regarding the Low German language in North-Rhine/Westphalia is not available. Schools decide, on their own responsibility, on whether they will offer courses or optional activity groups for "Low
German". Previous experience has shown that in areas where Low German dialect
groups or similar groups are active, various activities are also carried out with schools
or Schools Offices (teacher further education).

- 309 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

2. Schleswig-Holstein
1005. This obligation is met in Schleswig-Holstein in the sense of "undertake ... to
allow".
1006. In No. 401 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], the Committee of
Experts stated that it had not been made aware of any measures on the part of the
German authorities in this respect.
With regard to Schleswig-Holstein Land, it should be noted that the Low German
speech area must be considered to comprise the entire Land - even though with
varying intensity of language use. Therefore, it is not clear what 'other territories'
might be referred to. This undertaking is fulfilled for the entire Land of Schleswig-Holstein.

- 310 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

Article 9
Judicial Authorities
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents using
the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to the
situation of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the
present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of justice:

Art. 9, para. 1, sub-para. (b) - Civil Proceedings (iii)

to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

This obligation has been explicitly accepted by the Länder of Bremen, Hamburg,
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Lower Saxony, North Rhine/Westphalia and
Schleswig-Holstein.
1007. With the proviso that documents and evidence drafted in a minority language
must be presented in a form obviating misunderstandings or errors with regard to
their translation, this obligation is met by the legal situation prevailing in Germany (cf.
the comments in Nos. 213 - 215 above). Therefore, it has not been necessary to take
any special measures.
Art. 9, para. 1, sub-para. (c) - Proceedings before Courts concerning Administrative
Matters (c)

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
(iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

This obligation has been explicitly accepted by the Länder of Bremen, Hamburg,
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Lower Saxony, North Rhine/Westphalia and
Schleswig-Holstein.
1008.

In this regard, cf. the comments in No. 1007 above.

1009. As regards this branch of the judiciary, it must be pointed out that administrative courts are obliged to conduct ex officio investigations and, where necessary
and appropriate, will on their own initiative rely on the services of interpreters. Thus,
the members of a given language group suffer no prejudice by the use of their language.

- 311 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

Art. 9, para. 2, sub-para. (a) - Validity of Legal Documents The Parties undertake:
(a) not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because
they are drafted in a regional or minority language; or

This obligation has been explicitly accepted by the Länder of Brandenburg, Bremen,
Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Lower Saxony, North Rhine/Westphalia, Saxony-Anhalt and Schleswig-Holstein.
1010.

In this regard, cf. the comments in No. 1007 above.

- 312 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

Article 10
Administrative Authorities and Public Services
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of
regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the
situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:

Art. 10, para. 1, sub-para. (a) (v) - Submission of Documents (v)

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a
document in these languages;

1. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
1011. With the entry into force of the Regional/Minority Language Charter as of
01 January 1999, the provision under sub-para. (a) (v) has become applicable law for
the authorities of the Free Hanseatic City of Bremen. In order to stem the flood of
legal rules, the Hanseatic City of Bremen will refrain from adopting any special administrative regulations referring to the existing applicable legal provisions.
1012. As regards the criticism expressed by the Committee of Experts in Nos. 263
to 267 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] with regard to the obligations
accepted under Article 10 - i.e. that the obligations are only formally or partly fulfilled the Free Hanseatic City of Bremen provides the following information:
Adoption of any directives or administrative regulations with reference to the accepted undertakings is not envisaged in future, either. Nor have any cases become
known where problems arose in the context of the admission of the Low German
language in practice. No cases are known where documents or requests drafted in
the Low German language would have been rejected. As a rule, in order to ensure
legal certainty, the official language "standard German" is used for the drafting of
official documents, although the administrative authorities are well aware that they
could also be drafted in Low German.
2. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
1013. In Hamburg, as in Bremen (cf. the foregoing comments under Nos. 1011
and 1012 which also apply to Hamburg), it is possible to submit documents drafted in
Low German to the authorities. No use has so far been made of this facility by members of this language group.
1014. As regards the criticism expressed by the Committee of Experts in Nos. 300
to 303 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] with regard to the obligations

- 313 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

accepted under Article 10 - i.e. that the obligations are only formally or partly fulfilled the Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg provides the following information:
In 1997, when the Senate ratified the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, the provisions of Article 10 became directly enforceable law ("self-executing")
in Hamburg. To this extent, the respective voluntary undertakings are formally fully
fulfilled. In order to stem the flood of legal rules, Hamburg quite deliberately decided
against translating implementation of the voluntary undertakings under Art. 10 into
formal rules or directives. In view of the fact that, on account of Hamburg's particular
City-State constitution, the administration is clearly organized and easy to survey and
Senate decisions take immediate effect for the entire administration, the Senate
Authority of Finance considers it unnecessary to enforce and/or publicize the voluntary undertakings under Art. 10 on a wider scale than is already provided by the practice of informally disseminating the related information (in-service briefings/conferences, etc.). Thus, Hamburg's practice is in agreement with that of the other North
German Länder.
Hamburg is not aware of any cases where documents or requests drafted in the Low
German language would have been rejected or refused as a result of the non-existence of administrative regulations regarding implementation of Article 10. A pragmatic solution was put in place by providing in-house doorplates and/or stickers to identify language-proficient staff members of administrative authorities.
Within their respective area, administrative authorities have own responsibility for
press and public relations work which they design in specific orientation on their inhabitants. It is not planned to issue centrally organized Hamburg-wide public notices.
3. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
1015. Notwithstanding the applied principle of using German as the official language, Section 23 of the Land Administrative Procedure Act does not, on principle,
rule out use of Low German. Accordingly, documents drafted in Low German, e.g.
purchase deeds, etc., can be submitted in this regional language.
1016. As regards the lack of practical information pointed out by the Committee of
Experts in No. 331 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], the following information is provided:
With regard to the submission of documents/deeds drafted in the Low German language, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania has a model case dating back to the
1960's, which is also used in student training: In connection with a private-way dispute, a Low German deed was submitted. Submission of Low German documents is
- 314 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

generally admissible, but in practice - given the bilingual language proficiency of
speakers - only occurs in the case of historical deeds.
4. Lower Saxony
1017. Submission of legal documents in the Low German language is admissible.
So far, no information is available regarding the extent to which members of this language group have actually made use of this facility.
1018. As regards the criticism expressed by the Committee of Experts in Nos. 362
to 367 [366] of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] with regard to the obligations accepted under Article 10 - i.e. that the obligations are only formally or partly fulfilled - the Land of Lower Saxony provides the following information:
In the area of the Government of the Weser-Ems Regierungsbezirk, intensive and
communicative use is made of the Low German language in the administration's contacts with citizens. A major part of the staff members understand and speak Low German. Thus it is ensured that citizens can submit oral and written requests (in Low
German) and obtain answers (in that language). The same goes for submission of
documents.
5. Schleswig-Holstein
1019. The legal basis for the adoption of this obligation by Schleswig-Holstein Land
is Article 82a, para. 2, of the Land Administration Act. This discretionary regulation
provides for the general possibility to submit applications, petitions, records, deeds or
other documents in a foreign language, i.e. a language other than the official language.
"Section 82a - Official language
(1) The official language is German.
(2) If applications or petitions, records, deeds or other documents drafted in a foreign language are submitted to an authority, the latter may require a translation
to be produced. (...)"
1020. According to a non-representative survey carried out among subordinate
agencies of the Ministry of the Interior of Schleswig-Holstein Land, use was made of
this possibility, inter alia, by land survey offices [cadastral offices] and by the Land Statistical Office.
1021. In this context it should also be noted that, according to the legal commentary
by Foerster, Friedersen and Rohde (as of 2/97; no. 1, para. 4, regarding Section 82a
of the Land Administration Act), the term 'German language' not only covers standard
- 315 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

German ("Hochdeutsch"), but also dialects, including the Low German language.
This is also in conformity with the supreme-court decisions on the parallel regulation
applying to courts, cf. Section 184 of the Organization of the Courts Act. The prerequisite, however, is that all parties involved understand the dialect. To this extent, the
obligation is already met for Low German. Following this commentary, though, Low
German would not be considered a language in its own right, but a dialect - and as
such would not come under the Regional/Minority Language Charter. Linguistically,
however, it is an established fact that Low German is an independent language differing from standard (High) German.
1022. In No. 404 of its Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], the Committee of
Experts, on account of the lack of practical information, did not yet feel able to conclude that this undertaking was fulfilled.
The lack of practical examples of documents being submitted in Low German is primarily an indication of the status of Low German as a spoken regional language.
However, in the Land Government's view, such lack of examples does not preclude
the conclusion that the undertaking is implemented.
Art. 10, para. 1, sub-para. (c) - Drafting of Documents (c)

to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in a regional or minority
language.

1. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
1023.

In this regard, cf. the comments in Nos. 1011 and 1012 above.

2. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
1024.

In this regard, cf. the comments in Nos. 1013 and 1014 above.

3. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
1025. In this area, the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages has
already had the effect that, for instance, documents, speeches, letters and messages
of greeting are written in Low German both within the Land Administration and in
local administrations. The Arbeitsleiter serving with the Nordvorpommern Landkreis
in 2003 followed a 36-hours' Low German course held at the Grimmen adult education centre. Cultural events (e.g. Hanse Sail, Landeskulturtage [Land Cultural Days],
Mecklenburg-Vorpommern-Tag) are opened, and newly published Low German
books are presented, by the Minister-President of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
- 316 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

Land in the Low German language. This means significant upgrading and recognition
of Low German. To the extent possible, Low German letters sent by citizens will also
be answered in Low German.
1026. The employment of Low German Commissioners within the Land Administration and local administrations should be examined in a long-term perspective. The
task of such Commissioners for Low German could be to develop concepts for enhancing (oral/written) proficiency in the Low German language in administration.
For the outcome of this particular issue, cf. the comments in Nos. 1038 - 1045 below.
1027. As regards the criticism expressed by the Committee of Experts in No. 332 of
the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] concerning the lack of corresponding instructions issued to the authorities, the Land of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
takes the view that use of Low German within administrative authorities was admitted
to the extent reasonably practicable, and that consequently the accepted undertaking
was entirely fulfilled.
4. Lower Saxony
1028.

In this regard, cf. the comments in Nos. 1017 and 1018 above.

1029. In the context of a survey carried out among the Ostfriesland local authorities, however, the respondents assessed the scope for using Low German, also as a
written language within the administration, as rather negative - for reasons of feasibility (their staff members cannot write this language) and of practical need (many
speakers of Low German can read their language only with difficulty).
5. Schleswig-Holstein
1030. This obligation has been accepted by Schleswig-Holstein in the sense of
"undertake ... to allow". Reference is made to the general comments in Nos. 1019 1022 above.
1031. In particular, written messages of greeting for events related to Low German
issues are quite frequently drafted in the Low German language. Also, there are a
number of documents drawn up in Low German. Thus, for instance, the MinisterPresident used the Low German language in a letter addressed by her to the Bremen-based Institut für Niederdeutsche Sprache [Institute for the Low German Language].

1032.

[deleted: paragraph contained in the 1st State Report]

- 317 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

1033. In No. 405 of its Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], the Committee of
Experts considered that this undertaking was only formally fulfilled and recommended
that corresponding instructions be issued to the authorities and made public so as to
make it clear to the speakers of Low German that they may submit applications in
this language and to ensure that the administration is aware of this.
In this case, too, the lack of written communication primarily evidences the fact that
Low German is used mainly as an oral language in daily life.
Notwithstanding, under item 15 of its brochure „Sprache ist Vielfalt“ ["Language is diversity"], the Land Government pointed out that a request submitted in a regional or minority language could be answered in the same way as other requests provided that
the given administration had staff speaking the respective language. At the same
time, however, this means that the answer must be sufficiently clear and intelligible
so as to stand up to scrutiny, e.g. under a protest procedure [administrative proceeding
reviewing an individual administrative decision upon a protest by the party aggrieved].
This is of particular significance in the case of Low German which largely gets along
without nouns so that one-to-one translation or an unequivocal translation is not always possible. By contrast, the German administrative language uses many substantivized forms (verbs or adjectives used as nouns). To give a recent example: in
connection with the publication of a Low German/standard German dictionary (Plattdeutsch - Hochdeutsch; Hochdeutsch - Plattdeutsch), a discussion came up on the
extent to which a popular regional language should be receptive to modern terminology.
The Land Government plans to discuss the scope provided by this provision with the
associations of local authories.

Article 10, para. 2
Paragraph 2
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who are
users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below, the
Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:

Art. 10, para. 2, sub-para. (a) - Use of a Regional or Minority Language (a)

the use of regional or minority languages within the framework of the regional or local
authority;

1034. This accepted obligation - like the other obligations under paragraph 2 - is
generally met by the Länder at least in the sense of "undertake to allow". Therefore,
the members of this language group are free to make use of the pertinent provisions
- 318 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

also in everyday life. If at all, this is at present done in a few cases only. However,
practical implementation of this obligation very much depends on whether, and how
many, staff members of the respective authorities have a command of the Low German language. To the extent that implementation measures - in addition to the general applicability of this provision - can be taken, or where Länder already have practical experience in this regard, examples are given below.
1. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
1035. With the entry into force of the Regional/Minority Language Charter as of 01
January 1999, this provision has become applicable law for the authorities of the
Free Hanseatic City of Bremen. Specific measures have not been taken. For detailed
information, cf. the comments in Nos. 1011 and 1012 above.
2. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
1036. In Hamburg, Civil Registry Offices can, upon request, conduct marriage ceremonies in the Low German language. For detailed information, cf. the comments in
Nos. 1013 and 1014 above.
3. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
1037. Under Section 23 of the Land Administrative Procedure Act, the official language is German. The German language, by definition, also comprises all dialects
and, regarding the official language, also covers Low German as a regional language. Thus, the use of Low German as an official language is not generally precluded by the principle of German being the official language as stipulated in Section 23 of the Land Administrative Procedure Act. Use of Low German within the
framework of regional or local authorities depends on whether suitable staff members
having a command of Low German are available within the given administration.
1038. Stavenhagen, the native town of [the Low German writer Fritz] Reuter, designated
a female official of the Civil Registry Office as a Low German Commissioner. It is now
possible to perform marriage ceremonies also in Low German.
1039. Another example of the active use of the Low German language is presented
by Staatliches Museum in Schwerin where guided tours of the museum are regularly
conducted in Low German. Also, guided city tours conducted in Low German, e.g. in
the Land capital Schwerin, are very popular.

- 319 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

1040.

The Landesheimatverband Mecklenburg-Vorpommern e.V. [Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania Land Union for Local and Regional Traditions, reg'd] developed a sticker "Ick
snack platt" ["I speak Low German"] and a cup with the same inscription. These articles
signal the person's language proficiency, and 'canvass' for Low German.
1041. These are only a few examples from among a wide range of other initiatives
in the Land of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania where Low German is also used
within authorities at the regional level. In this respect, a good basis has been provided which can be further developed in all areas.
1042. In response to the request of the Committee of Experts in No. 333 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], the following additional information is provided:
1043.

In Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, "Landesweite Plattdeutsche Tage" and/

or "Regionale Plattdeutsche Tage" [Land-wide or regional Low German Days] have been organized for the past four years. The Land Government appealed to the political and
administrative representatives of the various regions, municipalities, towns and villages to use the Low German language within the administrative authorities.
1044. Marnitz Amt, for example, drafted the "Vision and Values" concept for its administration in the Low German language. The staff of many local authorities indicate
their command of Low German on office doorplates.
1045. The Fritz Reuter Literature Museum in Reuter's native town of Stavenhagen
regularly organizes discussion rounds entitled „Plattdütscher Stammtisch - Kommunalpolitik im Gespräch“ [Low German regular discussions on local politics]. In response to the
appeal to encourage use of Low German within the framework of the regional or local
authority, the following initiatives were launched:
-

-

-

IGA GmbH [company responsible for organizing the International Horticultural Exhibition] of the
Hanseatic City of Rostock and the Institute of Folklore (IVK - Wossidlo-Archiv)
had the Low German names displayed for all plants of the German Pavilion during
the 2003 IGA exhibition.
The IGA bases (information centres) in the Hanseatic City of Rostock are staffed
with Low German speakers of the Low German chat club "Klönsnack Rostocker 7" e.V.;
Since October 2002, two trips with the traditional streetcar have been organized
every month in Rostock, where information on the exhibition IGA 2003 and the
Hanseatic City of Rostock is given in Low German.

- 320 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

4. Lower Saxony
1046. In coastal regions of Lower Saxony, particularly in rural areas, many municipalities and other local governments employ staff proficient in the Low German language. In Ostfriesland and Ammerland, information on bilingualism is provided
region-wide, e.g. with reference to the registration of newly born children with the
competent authority.
1047. In addition, [civil] marriage ceremonies can be performed in Low German.
Also at official events, representatives of the Land or of local governments give
speeches in Low German.
1048.

In Ostfriesland and in Ammerland, representatives of Landkreise [rural administrative districts] and local governments formed working panels dealing specifically with
the implementation of Article 10 of the Charter.
1049.

For detailed information, cf. the comments in Nos. 1017 and 1018 above.

5. Schleswig-Holstein
1050. Use of Low German within the framework of regional or local authorities depends on whether staff members having a command of Low German are available
within the given administration. Even though no statistical data are available on the
use of Low German in this field, it can be assumed that, especially in rural communities, people communicate also in Low German.
1051.

Thus, the town of Schleswig distributed stickers inscribed "Ick snack Platt"
["I speak Low German"] to staff members speaking Low German so as to reduce any
inhibitions which visitors might still have with regard to the use of the regional language in their dealings with public agencies or authorities.
Art. 10, para. 2, sub-para. (b) - Submission of Applications (b)

the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written
applications in these languages;

1. Brandenburg
1052. This provision concerns local self-administration units. It is not known whether
- and if so, to what extent - citizens have so far submitted oral or written applications in
the Low German language to local authorities; in this regard, no statistical data are collected.
- 321 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

1053. If a citizen submits an application drafted in Low German to an official who
does not know the Low German language, it usually is quite easy to arrive at a practical solution by calling in another staff member speaking that language.
1054. It is not planned to issue administrative rules for specifically regulating the
treatment of applications drafted in the Low German language since there is no apparent practical need for such a regulation. So far, no case has become known where a
pragmatic solution was not found.
1055. In response to the view expressed by the Committee of Experts in No. 90 [91]
of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that this undertaking was only formally
fulfilled, the following information is provided:
Under this provision, local and regional authorities have the obligation to allow or encourage the possibility for users of Low German to submit oral or written applications
in this language. On the basis of previous experience, the practical need for making
use of this right can be assessed as minor. So far, no case has become known
where it would not have been possible to arrive at a practical and satisfactory solution, e.g. through the assistance by another staff member speaking that language.
1056. In response to the Committee's view that it was advisable to issue corresponding instructions to the authorities or to enact formal legal rules in order to make
the speakers of Low German aware of the possibility to use this language in their
dealings with administrative authorities, it must be noted that, in the Land's view,
such an obligation cannot be derived from this provision of the Charter, which has
been accepted as an undertaking. By its wording and purport, this provision only lays
down that the possibility to use the Low German language should be provided. Thus,
it aims at meeting an existing demand; it does not, however, imply the obligation of
administrative authorities to create a demand that is not there in the first place. The
Committee's interpretation goes far beyond the scope of protection afforded under
the Charter and differs from the perception on which the Brandenburg Land Government based its acceptance of this undertaking.
2. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
1057.

In this regard, cf. the comments in Nos. 1011 and 1012 above.

3. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
1058. It is possible to submit texts or applications drafted in Low German to the
Hamburg Administration, but no use has been made of this possibility so far. For detailed information, cf. the comments in Nos. 1013 and 1014 above.
- 322 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

4. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
1059. Under Section 23 of the Land Administrative Procedure Act, Low German
may be used for oral and written communication within local and regional authorities.
5. Lower Saxony
1060. Applications may be submitted in the regional language. For detailed information, cf. the comments in Nos. 1017 and 1018 above.
6. Schleswig-Holstein
1061. The general possibility to submit applications, petitions, records, deeds or
other documents in another (foreign) language - i.e. a language other than the official
language - derives from Section 82a, para. 2, of the Land Administrative Procedure
Act.
1062. In No. 407 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], the Committee of
Experts considers the obligation - providing for the possibility for users of the Low
German language to submit oral or written applications in this language - as being
only formally fulfilled. In its brochure "Sprache ist Vielfalt" ["Language is Diversity"]
which was distributed to all local authorities in Schleswig-Holstein, the Land Government draws attention to the possibilities and limits presented by the accepted provision.
1063. Reference is made to the comments in Nos. 1030 - 1033 above. In addition,
information is provided on experience gained within fiscal administration (tax offices).
It is particularly in rural areas that the possibility to communicate in Low German
creates an agreeable atmosphere. People feel more at ease when they can discuss
their tax matters with the agency staff in their familiar language.
Art. 10, para. 2, sub-para. (c) - Publication by Regional Authorities of Official Documents (c)

the publication by regional authorities of their official documents also in the relevant
regional or minority languages;

1. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
1064.

In this regard, cf. the comments in Nos. 1011 and 1012 above.

- 323 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

2. Lower Saxony
1065. Also the regional authorities of Lower Saxony employ staff having knowledge
of the regional language. However, publication of official documents in Low German
meets with some reserve. But on a case-by-case basis, the question as to whether
such action is expedient and/or effective as regards the intended addressees will be
considered.
1066.

For detailed information, cf. the comments in Nos. 1017 and 1018 above.

Art. 10, para. 2, sub-para. (d) - Publication by Local Authorities of Official Documents (d)

the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in the relevant
regional or minority languages;

1. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
1067.

In this regard, cf. the comments in Nos. 1011 and 1012 above.

2. Lower Saxony
1068. The publication of official documents in Low German is admissible in the
Land of Lower Saxony, and is not hampered by any legal stipulations. A survey
conducted in the Ostfriesland region of this Land has shown that, at present, the
various local authorities have not yet established such publication practices.
1069.

For detailed information, cf. the comments in Nos. 1017 and 1018 above.

Art. 10, para. 2, sub-para. (e) - Use by Regional Authorities of the Language in Debates of
Their Assemblies (e)

the use by regional authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

1. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
1070.

In this regard, cf. the comments in No. 1035 above.

2. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
1071. Interpellations and questions in Low German were occasionally presented in
the City-State Parliament [Bürgerschaft] and District Councils. As a rule, these were
discussed and answered in Low German.

- 324 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

3. Lower Saxony
1072. So far, no empirical data are available. Where relevant, the respective authorities may include appropriate regulations in their Rules of Procedure.
1073. In response to the request made by the Committee of Experts in No. 367 of
the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], the following additional information is
provided:
Within Hannover Regierungsbezirk, each year the first meeting of the local assembly
of Hagen, a town district of Neustadt am Rübenberge, is exclusively held in Low German. The assemblies of many local authorities belonging to Schaumburg Landkreis
make frequent use of the Low German language.
In the area of the Government of Lüneburg Regierungsbezirk, meetings of the Kreistag in Harburg, Winsen/Luhe Landkreis, at irregular intervals have debates in Low
German on various agenda items. The related bills are also drafted in Low German.
The Kreistag of Rotenburg/Wümme Landkreis at irregular intervals discusses a number of agenda items in the Low German language.
Occasionally, the Gemeinde and Samtgemeinde assemblies in the Lüneburg Regierungsbezirk also have debates in Low German.
A sample survey in the Weser-Ems Regierungsbezirk showed that all meetings of the
Gemeinde or Samtgemeinde assemblies of Hesel, Filsum and Detern (Leer Landkreis) are held in Low German, and one meeting per year of the assemblies of Jümme and Westoverledingen is conducted in Low German. Also in Broomerland Samtgemeinde (Aurich Landkreis), all assembly meetings are held in Low German. The
local assemblies of Dornum and of Krummhörn conduct their meetings in both Low
German and standard German. The local assemblies of Schortens (Friesland Landkreis), Jade (Wesermarsch Landkreis) and Wiefelstede (Ammerland Landkreis) occasionally use Low German in their meetings. The Gemeinden/Samtgemeinden in the
Landkreise of Emsland, Osnabrück, Oldenburg and Vechta hardly ever use Low German in their assemblies.
Art. 10, para. 2, sub-para. (f) - Use by Local Authorities of the Language in Debates of
Their Assemblies (f)

the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

1. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
1074.

In this regard, cf. the comments in No. 1035 above.
- 325 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

2. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
1075.

In this regard, cf. the comments in No. 1071 above.

3. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
1076. In local and regional assemblies, the Low German language is used by
councillors. For instance, the assembly of the town of Anklam has since 1992 held
meetings in Low German. In rural areas, use of Low German is more frequent and
widespread.
4. Lower Saxony
1077. In various places, the Council meetings are often held in Low German or are
bilingual (Low German/German). In this regard, cf. the comments in No. 1073 above.
5. Schleswig-Holstein
1078. The provision is implemented, inter alia, by the Schleswig-Holstein Land
Ministry of the Interior which, in response to pertinent inquiries made by local authorities or local government supervisory authorities, will refer to Article 10, para. (2) (f), of
the Charter and to the possibility to conduct assembly meetings in Low German. In
rural areas, in particular, it is quite common to hold meetings of local councils in Low
German, provided that nobody objects to the use of this language.
1079. In 1999, the town of Schleswig conducted a council meeting "op platt", i.e. in
Low German. Also, various Kreistag meetings are, either for their full length or in part,
held in Low German. The Land Government knows that Dithmarschen Kreis, for
example, held a Kreistag debate in Low German on 21 February 2003.

Article 10, para. 3
Paragraph 3
With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting
on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which regional or minority languages
are used, in accordance with the situation of each language and as far as this is reasonably
possible:
(a) to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in the provision of the
service; or
(b) to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request and receive a reply
in these languages; or
(c) to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request in these languages.

- 326 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

The obligation under sub-paragraph (c) has been entered into by the Land of Brandenburg.
1080. Sub-paragraph (c) covers the undertaking to allow persons wishing to use the
Low German language to do so when submitting a request. This is interpreted by the
Land Government to imply an obligation to refrain from action: the Land may not bar or
prevent the use of the Low German language for the submission of requests; and this
is ensured since there is no legal provision or administrative regulation prohibiting the
use of the Low German language for the submission of requests to administrative
authorities. Any positive regulation laying down that use of the Low German language
is admissible in this context is not considered necessary and therefore is not intended
to be introduced.
1081. In response to the statement of the Committee of Experts in No. 92 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that this undertaking was only formally fulfilled, the following information is provided by the Land of Brandenburg:
The comments in Nos. 1052 - 1056 above apply mutatis mutandis. It is the Land
Government's understanding that it complies with this provision by allowing users of
the Low German language to submit a request in this language with regard to public
services provided by the administrative authorities. There are no legal or practical obstacles as regards use of this language in Brandenburg. However, this provision of
the Charter, which has been accepted as an undertaking, does not call for active encouragement of the use of the Low German language by inhabitants of the region in
their contacts with administrative authorities.
Article 10, para. 4
Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the
Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:

Art. 10, para. 4, sub-para. (a) - Translation or Interpretation (a)

translation or interpretation as may be required;

This obligation has been accepted by the Land of Lower Saxony.
1082. Since the authorities of those regions where Low German is spoken, usually
also employ staff having a knowledge of the regional language, problems will not be
encountered as regards translation or interpretation. At any rate, no deficits have so
far become known.

- 327 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

Art. 10, para. 4, sub-para. (c) - Appointment of Public Service Employees having a Knowledge of a Regional or Minority Language (c)

compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a
knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which
that language is used.

1. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
1083. Applications for re-assignments have not yet been submitted by public service employees wishing to be appointed in the territory in which Low German is used.
In some District Council Offices, however, employees were asked whether they
spoke Low German so that they might, if required, be appointed to appropriate posts.
2. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
1084. The Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania variety of Low German is spoken
throughout this Land so that, e.g. in the appointment of teachers, administrative employees, nursery-school teachers and doctors, account can be taken of individuals
proficient in the Low German language. This fact does not, however, establish any
causal relationship between the Low German proficiency of public service employees
and the definitive assignment of the place of employment.
1085. As regards additional information on the pertinent policy of the authorities, as
requested by the Committee of Experts in No. 336 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG
(2002) 4 final], the following information is provided:
The speech area of the regional language Low German covers the entire territory of
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania Land. Staff members of the Land administration
who wish to be appointed to a post elsewhere can address a request to this effect to
the personnel co-ordination section of the Ministry of the Interior. The application
must list all qualifications - including, for example, knowledge of the Low German
language. If knowledge of the Low German language is required for a particular post,
such knowledge will be included in the eligibility criteria for employment. No applications with specific reference to Low German have so far been filed by staff members,
including those of the Supreme Land Authorities.
3. Lower Saxony
1086. The Land of Lower Saxony does not apply any restrictions as regards the
wishes of public service employees for appointment to posts where they can make
use of their knowledge of the Low German language. So far, no information is available on any cases where such requests were made and employees were actually
appointed to such posts.
- 328 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

1087. In response to the Committee's request for further information, cf. No. 370 of
the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], it is reported that a formalised procedure
does not exist. Within the area of the Government of Weser-Ems Regierungsbezirk,
on the occasion of superiors/staff personnel management interviews on the assignment wishes of staff members, on the one hand, and the administration's requirements, on the other hand, such wishes will be complied with provided that there are
no conflicting service requirements. Experience shows that this approach has proved
successful over the past few years. Lower-level administrative agencies usually proceed along the same lines.
4. Schleswig-Holstein
1088. With regard to the implementation of this accepted obligation, announcements to this effect were made at the Personalreferentenkonferenz (PRK - Conference of Personnel Officers) in 1999 and in 2003. The PRK brings together the personnel officers of the supreme Land authorities at regular meetings with the aim of coordinating and harmonizing the essential decisions taken by authorities with crossdepartmental responsibilities in the field of personnel management. If a staff member
within the Land Administration expresses a wish regarding such an appointment, the
scope for complying with the request will be examined. So far, however, there have
been no requests to this effect at the level of the supreme Land authorities.
1089.

As regards the Committee's comment in No. 409 of the Monitoring Report
[MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], that the information provided did not allow it to conclude that
this undertaking was fulfilled, reference is made to the comments, in Nos. 291 - 301
above, concerning similar problems encountered with regard to Danish.
1090. As regards Low German, it should also be pointed out that this regional language is spoken throughout the Land, although the extent to which it is used varies
from one region to another. In this sense, the entire Land of Schleswig-Holstein must
be regarded as the speech area of this language. In all practical respects, therefore,
this obligation would seem to be of little relevance as regards Low German. Nevertheless, the Land Government considers this undertaking fulfilled. Reference is made
to No. 1088 above.

- 329 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

Article 11
Media
paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in
which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that
the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this field,
and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:

Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (b) (ii) - Broadcasting of Radio Programmes (ii)

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;

1. Brandenburg
1091. In the Land of Brandenburg, radio and television broadcasts of Norddeutscher Rundfunk (NDR) can be received in the Low German speech area, and in part
NDR broadcasts are taken over by Rundfunk Berlin-Brandenburg (RBB) in its own
programme schedule.
1092.

In response to the Committee's statement in No. 93 of the Monitoring Report
[MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that, in view of the lack of information on radio programmes of
private stations, it was not in a position to conclude that this undertaking was fulfilled,
the following information is provided by Brandenburg Land:
Private broadcasters are, to a large extent, free to lay down their own programming;
outside very narrowly defined limits, the Land has little scope for either direct intervention or indirect influence. This provision of the Charter intrinsically obliges the
Land to encourage the broadcasting of programmes in the Low German language
only to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have
power or play a role in this field. Against this background, this undertaking must be
fulfilled essentially by public service broadcasting. As regards private broadcasters,
the Land Government must confine its intervention to general efforts to create an
opinion-forming climate well-disposed towards minorities and aimed at fostering the
regional or minority languages (cf. the comments under No. 851 above).
2. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
1093. Broadcasting of regular Low German programmes by the Radio Bremen
station shows a downward tendency. These are radio plays, local/regional programmes on weekends, Low German news and Low German magazine programmes. The station encourages its editors and anchormen and anchorwomen to
include Low German in the programme; in all other respects, programming is gov-

- 330 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

erned by the Land Media Act. The station produces its own Low German programme
sections which are transmitted over the sound broadcasting frequency bands.
1094. In response to the Committee's statement in No. 269 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that, in view of the lack of information on radio programmes
of private stations, it was not in a position to conclude that this undertaking was fulfilled, the following information is provided by Bremen:
Under the provisions of the Basic Law, the Land is not allowed to stipulate any requirements regarding private broadcasters' programming. However, in Sections 17
to 19 of its Land Media Act, the Bremen legislator laid down a number of principles
that must be observed in the production of programmes. These include the programming mandate under Section 17, which requires full information and underlines
the cultural mission of broadcasting. In our view, any obligation that would go beyond
this cannot, under constitutional law, be imposed on private broadcasters.
3. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
1095. The Inter-State Treaty on Norddeutscher Rundfunk (NDR) in many and various respects takes account of the interests of the Low German language. Thus, the
programming mandate under Section 5 of the Inter-State Treaty contains the stipulation that "adequate room must be given in the programme to the North German
region, its culture and language". The radio broadcasting programme of "HamburgWelle 90.3" covers regular broadcasts in Low German (on Sundays: "Wi snackt Platt"
["We speak Low German"]; on weekdays, the news are read in Low German once per
day). Once per month, the public event "Sonntakte"* is transmitted by Hamburg-Welle
and often contains programme parts in Low German.
Section 5 of the NDR Inter-State Treaty is merely a discretionary regulation. On the
basis of the constitutional rule of governmental non-intervention in broadcasting, the
NDR cannot be required to provide a quantifiable portion of Low German programmes. However, the programming mandate contains the stipulation that "adequate room must be given in the programme to the North German region, its culture
and language" (Section 5, para. 2, of the NDR Inter-State Treaty).
1096. In response to the Committee's comment on the obligations regarding broadcasting - cf. Nos. 306 - 308 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] - that, in
view of the lack of information on radio programmes of private stations, it was not in a
position to conclude that this undertaking was fulfilled, the following information is
provided by Hamburg:
*

wordplay on Sonntage (Sundays) and Takte (bars of music) [Translator's Note]

- 331 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

The constitutional rule of governmental non-intervention in broadcasting precludes
any influence on programming. With its Low German programme items, public-service broadcasting fulfils its mandate to provide basic services to the entire population.
Private broadcasting programming is the exclusive responsibility of private stations.
In this respect, "encouragement", or even stipulation of requirements, is not possible.
Public-service broadcasting, of its own accord, honours its responsibility for the Low
German language and literature in accordance with Hamburg's voluntary commitment regarding the obligations under the European Charter. The relevant programme
offers are already very extensive. As before, the Government does not have any
scope for exerting an influence on broadcasting stations; such influence would run
counter to the political objective of enhancing the broadcasters' autonomy.
4. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
1097. Both in the NDR programme Radio Mecklenburg-Vorpommern (RMV) and in
the programme of Antenne Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, Low German has regular
broadcasting times and enjoys unflagging popularity. Since the Low German sector is
represented also by a representative of the cultural sector on the Land Broadcasting
Board, consideration has to be given, on a case-by-case basis, to the possibilities for
including Low German also in the context of 'Open Channels'.
1098. In response to the Committee's statement in No. 337 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that, in view of the lack of information on radio programmes
of private stations, it was not in a position to conclude that this undertaking was fulfilled, the following information is provided by Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania:
The Niederdeutsch-Beirat [Consultative Council for Low German] of Mecklenburg-Western
Pomerania had talks and exchanges of views with the editors responsible for 'Low
German in radio broadcasting', with the aim of encouraging radio broadcasts of Low
German programmes. Contacts with both public-service and private broadcasting
stations are being further developed.
In a letter of 20 June 2003 addressed to the respresentatives of the media (television, newspapers, radio broadcasting, Kulturelle Filmförderung Mecklenburg-Vorpommern e.V, etc.), the Minister-President of Meckenburg-Western Pomerania Land
requested the addressees to use the regional language Low German in the media.
5. Lower Saxony
1099. Under the Inter-State Treaty on Norddeutscher Rundfunk which was concluded by the Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg and the Länder of Mecklenburg- 332 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

Western Pomerania, Lower Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein, the programming mandate of Norddeutscher Rundfunk (NDR) as a broadcasting corporation under public
law stipulates, inter alia, that adequate room must be given in the programme to the
North German region, its culture and language (Section 5, para. 2, of the NDR InterState Treaty).
1100. The Broadcasting Centres of the Länder produce Land programmes, as a
full-day radio and a regional TV programme which present, inter alia, the cultural and
social life of the respective Land (Section 3, para. 3, of the NDR Inter-State Treaty).
This also covers various broadcasts in the Low German language, either at fixed
broadcasting times or in the context of current affairs reporting.
1101. The programme of NDR 1 Radio Niedersachsen [Radio Lower Saxony] covers regular daily thematic sections, including the pastoral talk in Low German ("plattdeutsche Ansprache"). In addition, there are two 1-hour thematic broadcasts in Low
German and two Low German radio plays per month. Also, a weekly 2-hour magazine programme is presented in Low German.
1102. Generally it is to be noted that the airtime (in minutes) devoted by Norddeutscher Rundfunk to Low German broadcasts over the past years has, in most areas,
remained constant, and in some cases has even been increased.
1103. The Lower Saxony Land Broadcasting Act lays down, inter alia, that the programmes of private broadcasters must make appropriate allowance also for the cultural diversity of the regions and for the regional languages used in Lower Saxony
(Section 17, para. 2, of the Land Broadcasting Act). Compliance with these requirements is also monitored by the minimum number of 41 members of the Assembly of
the Lower Saxony Land Supervisory Authority for Private Broadcasters (Niedersächsische Landesmedienanstalt). All major groups of society or organizations in the
Land are entitled to make nominations as regards representation on the Assembly.
1104. In the past, the radio station Hit-Radio Antenne broadcast a programme featuring a comedy figure speaking Low German, and now is planning further regionallanguage activities as part of its regional programme.
1105. On the other hand, the radio station radio ffn does not provide programme
sections in minority languages because it considers that integration of such broadcasts would be very difficult in a success-oriented private medium catering for a mass
audience.

- 333 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

1106. The Lower Saxony Land Supervisory Authority for Private Broadcasters also
supports non-commercial local broadcasters and the 'Open Channels'. It is especially
in the programmes of these broadcasters with a focus on regional and local settings
that specific cultural features and linguistic minorities are included and presented.
1107. The multifarious programme structure of the Open Channels and local broadcasting stations provides for a number of Low German broadcasts, some of them on
a regular basis. For example, Offener Kanal Emsland - Grafschaft Bentheim on Wednesdays and Thursdays airs a 1-hour Low German programme. Radio Jade broadcasts Low German news every day at 16.30 hours, and once per month, on Wednesdays, airs a 2-hour broadcast entitled "Wi snackt platt - för jeden wat" ["We speak Low
German - something for everybody"]. Also, Offener Kanal Osnabrück airs a half-our programme entitled "Wi küert platt" ["Chatting in Low German"] on Wednesdays.
1108.

Broadcasters, also in view of their own interest, strive to meet the legal re-

quirements. In addition, the Land of Lower Saxony - within the limits of its scope for
exerting an influence - encourages radio and television broadcasters to take account
of region-specific features [of the culture and language].
6. Saxony-Anhalt
1109. In Saxony-Anhalt, radio and TV broadcasting corporations under public law
as well as private broadcasters regularly air programmes in the Low German language and report on Low German events.
1110. In the northern part of Saxony-Anhalt, radio and TV broadcasts of Norddeutscher Rundfunk (NDR) can be received in the Low German speech area. In part,
broadcasts of Rundfunk Berlin-Brandenburg (RBB) are also taken over by Mitteldeutscher Rundfunk (mdr) in its own programme schedule.
1111. Also, Open Channels and local radio stations established in Saxony-Anhalt
include Low German broadcasts in their programmes.
7. Schleswig-Holstein
1112. In 1999 and again in 2003, the Minister-President of Schleswig-Holstein Land
encouraged the radio and TV station programme directors of Norddeutscher Rundfunk (NDR), Zweites Deutsches Fernsehen (ZDF - Second German Television, or Channel II), DeutschlandRadio, Radio Schleswig-Holstein (R.SH), NORA (NordOstseeRAdio), delta radio and POWER RADIO Nord as well as the Unabhängige Landesanstalt für Rundfunk und neue Medien (ULR - Independent Land Supervisory Authority for
- 334 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

Broadcasting and the New Media), the TV stations RTL and SAT1, the Gesellschaft zur

Förderung audiovisueller Werke in Schleswig-Holstein mbH (MSH - Limited Liability
Company for the Promotion of Audiovisual Works in Schleswig-Holstein) and Kulturelle Filmförderung [registered association Cultural Film Promotion, Schleswig-Holstein] that "further avenues should be explored for integrating contributions in the minority languages and
in the regional language Low German into their programmes, as a service for the
citizens and in support of this element of the culture of Schleswig-Holstein".
1113.

In addition, the following provisions were laid down:

• The broadcasting corporation under public law (NDR) has the legal mandate to
report on the cultural diversity and the special features of the respective Land and
to give its support to the protection of minorities.
• Adequate room must be given in the programme to the North German region, its
culture and language.
• Programming principles for private broadcasting: "Broadcasting programmes shall
contribute (...) to the protection and promotion of minorities (...)."
• Protected minorities have access to the media, and scope for participation, on the
same conditions as other groups of society. The provisions of the Land Broadcasting Act promote programming diversity and the variety of broadcasters.
• The Land Broadcasting Act was amended in 1999. Under this amendment, the
previous Assembly of the supervisory authority ULR [Schleswig-Holstein Land broadcasting institution for private broadcasters] was replaced by a Media Council. Any socially
relevant group, organization or association of supraregional standing is entitled to
make nominations for the election of the Media Council.
• In addition, the ULR operates two radio broadcasting "Open Channels" in Schleswig-Holstein. Through these Open Channels, anybody who is not a broadcaster
him/herself, can disseminate his/her own contributions via radio broadcasting.
1114. Relevant legal bases are:
Inter-State Treaty on Norddeutscher Rundfunk [NDR State Treaty] (of 26 February
1992): Section 3, para. 3; Section 5, para. 2, 1st sentence; Section 7, para. 2,
3rd sentence;
Inter-State Agreement on the Public Corporation Zweites Deutsches Fernsehen
(ZDF) (of 15 December 2000): Section 5, para. 2;
Land Broadcasting Act (of 22 May 2002): Section 17, para. 2, nos. 1 and 2; Section 24, para. 3; Section 34, para. 1, 1st - 3rd sentences; Section 54, para. 3.
1115.

Examples of pertinent broadcasts are:

The sound broadcasting department of Landesfunkhaus [Land Broadcasting Centre] in
Kiel has a Low German central office. The latter is reponsible for the regular programme "Low German Radio Play" and the programme "Niederdeutsche Chronik"
["Low German Chronicle"].
NDR 1 - Welle Nord airs many Low German programmes:
• "Von Binnenland und Waterkant" ["Inland and Seaside Life"]
- 335 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

•
•
•
•

Part D: Low German

"Bi uns to Huus" ["At home, in our region"] (parts are in Low German)
"Hör mal'n beten to" ["Just listen for a bit"]
"Ünner't Strohdack" ["Under the thatch roof"] (North German reading)
"Vertell doch mal" ["Tell me ..."] (Low German story-telling competition)

In addition, there are broadcasts with Low German sections (consumer topics in Low
German, the Low German weekly review, and the Low German morning prayers).
Also, at irregular intervals, Radio Schleswig-Holstein (R.SH) airs [Low German] broadcasts dispersed throughout its overall programme. Open Channels also broadcast
Low German items.
1116.

Cf. the additional comments in No. 314 above.

Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (c) (ii) - Broadcasting of Television Programmes (ii)

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;

1. Brandenburg
1117.

In this regard, cf. the comments in Nos. 1091 and 1092 above.

1118. Regarding the Committee's understanding - cf. No. 94 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] - that only the programmes of radio bremen are available to
Brandenburg, it should be noted that the NDR regularly airs the talk-show "Talk op
platt". In addition, information or documentation programmes at irregular intervals
include Low German topics, e.g. "da bist Du platt" (a full inventory) or "moin Missouri"
["hello, Missouri"] (on the use of Low German in the American Midwest). Regular folkloric entertainment programmes include presentation of Low German songs, e.g. by
groups such as Godewind or Torfrock in the programmes "Lieder so schön wie der
Norden" or "Lüders Krug".
2. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
1119.

[deleted: paragraph contained in the 1st State Report]

1120. In response to the statement of the Committee of Experts in No. 270 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that this undertaking was not fulfilled, Bremen
reports that the public-service TV broadcasting station (i.e. Radio Bremen) - without
any government influence, but under the control of the Rundfunkrat [Broadcasting Board]
composed of representatives of relevant groups of society - includes the regional language Low German in its programme.
- 336 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

3. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
1121. The broadcasting station N 3 of Norddeutscher Rundfunk (NDR) regularly
broadcasts the talk show "Talk op Platt" ["Talk in Low German"]. The daily "Hamburg
Journal" programme reports on local events and, occasionally, on events in which
Low German plays a special role.
The talk-show "Talk op Platt", which is quite an asset to the NDR's programme, has
been on the air since 1982.
In this context it is quite obvious, however, that the NDR in many ways fulfils its mandate under Section 5 of the NDR Inter-State Treaty, i.e. to give adequate room in its
programme to the regional language and culture. As in the past, the radio broadcasting programme of "Hamburg-Welle 90.3" covers regular broadcasts in Low German:
on Sundays, "Wi snackt Platt" ["We speak Low German"]; on weekdays, Low German
stories "Hör mal'n beten to" ["Listen for a while"]; on weekdays, the news are read in Low
German once per day; the programmes "Dat Plattdüütsche Hörspeel" ["Low German
radio play"] (twice per month), "Melodien van de Waterkant", and "Sonntakte" (on Sundays, cf. No. 1095 above).
The talk-show "Talk op Platt" continues to be an established Low German part of the
NDR's television programme. This also is the case with the performances of the
Hamburg Ohnsorg-Theater, which are shown on NDR TV and are very popular with
viewers. The efforts currently made to integrate the Low German language into the
programme are reflected, not least, by the weekly "Sportclub" programme, with reporting in Low German on one of the week's soccer games. In addition, NDR TV, in
connection with the "Talk op Platt" programme, prepares a Low German dictionary
which it wants to offer to its viewers. Also, NDR TV asks its viewers to help with the
preparation of this dictionary by sending in Low German words/terms and their
standard German equivalents.
1122.

For detailed information, cf. the comments in Nos. 1095 and 1096 above.

4. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
1123. The Land television programme of Landesfunkhaus Mecklenburg-Vorpommern [Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania Land Broadcasting Centre] only sometimes features
the Low German language in occasional broadcasts as part of the programmes
"Nordmagazin" ["Magazine of the North"], "Zwischen Elbe und Oder" ["Region between the
Elbe and Oder Rivers"], "Mecklenburg-Vorpommern heute" ["Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
today"]. At present, it is not planned to produce specific Low German programmes.
The same goes for feature broadcasts produced by Landesfunkhaus Mecklenburg- 337 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

Vorpommern for Norddeutsches Fernsehen N 3, which also only occasionally include
Low German texts or songs.
1124. Regarding the TV programme of Norddeutscher Rundfunk (NDR), particular
mention must be made of the programme "Talk op platt" ["Talk in Low German"]. This
two-hour live broadcast is aired six times per year on TV Channel III of NDR from
different places in the transmission area, inter alia from Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania. The editorial office for this programme, which is exclusively in Low German, is
located in Hamburg.
1125.

In response to the Committee's finding in No. 338 of the Monitoring Report
[MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that, in view of the lack of information on radio programmes of
private stations, it was not in a position to conclude that this undertaking was fulfilled,
the following information is provided by Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania:
Since October 2001, Rostocker Offener Kanal (ROK-TV) has aired a live TV programme (1 x 45 minutes per month; with five re-runs) on Low German, maritime and
cultural traditions in the Hanseatic City of Rostock. In this programme, Low German
and standard German are spoken alternately. The programme is called "Klönsnack
im alten Hafenhaus" ["Chatting in the old waterfront house"] (presented by Karin Ahrens
and Werner Völschow). The TV programme is a coproduction of the association
"Klönsnack Rostocker 7", the "Schiffahrtsgeschichtliche Gesellschaft Ostsee" e.V.
[Society for Baltic Maritime History] and the Hansefilmstudio, and is produced by the
Media Workshop of ROK-TV.
The most recent broadcast, on 13 February 2003 was also transmitted over the Internet. The covered subjects and invited guests included, among others: history of the
Rostock harbour, shipbuilding in Rostock, presentation of the Low German youth
group De Rosenkinner, Low German writers, the Wendisches Quartier der Hanse [the
"Wendish Quarter of the Hanseatic League", i.e. the Hanseatic Cities of Lübeck, Rostock, Stralsund,
Wismar, etc.], Low German discussions with Rostock's chief burgomaster (mayor), the

Hansesail, the international horticultural exhibition IGA 2003, and the Low German
language and the history of the Hanseatic League.
The Open Channel in the town of Neubrandenburg and in the Land capital Schwerin
also starts operations and will include Low German.
5. Lower Saxony
1126. Reference is made to the general comments in Nos. 1099 - 1108 and Nos.
665 - 670 and 671 - 672 above.

- 338 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

1127. Norddeutscher Rundfunk - the broadcasts of which are received in the Low
German speech area of Lower Saxony Land - regularly airs the talk-show "Talk op
Platt" ["Talk in Low German"]. In addition, entertainment programmes such as "Bi uns to
Hus" ["At home, in our region"] and "Melodie der Meere" ["Melody of the Seas"] often feature
poems and songs in the Low German language. Lower Saxony has its own 10-minute Low German broadcast which is aired every second Friday.
1128. In response to the Committee's comment in No. 373 of the Monitoring Report
[MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that it had no information on the measures aimed at encouraging the broadcasting of television programmes (in Low German), Lower Saxony
provides the following information:
The programming mandate of Norddeutscher Rundfunk (NDR), as a broadcasting
corporation under public law, is defined by Section 5 of the NDR Inter-State Treaty
(NDR-StV) to include, among others, the obligation to give adequate room in the programme to the North German region, its culture and language (Section 5, para. 2). A
similar obligation applies to private broadcasting under Section 15, para. 2, 2nd sentence, of the Lower Saxony Media Act. On appropriate occasions, the Land Government appeals to both public-service and private broadcaster to comply with this obligation and to provide programmes also in regional languages. However, in view of
the programming autonomy of broadcasters and, in the particular case of publicservice broadcasting, of the constitutional rule of non-governmental intervention in
broadcasting, there is no scope for the Land Government to exert an influence on
specific detailed programme contents.
6. Saxony-Anhalt
1129.

In this regard, cf. the comments in Nos. 1109 - 1111 above.

7. Schleswig-Holstein
1130.

In this regard, cf. the comments in Nos. 1112 - 1116 above.

1131. In addition, it should be noted that the Schleswig-Holstein-Magazin - which is
aired daily, except on Sundays, from 19.30 - 20.00 o'clock - includes broadcasts on/
in the Low German language, e.g. the talk show "Talk op Platt" ["Talk in Low German"].
1132. The criticism expressed by the Committee of Experts in No. 411 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] prompted the Minister-President to inform, in
writing, the directors and managers of public-service and private broadcasting institutions of the Committee's findings (letter of 9 January 2003). At the same time, she
encouraged the addressees "to support, to the best of their ability, the presence of
- 339 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

minority and regional languages in TV and radio broadcasts, in the print media and in
the context of promoting audiovisual works, and to focus their programming on new
lines".
Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (d) - Audio and Audiovisual Works (d)

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in the regional or minority languages;

1. Brandenburg
1133. The Land of Brandenburg implemented this obligation especially by means of
legislative measures. The ORB's obligation is anchored in Section 5, para. 2, of the Act
on Ostdeutscher Rundfunk Brandenburg (ORB Act), i.e. in fulfilment of its programming mandate, to rely on private-sector providers and services and in this regard to include production firms domiciled in Brandenburg Land. This obligation also benefits the
producers and distributors of audio and audiovisual productions in the northern region
of the Land, which is part of the Low German speech and cultural area.
1134. As regards additional information on practical measures, as requested by the
Committee of Experts in No. 95 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], the following information is provided:
Within the framework of the reorganization of broadcasting in Berlin and Brandenburg, these two Länder concluded the Inter-State Treaty on the Establishment of a
Joint Broadcasting Corporation for the Länder of Berlin and Brandenburg of 25 June
2002 [RBB Inter-State Treaty]. Rundfunk Berlin-Brandenburg (RBB) unites the broadcasting stations Ostdeutscher Rundfunk Brandenburg (ORB) and Sender Freies Berlin (SFB). The new Broadcasting Treaty entered into force as of 17 March 2003.
Section 5, para. 3, of the RBB Inter-State Treaty allows the RBB to purchase broadcasting productions of other providers, on condition that such productions are not
purchased or produced for the main purpose of commercial exploitation. This applies
irrespective of whether or not these productions are in the Low German language.
Various efforts are made in the field of film promotion with the aim of facilitating the
production and distribution of audio and audiovisual works and to encourage filmmakers in this sense.
These measures are addressed to the cinema sector in general and, of course, are
also open to producers whose projects are realized in a regional or minority language. Both in the past and in future, film promotion attached, and will attach, particular importance to cultural diversity. So far, however, no Low German works were
submitted, and no applications were filed for promotional funding for such works. Pertinent applications would be received favourably.
- 340 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

2. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
1135.

Some of the productions of Radio Bremen - e.g. Plattdeutsche Nachrichten
[Low German News], Plattdeutscher Sprachkursus für Anfänger [Low German Language
Course for Beginners] - are disseminated, as texts with audio versions, on the Internet.
Topical news can be downloaded from Radio Bremen-Online.
1136. In response to the statement of the Committee of Experts in No. 271 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that this undertaking is not fulfilled, the following information is provided: the Länder of Lower Saxony and Bremen established the
media company nordmedia, i.e. Mediengesellschaft Niedersachsen/Bremen mbH,
which has the priority task of promoting audiovisual productions. With this new instrument of film and TV promotion, also works in the Low German language are subsidized.
3. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
1137. Hamburg, as an important media site, welcomes the production of pertinent
audio and audiovisual works by Hamburg-based media companies.
Radio and TV broadcasts in the regional language Low German are aired by Norddeutscher Rundfunk - N 3. Radio-play musicassettes are used in classroom instruction for the subjects 'German' and 'music'.
Within the limits set by the aforementioned rule of governmental non-intervention,
Hamburg provided a legal framework for greater inclusion of the Low German language in broadcasting programmes. Apart from the NDR's programming mandate as
defined in Section 5 of the NDR Inter-State Treaty, a similar legal basis is provided
for Zweites Deutsches Fernsehen (ZDF) in Section 5, para. 2, of the ZDF Inter-State
Treaty.
As regards private broadcasting, Section 4 of the amended Hamburg Media Act of
02 July 2003 requires private broadcasters to work towards harmonious community
life based on non-discrimination. Protected minorities have access to the media, and
scope for participation, on the same conditions as other groups of society. Under
Section 25 of the amended Hamburg Media Act, transmission capacities shall, on a
priority basis, be allocated to those programmes which make the greatest contribution to programme diversity. In this respect, particular emphasis is given to the inclusion of aspects of the region's culture. Responsibility for allocating transmission capacities lies with the executive board of the Hamburg Anstalt für neue Medien [Land
supervisory authority for new media]. Any Hamburg-based, socially relevant group, organization or association is entitled to make nominations for the election of the executive
board. Also, it is planned to provide a new "Bürger- und Ausbildungskanal" ["Citizens'
- 341 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

and Education Channel"] dedicated to media education, to projects of children and youth

work, to integration, and to neighbourhood-specific and regional culture (Section 32
of the Hamburg Media Act).
1138.

For detailed information, cf. the comments in Nos. 1095 and 1096 above.

4. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
1139. As part of cultural promotion, various projects for language promotion by
audiovisual means have been carried out. Interesting materials for Low German instruction are, for instance, the video "Norddeutsche Märchen und Sagen" ["North German Folk Tales and Legends"] produced by the Hagenow Kreis Adult Education Centre,
the audio cassette "Plattdütsch for juch" ["Low German for you"] produced by Landesheimatverband Mecklenburg-Vorpommern [Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania Land Union for
Local and Regional Traditions], the cassette "Oll Hinning vertellt" ["Old Hinning telling his
tales"] by Karl-Heinz Madauß/Parchim, and the CD edited by Werner Völschow and

published by the "Nordkurier" newspaper and containing texts from Fritz Reuter's
work "Dörchläuchting" ["Serene Highness"].
1140. The foundation Stiftung Mecklenburg in Ratzeburg, which is subsidized jointly
by Schleswig-Holstein and Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, collects Low German
films which also can be viewed at the Foundation headquarters. The 'Media Workshop' provides comprehensive information on the fullest range possible of persons
and groups working in the Low German sector (reciters/readers, theatre groups,
singer-songwriters, radio and TV programmes, etc.). The technical information levels
depend on the collected material (CD, video, cassettes, etc.). The material and information offered by Stiftung Mecklenburg are designed, in particular, for children and
youngsters. Another aim is to collect speech samples through interviews. Also, video
cameras are available for reviewing one's own rehearsals of Low German theatre
scenes.
5. Lower Saxony
1141. The programming principles for public broadcasting corporations, as stipulated in the NDR Inter-State Treaty, and those for private broadcasters, as laid down
in the Land Broadcasting Act - which are described above (cf. the comments under
Nos. 1099 - 1100 and 1126 - 1128 referring to sub-paras. (b) and (c)) - are also intended to provide incentives for the production and dissemination of audio and
audiovisual works in the Low German language.

- 342 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

Upon application, the Land of Lower Saxony, in view of supporting such productions
within the framework of cultural promotion, grants subsidies to the production costs.
6. North Rhine/Westphalia
1142. In the context of the preservation of regional traditions, the Landschaftsverband [regional local authority] Westfalen-Lippe which promotes the Low German language mainly in the cultural sector (see also the comments below on Article 12) subsidizes the production costs of Low German sound recordings. The production and
dissemination of audiovisual works in Low German are also encouraged in this way.
1143. In response to the request of the Committee of Experts in No. 122 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], the following additional information is provided: the Westfalen-Lippe Landschaftsverband [regional local authority] does not on its
own initiative take part in activities for the production of audio(visual) works in the
Low German language. In the past, funds and - if so desired - scholarly support were
provided for a large variety of works produced by outside firms.
7. Saxony-Anhalt
1144. Pursuant to the Decision of 19 November 1991 adopted by the Landtag of
Saxony-Anhalt (Parliamentary Publication 1/24/908 B), the Land Government is obliged to promote, in particular, the Low German language, together with its cultural
traditions. The Directives on the Allocation of Grants, inter alia for the cultivation and
preservation of local/regional customs, explicitly lay down that promotion of Low German - in the form of musical, literary or language-related activities in the pre-school
and extracurricular sectors, e.g. in clubs, workshops and self-organized groups - is
eligible for allocation of funds. On the basis of these Directives, natural persons and
associations can receive Land funding to a maximum amount of 70 per cent of the
expenses eligible for allocation of funds. Within the framework of such Land funding,
it is also possible to grant subsidies for the production of visual or audiovisual media
in the Low German language. The production and dissemination of audiovisual works
in Low German are also encouraged in this way.
Information on the availability of promotional funding is provided by the Land in pertinent decrees published in the Ministerialblatt [Ministerial Bulletin of Orders and Decrees] of
Saxony-Anhalt Land and, in addition, on the Internet (Landesportal Sachsen-Anhalt)
under the heading Kultur. Also, potential users are, on an increasing scale, informed
on the eligibility criteria for allocation of promotional funds through the AG "Niederdeutsch" [Low German Working Group] established at the Ministry of Education and Cultural Affairs, which more or less performs multiplier functions.
- 343 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

1145. In response to the statement of the Committee of Experts in No. 109 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that, for lack of information on the extent of
the mentioned possibilites for funding, it was not in a position to conclude that this
undertaking was fulfilled, the following information is provided:
Land-provided promotional funding for audio and audiovisual works in Low German
can be effected both within the framework of film and media promotion and under
other cultural promotion schemes. This means that a relatively large range of possibilities are open. In the past, however, no promotional funds were allocated to works
of the film and media sector for lack of pertinent applications, but in the promotional
area of 'cultivation of traditions, and preservation of regional culture', for example, CD
productions (e.g. Harzer Kraus) were subsidized. No information can be provided,
however, on all those works which were produced without any Land funding whatsoever. Nor can any statistical survey be made of such works.
In the Land Government's view, encouragement and facilitation could be achieved
best by offering and further developing the various forms of promotion available to
users. Good possibilities and chances exist in this respect as regards production of
Low German audio and audivisual works; in some cases, however, demand lags
behind these offers.
8. Schleswig-Holstein
This provision is implemented in Schleswig-Holstein in the following way:
1146. The programming principles laid down for public service broadcasting and for
private broadcasting provide an indirect incentive: the Act lays down that (...) the
broadcasting programmes shall contribute (...) to the protection and promotion of (linguistic) minorities. The programming principles provide for the production of audiovisual works in the regional language.
"The Unabhängige Landesanstalt für Rundfunk und neue Medien (ULR) is entitled to
provide financial support to non-profit organizations with cultural (...) aims, especially
in the audiovisual sector (...)." Additional support is provided by the Gesellschaft zur
Förderung audiovisueller Werke in Schleswig-Holstein mbH (MSH - Limited Liability
Company for the Promotion of Audiovisual Works in Schleswig-Holstein). MSH obtains funds
from the NDR broadcasting corporation and from ULR [the Schleswig-Holstein supervisory
authority for private broadcasters]. These funds are used for the promotion of commissioned productions and of coproductions in the cinema sector, television and sound
broadcasting, which are made by producers who are native to, or resident in, Schleswig-Holstein.

- 344 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

1147. Legal Basis:
Land Broadcasting Act (of 13 October 1999): Section 24, para. 3; Section 53, para. 2;
and Section 73, para. 2
1148. Otherwise, it is left to the users of the Low German language, on the basis of
the cultural promotion by the Land and of the principle of self-government, to decide
on pertinent measures and to implement these within the limits of the overall funds
available.
Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (e) (ii) - Newspaper Articles (ii)

to encourage and/or facilitate the publication of newspaper articles in the regional
or minority languages on a regular basis;

1. Brandenburg
1149. On account of the freedom of the press guaranteed by the Constitution, there
is little scope for direct Land influence on the editing of printed media. However, the
Land Government takes a favourable view of the publication of articles in the Low German language. Low German articles actually appear quite frequently in the printed
media of the Low German speech and cultural area.
1150.

The most important daily newspapers of the region are "Uckermark-Kurier"

["Uckermark Courier"], "Oranienburger Generalanzeiger" ["Oranienburg Gazette"] and "Der

Prignitzer" ["Prignitz Post"].
1151. The newspaper "Der Prignitzer" which is read in the north western region of
the Land at regular intervals prints articles in the Low German language. These are, in
particular, articles on regional history, nature study, and local history and geography,
and literary items. In addition, there is reporting, also in standard German, on the work
of clubs dedicated to the preservation of local and regional traditions and of similar
associations devoted, inter alia, to the cultivation of the Low German language and
culture, so as to familiarize also non-speakers of Low German with the work of such
clubs and associations.
1152. Every two weeks, the newspaper "Uckermark-Kurier" which is read in the north
eastern region of the Land publishes one page with Low German items. For the major
part, these are stories written by contemporary authors from the region, but the works
of authors from earlier epochs and other regions are included as well. There are also
reports on the impact of Low German.

- 345 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

1153. Oranienburger Generalanzeiger does not regularly print items in the Low German language.
1154. In response to the request of the Committee of Experts in No. 96 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] for additional information on how publication of
newspaper articles is encouraged or facilitated, Brandenburg reports the following:
The Land Government supports use of the Low German language by creating a climate where cultural diversity is not perceived as a threat, but as an enriching asset,
and where cultivation and preservation of autochthonous forms of language and culture are not viewed as backward and outdated, but as a valuable contribution to
forging and preserving a regional identity.
2. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
1155. Publication of the monthly INS PRESSE by the Institut für Niederdeutsche
Sprache e.V. (INS - Institute for the Low German Language) for providing the regional
and supraregional media with information on Low German matters.
1156. As regards the request of the Committee of Experts in No. 272 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] for additional information on how publication of
newspaper articles is encouraged or facilitated, Bremen takes the view that the free
press independently makes it own decisions on regular publication of Low German
texts, without any scope for the state to exert an influence.
3. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
1157. Low German articles appear every day in the daily evening paper "Hamburger Abendblatt" (cf. below, information provided by Schleswig-Holstein Land) and
regularly in various weeklies of the city districts (e.g. in the weekly "Niendorfer Wochenblatt") and in relevant information bulletins.
The state has no influence on such publications. The publishers concerned decided,
of their own accord, to promote Low German, i.e. without relying on any governmental regularization.
1158.

As regards the Committee's request in No. 309 of the Monitoring Report [MINLANG (2002) 4 final] for additional information on how publication of newspaper articles is
encouraged or facilitated, Hamburg takes the view that, on account of freedom of the
press, constitutional law precludes any governmental influence on press contents,
and "encouragement", or even stipulation of requirements, is not possible.

- 346 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

There is no change to Hamburg's position. On account of freedom of the press as
guaranteed by the Constitution, there is, on principle, no scope for direct [state] action/
influence. Moreover, with a view to competitiveness, it is not possible to impose binding requirements on publishing houses. In addition, it should be noted that Hamburg
has a particularly diversified press landscape that is free of constraints also as regards Low German publications.
4. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
1159. Both in towns and rural areas, dailies, advertising papers and Sunday papers
play an important role in the dissemination of Low German texts. About once per
week, the newspapers of this Land publish Low German texts which are very popular
with the reading public. As a rule, Low German texts (e.g. stories, poems, "Läuschen
un Rimels" [the title of droll stories by Fritz Reuter], features) appear in the local/regional
section or the feature supplement [feuilleton]. The "Mecklenburg-Magazin" of Schweriner Volkszeitung also assigns a regular section to Low German. The "MecklenburgMagazin" is published once per week. Also, the local/regional sections of newspapers often publish articles on Low German stage performances and events/meetings organized by Low German clubs and authors.
1160. The use of Low German as an occasional 'language of politics' is also reflected in the newspapers when these publish entire articles in Low German or often
choose a Low German headline which, for instance, might be quoted from a speech.
The wide-spread popularity of Low German is demonstrated by Low German personal (birth, marriage, death) announcements or personal congratulations. Occasionally,
readers also draft their letters to the editor in Low German.
1161. Business and industry, too, have discovered the Low German language as a
vehicle of great publicity appeal. A number of advertisements - of special events or
specialties of the Land - contain Low German texts.
1162. In response to the request of the Committee of Experts in No. 340 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] for additional information on how publication
of newspaper articles is encouraged or facilitated, the following is reported:
On appropriate occasions, the Land Government repeatedly makes appeals to include and present the Low German language also in press publications. The addressees are the regional and supraregional newspaper publishing companies. Ostsee-Zeitung devoted a series of articles to the subject of Low German in pre-school
education, schools providing general education, and in language-related and cultural
activities. In connection with this series, Ostsee-Zeitung engaged its readers in a
- 347 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

three-month discussion under the motto "Hoch dat Platt" ["Up with Low German"]; it received 300 letters from readers and, in conclusion, organized a public readers' forum
where hundreds of participants engaged in a lively discussion. This initiative also
attracted attention in areas outside Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania.
1163.

Low German items appear in Ostsee-Zeitung regularly every two weeks.

Schweriner Volkszeitung every week publishes a supplement entitled "Mecklenburg

Magazin". Mecklenburg Magazin also includes Low German texts and poems.
Every two weeks, Nordkurier Neubrandenburg publishes a Low German page entitled
"Dit un dat" ["this and that"]. In order to encourage all Low German writers to increase
their contributions to this page, Nordkurier advertised a literature competition for Low
German writers in September 2001 and in May 2002. The newspaper received
hundreds of yet unpublished short stories and poems. These texts and poems are
published on this Low German page.
The Fritz Reuter Literature Museum in Reuter's native town of Stavenhagen publishes
the periodical "kikut" ["lookout"]. This publication - its 24th edition appeared this year
[2003] - combines research on Low German subjects with Low German poetry and
prose of more recent date.
In its regional journal "kikut-Magazin", the Fritz Reuter Literature Museum regularly
publishes Low German items and also runs competition puzzles in Low German.
The publication series "heimathefte für Mecklenburg-Vorpommern" published by Landesheimatverband Mecklenburg-Vorpommern e.V. devotes a relatively large portion of
this quarterly publication to Low German texts, poems, stories as well as to reports
on events and to book reviews. The following overview, which covers the latest
12 issues published in the years 2000 - 2004 [? 2000 - 2002], shows the respective Low
German share.

- 348 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

Overview by main thematic sections
Main thematic sections
Annual volumes 10 - 12 of the
Heimathefte (12 issues)
total, on an average
Land und Leute [The region and its
people]
"Hier ward Platt snackt"
["Low German spoken"]

no. of pages

no. of publ.

articles/reports

Kaleidoskop ["Kaleidoscope"]
"Aus Vereinen and Verbänden"
["Club news"]
Recommendations for further reading /
Book reviews

95

327

42.8

166

137

17.9

76

91

11.8

126

134

17.5

138

70

9.0

9

5

1.0

610

764

100.0

Letters to the editor
Total

section percentage of
total

The number of pages - total: 896 pages - of the individual issues varies from 80 to
64.
Overview of the share of Low German items
Main thematic sections
Annual volumes 10 - 12 of the
Heimathefte (12 issues)

no. of pages

no. of publ.

articles/reports

total, on an average
Land und Leute [The region and its
people]
"Hier ward Platt snackt"
["Low German spoken"]
Kaleidoskop ["Kaleidoscope"]
"Aus Vereinen and Verbänden"
["Club news"]
Recommendations for further reading /
Book reviews
Letters to the editor
Total

Low German
percentage of
total

6

3

1.5

166

137

68.2

7

8

4.0

55

45

22.3

17

6

3.0

3

2

1.0

254

201

100.0

5. Lower Saxony
1164. On account of freedom of the press as guaranteed by the Constitution, there
is, on principle, no scope for direct [state] action/influence. Moreover, with a view to
competitiveness, it is not possible to impose binding requirements on publishing
houses.
1165. Also the supraregional newspapers, but especially the regional and local
papers, carry many and various articles in the Low German language, in part as
regular columns.

- 349 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

1166. On appropriate occasions, the Land Government repeatedly makes appeals
to include and present the Low German language also in press publications. This appeal is addressed both directly to publishing houses and through the Verband Nordwestdeutscher Zeitungsverleger [Association of North West German Newspaper Publishers].
6. Saxony-Anhalt
1167. Both in towns and rural areas, the regional daily press plays an important role
in the dissemination of Low German texts. The weekend edition of "Volksstimme"
["People's Voice"], for its entire circulation area, every week publishes various Low German texts (tales, short stories, poems, etc.). In addition, Low German texts (e.g.
stories, legends, poems, songs, recipes, features) can be found in the local/regional
section or in the feature section of both the "Volksstimme" and other local or regional
newspapers.
1168. As regards the request of the Committee of Experts in No. 110 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] for additional information on how publication of
newspaper articles is encouraged or facilitated, Saxony-Anhalt takes the view that it
cannot be the duty of any public authority whatsoever to encroach upon the freedom
of the press and to insist on regular publication of Low German items. Publication of
Low German articles is, however, facilitated by supporting the writers of pertinent
articles through the activities of the AG "Niederdeutsch" [Low German WG] of the Ministry of Education and Cultural Affairs, through co-ordination provided by the Landesheimatbund, or grants allocated under Land promotional schemes.
In the Land Government's view, the number of publications can only be increased
significantly if the communication between the users and providers of this language
and the press could be improved. Therefore, the Ministry's AG "Niederdeutsch" on
2 April 2003 reached a number of agreements on this point, which primarily aim at
developing a procedure which will ensure that the relatively wide range of Low German offers will reach the press more effectively. On this occasion, schools - press
communication and associations/clubs - press communication also were discussed.
7. Schleswig-Holstein
1169. There is little scope for Land action/influence on account of the guaranteed
freedom of the press (in this respect, cf. the comments above in No. 230).
1170.

However, the Verband der Zeitungsverlage Norddeutschland e.V. [Association
of Newspaper Publishers for Northern Germany] takes the regional culture very seriously.
As a result, and on account of requests to this effect by readers, reports in the Low
- 350 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

German language have become an integral part of newspapers in Schleswig-Holstein.
1171.

In addition, in 1999 and again in 2003 in letters addressed, inter alia, to Zei-

tungsverlegerverband Schleswig-Holstein e.V. [Schleswig-Holstein Association of Newspaper Publishers, reg'd], the Minister-President of Schleswig-Holstein Land encouraged
the addressees to integrate "linguistic particularities which determine the specificity of
our Land" in their publications; intensification of first action already taken in this
respect would be welcomed.
1172.

The press share of Low German is as follows:

Hamburger Abendblatt (Hamburg Evening Paper; 248,430 copies), weekly Low Ger-

man section in the main edition, a 2-column article on Saturdays (100-120
characters)
Uetersener Nachrichten (Uetersen News; 5,84 copies), a "Low German Corner" every
Saturday
Pinneberger Tageblatt (Pinneberg Daily; 16,850 copies), every Sunday about one
quarter of a page
Elmshorner Nachrichten (Elmshorn News; 12,222 copies), occasionally Low German
items
Barmstedter Zeitung (Barmstedt Newspaper; 2,053 copies), a Low German column
about every two weeks (irregularly)
Lübecker Nachrichten (Lübeck News; 114,124 copies), once per week a Low German
column (60-80 lines); three times per month "Platt lesen" ["Reading Low German"]
(100 lines)
Dithmarscher Landeszeitung (Newspaper of Dithmarscher Land; 26,197 copies), about
5,800 lines/year
sh:z (Schleswig-Holstein Newspaper; 165,983 copies), a daily "Extrablatt" [extra page;
supplement], once per week "Maandagmorrn" ["Monday mornings"], and irregularly items in the sh:z-magazin.
Schleswiger Nachrichten (Schleswig News; 15,892 copies), about once per month
"Brev up Brarup" ["Brarup Letter"]
Schlei-Bote (Schlei Herald; 4,445 copies), about once per month "Brev up Brarup"
["Brarup Letter"]
Kieler Nachrichten (Kiel News; 113,082 copies), irregularly one page (about 12 pages

per year)

- 351 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

Art. 11, para. 1, sub-para. (f) (ii) - Financial Assistance for Audiovisual Productions (ii)

to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions
in the regional or minority languages;

1. Brandenburg
1173.

In response to the Committee's request, in No. 97 of the Monitoring Report
[MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], for examples of cases where financial assistance was provided,
Brandenburg reports that the film promotion directives do not contain any restrictions
regarding the promotion of films in the Low German language. The same principles
are applied to projects in regional or minority languages as to projects in standard
German, and such projects are not subject to any specific separate restrictions.
1174. The fact that so far no film in the regional language has been subsidized is
primarily due to the reason that promotion of a film in the Low German language has
as yet not been applied for.
2. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
1175.

'Open Channel' (radio and television) productions are granted subsidies.

1176.

In response to the Committee's request, in No. 273 of the Monitoring Report
[MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], for examples of cases where financial assistance was provided,
Bremen reports that the Open Channels in Bremen and Bremerhaven support
productions in the Low German language. Thus, every year the Open Channels
regularly make recordings of theatre performances of Low German stage-plays for
TV broadcasts - about two or three times on a yearly average. In addition, the Bremen Open Channel airs a monthly radio programme entitled "Die Plattsnuten"*. In
music selection, great store is set by including Low German songs. Every Wednesday, news in Low German are broadcast over the frequency assigned to Bremerhaven Open Channel.
3. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
1177. Tape-recordings and videograms of readings by authors and of stage
productions in the Low German language are on sale.
1178.

In response to the Committee's request, in No. 310 of the Monitoring Report
[MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], for examples of cases where financial assistance was provided,
Hamburg reports that the Senate Authority for Cultural Affairs, which has responsi*

word play on "Platt"="Low German" and "platt"="flat"; "snuten" = "mouths"/"faces"

- 352 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

bility for this subject matter, does not intervene in the market for radio play or other
audiovisual productions. It is not possible to give examples of cases where audiovisual productions have been subsidized. Radio play productions are welcome; it
should also be noted that the demand for such productions shows an upward tendency in the market. Applications filed with the Senate Authority for Cultural Affairs
for promotional funding, e.g. for radio play productions, are considered carefully with
due regard to Hamburg's voluntary commitments concerning the obligations under
the Charter.
4. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
1179. Grants for the making and funding of audiovisual productions in the regional
language Low German can be applied for within the framework of project-oriented
promotion. The basis for such applications is the Cultural Promotion Directive. One
example of successful video productions is the video "Norddeutsche Märchen und
Sagen" ["North German Folk Tales and Legends"] produced by tje Hagenow Kreis Adult
Education Centre and used in Low German classroom instruction.
5. Lower Saxony
1180.

In this regard, cf. the explanations in No. 1141 above.

6. Schleswig-Holstein
1181. Direct financial assistance by the State is problematic, due to the constitutional guarantee of freedom of broadcasting. However, the following promotional/subsidizing possibilities exist:
"The Unabhängige Landesanstalt für das Rundfunkwesen (ULR) is entitled to provide
financial support to non-profit organizations with cultural (...) aims, especially in the
audiovisual sector (...)."
Additional support is provided by the Gesellschaft zur Förderung audiovisueller Werke in Schleswig-Holstein mbH (MSH - Limited Liability Company for the Promotion of Audiovisual Works in Schleswig-Holstein). MSH obtains funds from the NDR broadcasting corporation and from ULR [the Schleswig-Holstein supervisory authority for private broadcasters].
These funds are used for the promotion of commissioned productions and coproductions in the cinema, television and sound broadcasting sectors, which are made by
producers who are native to, or resident in, Schleswig-Holstein.

- 353 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

1182. Although eligible applicants are aware of the possibilities to obtain promotional funds, they actually file pertinent applications only very infrequently. According
to information provided by Kulturelle Filmförderung Schleswig-Holstein e.V., a current
Low German production is the film entitled "in Delve". In 2000, the MSH company Gesellschaft zur Förderung Audiovisueller Werke in Schleswig-Holstein mbH - subsidized "Die Sesamstraße auf Platt" ["Sesame Street in Low German"], a programme forming part of a children's series.
Article 11, para. 2
Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television broadcasts
from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or
minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from
neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure that no restrictions
will be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of information in the written press
in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of
the above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to
such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in
a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for
the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the
reputation or rights of others, for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or
for maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.

1183. Free reception of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring
countries is guaranteed by the Basic Law throughout the Federal Republic of Germany. In this regard, cf. the detailed comments in Nos. 226 - 239 above.
1184. In addition, this obligation has once more been explicitly adopted by the Land
of Brandenburg, the Free Hanseatic City of Bremen, the Free and Hanseatic City of
Hamburg and the Länder of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Lower Saxony, NorthRhine/Westphalia, Saxony-Anhalt and Schleswig-Holstein; this acceptance did not
entail the need for any special implementation measures.

- 354 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

Article 12

Cultural Activities and Facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities - especially libraries, video libraries, cultural
centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film
production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries, including
inter alia the use of new technologies - the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such
languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play
a role in this field:

Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (a) - Types of Expression, and Access to Works
(a)

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority
languages and foster the different means of access to works produced in these
languages;

1185. The Institut für niederdeutsche Sprache (INS - Institute for the Low German Language), with headquarters in the Free Hanseatic City of Bremen, plays a prominent
role as regards cultivation of the Low German language and implementation of the
accepted undertakings. The Institute is subsidized by the Länder of Bremen, Hamburg, Lower Saxony, North Rhine/Westphalia and Schleswig-Holstein under an
Agreement concluded to this effect.
1186. The Institute for the Low German Language (INS) in Bremen is highly
esteemed by the academic community as well as by writers, the theatre, choral societies, etc. The activities of the INS refer to the entire Low German speech area,
have explicitly been put on a cross-State, supraregional basis, and essentially are
oriented towards all aspects and/or problems of Low German language culture. A
major research focus is on the facts and issues related to the social functions of
regional languages in modern times. The findings and research results are passed on
by the INS to the interested public. Recently, the INS placed its site on the Internet
and can be contacted by e-mail so that many items of information can be obtained
decentrally.
1187.

The INS publishes, inter alia, the "Plattdeutsch-Hochdeutsches Wörterbuch"

["Low German/Standard German Dictionary"] and the "Hochdeutsch-Plattdeutsches Wör-

terbuch" ["Standard German/Low German Dictionary"]. In addition, it developed a comprehensive exhibition on Low German. Its library comprises some 14,000 media
units.
1188. Section 2, "Purpose", of the Statute of the providing body [sponsoring Association] describes the Institute's terms of reference as follows:
"The Ostfälisches Institut ["Eastphalian" Institute] shall be organized as an academic/
scholarly centre and shall fulfil the following tasks:
- 355 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

a) collection, classification and scholarly analysis of works in the Low German
language, with particular reference to the present time;
b) editing the work results for the general public;
c) co-ordination of, and support for, all efforts aimed at cultivating and preserving
the Low German language;
d) maintenance and development of contacts with similar institutions, also
abroad."
1. Brandenburg
1189. Promotion of Low German culture is project-oriented, within the framework of
the Land's general cultural promotion activities. For instance, a number of printing-cost
subsidies were granted for publications in the Low German language or on subjects of
the North German culture. Also, other literary projects or projects relating to other
forms of cultural expression will, upon application, be subsidized within the limits of the
available resources; Low German is not placed at a disadvantage in relation to works
in the standard German language.
1190. As regards additional information on concrete means of access to such
works, as requested by the Committee of Experts in No. 99 of the Monitoring Report
[MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], the following is reported:
The "Prignitz-Sommer" festival, a cultural event organized by Prignitz Landkreis,
comprised the following single events in Low German:
1 - 2 July 2000, Lenzersilge: 225th anniversary festivities "De Plattsnacker ut de
Berger Schaul" ["The Low German speakers from the Berg school"], followed by "Danz up
de Deel" ["dance in the dance hall"]
16 September 2000, Lanz: a Low German programme on the occasion of the
Kreis 'harvest home' fair, with Wolfgang Gildhoff
12 July 2001, Groß Breese: 20th Meeting of Low German speakers from four Länder
27 June 2002, Seddin: A Low German evening get-together with Vicar Winter
Overhavel Landkreis: the Verein zur Brauchtumspflege Mecklenburg-Vorpommern e.V. [Club for the Cultivation and Preservation of Customs and Traditions, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania] held events on the occasion of both the Oranienburg castle festival and
the Gransee historical festival. In Zehdenick, an author from Templin read from her
books.
The town of Prenzlau (Uckermark) maintains a so-called Black Friars monastery
where Low German events are regularly held.

- 356 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

2. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
1191. In Bremen, access to works in the Low German language is ensured through
the promotion and maintenance of the Institut für niederdeutsche Sprache (INS - Institute for the Low German Language) which has adequate stocks of literature at its disposal.
Also, a large number of works are held by the archives and libraries in Bremen. In addition, the adult education centres offer literature courses which make it possible for
all sections of the population to have access to works in the Low German language.
1192. For the additional information requested by the Committee of Experts in
No. 276 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], cf. the remarks in Nos. 1315 1318 below.
3. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
1193. In Hamburg, this obligation is implemented through financial support provided
to the INS [Institute for the Low German Language] and to the Hamburg Ohnsorg-Theater.
Due account is taken of the applications by various institutions for funding of Low
German activities (e.g. Quickborn-Vereinigung [Quickborn Association for Low German Language and Literature], Fehrsgilde [Fehrs Guild, an association for the cultivation of the Low German
linguistic heritage, named after the Low German writer J.H. Fehrs].
4. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
1194. It is with great commitment, in the context of voluntary activities, that the
people of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania Land use and cultivate the regional language Low German as "their" language. Numerous associations, literary societies,
libraries, the music sector, the theatre and the literature sector pursue regional and
supraregional activities which include many and various possibilities for active encounters with the Low German language and culture.
1195. In addition to its traditional activities - e.g. the Low German competition "Wi
snacken platt - plattdütsch läwt" ["We're talking in Low German - Low German is alive"], the
Rostocker Plattdeutsch-Tag "Plattdütsch läwt" [Rostock Low German Day "Low German is
alive"], and the Low German song festival "Nu kaamt to hoop" [song title "Come now in
large numbers"] - the Volkskulturinstitut Mecklenburg und Vorpommern im Kulturbund
e.V. [Folk Culture Institute of the Kulturbund, for Mecklenburg and Western Pomerania] organized six follow-up training events for Low German teachers in the period 2001 2003. An average number of 55 persons attended these training events. In Rostock,
on 8 June 2001, Low German groups, teachers and educators held an exchange of
experience on "Schools and Low German associations - fields for co-operation".
- 357 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

The Volkskulturinstitut took care of organizational matters related to the preparation
for, and organization and funding of, an academic conference held jointly by the Ministry for Education, Scientific and Cultural Affairs of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
Land, the University of Magdeburg and the Landesheimatbund Sachsen-Anhalt e.V.
on "cultivation and preservation of Low German, and voluntarism - current strategies
for imparting the regional language Low German" in Salzwedel on 2 to 3 November
2001.
Under the lead responsibility of Volkskulturinstitut, a number of events were organized within the framework of a job creation measure under the motto "Plattdeutsch für
Rostock" ["Low German for Rostock"]; the staff members of the public make-work
schemes - both during classes and in their leisure time - maintained contacts between the Rostock Low German clubs and association and schools/children's daycare centres in Rostock, and took school children and adults on guided tours of the
city in Low German.
Under the non-profit employment promotion project "Revival of the historical-cultural
tradition of the Hanseatic City of Rostock", Low German activities were included as
well. For example, Low German was repeatedly used in the performances of the
"Rostock Bursprake" (three stage performances of this historical town meeting, with
25 amateur actors; one performance on the occasion of the so-called "asparagus
market" held in Rostock every year, and one performance on the "open House" day
of the Rostock Town Hall), in the performances of the play "Slüters Hochzeit" ["Slüter's
Wedding"] (five performances, with 30 actors, in the churches Petrikirche and Marienkirche), and in literary-musical programmes.
In addition to its participation in events organized on ROK-TV (Rostocker Offener Kanal) and co-funding of the yearly publication "kikut" ["lookout"], the Volkskulturinstitut
published a CD with texts by John Brinckman for use in classroom instruction.
In co-operation with the employers'/trade association Unternehmerverband Rostock
und Umgebung e.V., the Volkskulturinstitut produced a publication on "Rostocker
Burspraken/Bürgeraussprachen" in which these 'town meetings' (citizens' debates) of
Rostock are placed in their historical context and analyzed. The two Burspraken are
given in their (Middle Low German) original version and in standard German translation.
1196. The Landesverband Mecklenburg und Vorpommern Kulturbund e.V. is a union
of 18 associations and groups dedicated to the cultivation of the Low German language. These associations are established throughout the Land of MecklenburgWestern Pomerania. In addition to regular club meetings, they set up groups to de- 358 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

velop and perform Low German programmes. The Low German group also takes
part in the Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania Landeskulturtage. Some members of
these associations work with children's groups, teach Low German lessons at
children's day-care centres, and sit on juries set up for the Low German competition.
1197.

During the 2001 - 2003 report period, the Landesheimatverband Mecklen-

burg-Vorpommern e.V. [Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania Land Union for Local and Regional Traditions] carried out the following supraregional and Land-wide events/

projects:
-

Land-wide Low German Competition: In co-operation with the Volkskulturinstitut
Mecklenburg und Vorpommern im Kulturbund [Folk Culture Institute], the Land Institute for Schools and Training [L.I.S.A.] and the savings banks in MecklenburgWestern Pomerania (main sponsor), the Landesheimatverband Mecklenburg
Vorpommern e.V. organizes the Land-wide Low German competitions. The 6th
Land-wide competition took place during the 2001 - 2003 report period.

The 2001/2002 Low German competition met with great response among the public.
Many groups made their own stage setting and décor for their performances. Topicalinterest plays, adapted to young people's needs and interests, were presented, in
particular, by pupils of the upper secondary grades (of grammar schools).
1198. Low German competitions in Uecker-Randow Kreis:
In 2000 and all subsequent years, regional Low German competitions were held in
Uecker-Randow Landkreis; they were organized in co-operation with the Landesheimatverband, Ueckermünde Gymnasium and the Landkreis. This "small edition" of
the Low German competitions was well received not only by the many active participants, but also by guests and other interested persons. 41 plays alone were put on
stage during the 3rd competition in January 2002, in which 60 active members of 4 institutions took part.
1199. Reuter Festival:
In 2001 and 2002, the Landesheimatverband - in co-operation with Fritz Reuter's native town of Stavenhagen and with the Stavenhagen Culture and Local Traditions
Club - organized the Reuter Festival. The Festival was attended by about 10,000
spectators in the years 2001 and 2002.
1200. Plattdeutsches Wort ["Low German Word of the Year"]:
The Landesheimatverband Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, Reuter's native town of Stavenhagen and the Fritz-Reuter-Literaturmuseum launched a call for nominations for
"Plattdeutsches Wort" ["Low German word of the year"].
- 359 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

1201. Low German Days of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania Land / regional Low
German Days:
Low German Days (Plattdeutsche Tage) for Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania were organized in 2001 and in 2002. Also, the 2nd Plattdüütsch-Dag [Low German Day] was
held in Grimmen in 2002.
1202. Committee work:
Fachgruppe Niederdeutsch ["Low German" Subject-Matter Group]: The 13-member
Fachgruppe Niederdeutsch holds several meetings per year and develops concepts
to help with the preparation of specialist meetings, exchanges of experience and
seminars.
Niederdeutscher Rat [Low German Council]: The Landesheimatverband MecklenburgVorpommern is a member of the newly established Niederdeutscher Bundesrat [federal Low German council] of the Bund für Heimat und Umwelt Deutschland (BHU - a union
dedicated to the preservation of local/regional culture, to the conservation of the architectural heritage
and to environmental protection in Germany). The Landesheimatverband has two represen-

tatives on Niederdeutscher Bundesrat.
1203.

Fostering of voluntarism:

Co-operation with members, and help with the cultivation of the Low German language and Low German customs and traditions: At present, 54 of 100 corporate
members of the Landesheimatverband, including Low German Land unions with their
affiliated organizations from Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, and unions from Bremen and Schleswig-Holstein, directly engage in Low German activities. This also
includes more than 65 Low German speaking individual members and 8 institutional
members from Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania and Schleswig-Holstein. This
means that members of the Landesheimatverband regularly cultivate and publicize
the Low German language in more than 80 places in all Landkreise. The organized
events include 'Low German evenings', readings by the authors of Low German
works, or song recitals, and excursions to towns forming part of the Low German cultural heritage.
1204.

Presentation on the Internet:

The subjects 'Low German' and 'cultivation of customs and traditions' are presented
on the Internet. In co-operation with the Institut für Niederdeutsche Sprache and
Schleswig-Holsteinischer Heimatbund, publication of a leaflet on "Low German in the
European Charter" (2001): With this publication, the Heimatverband fulfils its objective of promoting and advertising the implementation of undertakings relating to the

- 360 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

Low German language, as provided under the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages.
1205. The foundation Stiftung Mecklenburg in Ratzeburg - in co-operation with the
Institut für niederdeutsche Sprache (INS) in Bremen - now completed the three-volume Low German reader project for schools in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania and
Schleswig-Holstein: three volumes each of the reader (for the lower secondary
grades, the Mittelstufe [grades 5 to 10 of a Stufenschule, or grades 8 to 10], and the upper
secondary grades, respectively) were developed for Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania and Schleswig-Holstein.
1206.

As a result of this co-operation with Stiftung Mecklenburg, the Holstein-based
Zentrum für Niederdeutsch also supports Low German activities in MecklenburgWestern Pomerania. This is done in close co-ordination with the Low German
Consultative Councils of the Länder of Schleswig-Holstein and Mecklenburg-Western
Pomerania.
1207. With regard to Low German-related work across Land borders, the Holsteinbased Zentrum für Niederdeutsch established special key activities:
-

working within the Low German Consultative Councils of both Schleswig-Holstein
and Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania;
organization of lectures/meetings, in Haus Mecklenburg, also with speakers from
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania;
contacts/co-operation with institutions, associations/clubs and individuals in
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania;
as part of information and advisory services: supply of information also on activities pursued in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania;
making many and various Low German media available;
increased activities in the field of the new media (e.g. Internet), thus extending its
sphere of activity beyond the Holstein region into Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania.

1208. Within the framework of project-oriented promotion from Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, the Institut für niederdeutsche Sprache e.V. (INS) in Bremen published the volumes "Niederdeutsch in Literatur und Gesellschaft" ["Low German in Literature
and Society"] and "John Brinckman: Briefe, Dokumente, Texte. Band I" ["John Brinckman:
Letters, Documents, Texts. Volume I"]. A second volume on Brinckmann is currently under
preparation.

- 361 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

1209. Fritz Reuter Gesellschaft e.V. [Fritz Reuter Society], under the motto "Fritz Reuter, John Brinckman, Dethloff Carl Hinstorff", organized the Reuter-Tage [Reuter Days]
in Rostock in 2001. In the Neues Tor building in Neubrandenburg, the Fritz Reuter
Society regularly organized evening lectures and "afternoon chats". Also, school
classes organized "project days", and a Low German Working Panel of pupils held
regular meetings. For the redecoration of the Fritz Reuter Literature Museum, the
Fritz Reuter Gesellschaft donated 1,000 deutschmark and bought a print.
In 2002, the Reuter Days were held in Schwerin, under the motto "Fritz Reuter - Richard Wossidlo - Mecklenburg Folk Literature". The Hanseatic town of Greifswald
was the Reuter Days venue in 2003.
1210. After a year of thorough refurbishing, the Fritz Reuter Literature Museum in
Stavenhagen re-opened on 12 July 2001 and presented a completely new permanent exhibition. The entire technical equipment was newly acquired, and many exhibits can now be displayed for the first time. The Fritz Reuter Literature Museum can
now present a very modern literature exhibition. Under 31 general headings - each
defined by a quotation from Reuter's works or letters - visitors can familiarize themselves with Fritz Reuter's life, work and impact. Over a number of computers, sound
recordings of spoken Low German, some of which are historical recordings of considerable value, and film footage can be downloaded. The current state-of-the-art of
Reuter research shaped the museum-related concept which was developed by an
academic working group set up for this specific purpose and chaired by the director
of the Fritz Reuter Literature Museum.
At the same time, the new biography entitled "Ich bin das geworden, was ich immer
sehnlichst gewünscht habe... - Fritz Reuter - Leben, Werk und Wirkung" ["I have become what I always most fervently wanted to be - Fritz Reuter: His Life, Work and Impact"]

and edited by Cornelia Nenz was published by the publishing house Hinstorff-Verlag.
1211.

Since 2000, the town of Stavenhagen and the Fritz Reuter Literature Mu-

seum has awarded the "Fritz Reuter Literaturpreis" every year. This prize is awarded
for works in the Low German language, poetry and/or prose, and writings about the
Low German language and Low German authors and their life and work. So far, the
prize has been awarded to: Johann D. Bellmann, Jürgen Grambow, Wolfgang Siegmund, Hartmut Brun.
1212. During the years 2001 to 2003, the Johannes-Gillhoff-Gesellschaft e.V. in
Glaisin organized one or two Low German cultural events per month, e.g. in 2001 an
event at which Low German authors presented their own texts on the occasion of the
"Sängerkrieg zu Glaisin" [Glaisin song contest]. Every year, this society awards the Jo- 362 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

hannes-Gillhoff-Preis. In addition, this society maintains close contacts with U.S.
Americans who are interested in Low German; for example, Professor Dr. Eldon L.
Knuth, Encino/California, was awarded the Fritz Reuter Medaille in 2002.
1213.

Also, the association 'Doemser Plattsnackers un Frünn' e.V. [Dömitz Low
German Speakers and Friends] organized ten Low German Evenings per year in the
Pulverkeller of Dömitz Fortress in the years 2001 - 2003. A matter of particular importance to this association is to make the younger generation interested in the Low
German language and literature. For several years already, a group of pupils from
schools in Dömitz has studied Low German and even performed Low German
poems, songs and short scenes. Hartmut Brun, who is a member of the association's
board, published many books, e.g. since 1995, the annual calender for the North
German region, entitled "Voß un Haas" ["Fox and Hare"].
1214.

During the period under review, the activities of Bund Niederdeutscher Auto-

ren e.V. [Union of Low German Authors] included, among others, organization of the Lese-

café [readers' café] during the Reuter Festival in Reuter's native town of Stavenhagen
and publication of yet another volume (no. VIII) of the anthology "Plattdütsch Blaumen" ["Low German flowers" ("flowers" in the sense of "anthology"/"selection"].
1215.

The Low German chat club Plattdütsch Verein "Klönsnack - Rostocker Sieben" e.V., which was founded in 1995, engages in a variety of activities that meet
with a positive public response and are aimed at preserving and using the Low German language. The focus of these activities is on the Hanseatic City of Rostock and
its environs.
Mention should be made of the following activities:
- Information provided on the handicrafts and cultural traditions in the event series
"Klönsnack an'n Spinnrad" ["Chat at the spinning wheel"] (e.g. "rescue of persons in
distress at sea"; "Mit Pierd und Wag dörch dei Rostocker Heid" ["horse-drawn carriage tour of the Rostock heath]; visit to the Möller furrier's workshop).
– Public readings of Low German writings by authors from Mecklenburg-Western
Pomerania.
– Project "Mecklenburger Traditionen, Sitten und Bräuche" ["Traditions, Manners and
Customs of Mecklenburg"].
– Use of the new media: The Internet site www.Klönsnack-RostockerSieben.de.wu
provides information world-wide, beyond this region, on the activities of the Plattdütsch-Verein. Members of the Plattdütsch Verein who are connected to the Internet can access this site to read the Low German monthly magazine "Maandenbladd" which also covers an entertainment guide for the given month. A highlight
was live transmission, over this Internet site, of the (audio)studio broadcast "Klön- 363 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

snack im alten Hafenhaus" ["Chat in the old waterfront house"] on the subject of "Plattdeutsche Autoren zu Gast". In this way, people (having access to the Internet) all
around the world were able to listen to this Low German talk-show. This project is
further pursued in co-operation with the Institut für neue Medien Rostock. Both
video and audio live transmission is planned for the next programme in March
(2003).
In addition, the Plattdütsch Verein very actively participates in the work of Rostocker
Offener Kanal [Rok - Rostock Open Channel]. Also, the Plattdütsch Verein produces the
programme series "Plattdütsch läwt" ["Low German is alive"] which for years already has
been broadcast at irregular intervals by the Rostocker Offener Kanal. Examples of
such films are:
- Customs and Traditions of Mecklenburg
- Johannes Schlüter, Reformer
-

Plattdütsch läwt in'n Kinnergoren und in'n Schaul [Low German is alive in daynurseries and in schools]

-

Wihnachten is dat schönste Fest [Christmas is the greatest season]

Rok-TV exchanges these and other films with "Open Channel" partner stations in
Bremen, Hamburg and other North German towns and cities.
- Cultivation of Rostock customs and traditions: establishment and opening of the
"Kurt Dunkelmann Stube" in the "Altes Hafenhaus" in Rostock. Kurt Dunkelmann
was an author, actor, painter, playwright, and shipyard director in Rostock.
- "Tradition tours" with the Rostock streetcar: In co-operation with the Arbeitsgemeinschaft "Traditionspflege" of the streetcar company Rostocker Straßenbahn
AG, members of the Plattdütsch Verein organize "tradition trips", especially to the
annual Hansesail sports event. Since October 2002, two trips with the traditional
streetcar have been organized every month, with particular emphasis on information on the international horticultural exhibition IGA 2003. The guided tours of the
city are also in Low German.
- Familiarization of children and youngsters with the Low German language: The
Plattdütsch Verein regularly organizes Low German events in children's day-care
centres of the Hanseatic City of Rostock. The aim is to make children familiar with
Low German by means of texts and songs.
1216. The society John-Brinckman-Gesellschaft e.V. celebrated its 10th anniversary in 2000. On 20 September 2000, a ceremony was held at the John-BrinckmanGymnasium in Güstrow in commemoration of the 130th anniversary of John Brinckman's death. The Society's Chairman, Mr. Wolfgang Siegmund, in 2001 published
the book "John Brinckman - Ein Lebensbild" ["John Brinckman - Portrait of a Life"].

- 364 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

A leaflet entitled "Auf den Spuren John Brinckmans in Güstrow - ein kleiner Stadtrundgang" was designed to guide tourists and Brinckman amateurs on tours of John
Brinckman's native town of Güstrow.
In 2001, the John-Brinckman-Gesellschaft took part in the event "Güstrow kocht auf"
presenting the town's culinary delights. In the form of a Low German talk-show ("Talk
up Platt), two members of the John-Brinckman-Gesellschaft talked about "Äten un
Drinken" ["Eating and Drinking"] in the house of the Brickman family in the 19th century.
The Brinkman Gesellschaft publishes the informative Brinckmanbriefe on a continuous basis.
1217. The mixed choir Mecklenburger Sänger e.V. from Pampow - with some 35
singers - dedicates its activities to Low German songs. The Mecklenburger Sänger
developed their own form of a cappella choir singing and, in addition, a large Meclenburgian folklore programme.
From 2001 onwards, two thematic song booklets per year have been compiled and
published with the aim of promoting the large body of Low German songs and
making it available to the public. The project will cover another 10 song booklets
comprising 20 - 25 songs each, so that ultimately a collection of more than 200 songs
will be presented to the public. A musical setting composed for choirs is given for
each song. In addition, each song booklet has an annex dealing with the particular
features of the given song in terms of its history, source and interpretation. In 2000,
Mecklenburger Sänger published a CD entitled "de eikboom" ["the oaktree"].
1218.

Over the Ascension Day weekend in 2003, the Freundeskreis Ossenkopp e.V.
Dümmer/Mecklenburg [Ossenkopp Circle of Friends in Dümmer/Mecklenburg] organized
the third Low German song contest "Sängerwettstried up platt - slagers un pop üm
den'n ossenkopp" [Low German pop songs presented at the hotel/restaurant "Ossenkopp"
(a surname and Low German word meaning "oxhead")]. At this Low German pop song
grand prix, new unpublished Low German songs are presented to the public. The
winners are awarded a prize.
1219.

The following Low German theatres are members of Niederdeutscher Büh-

nenbund Mecklenburg/Vorpommern e.V. [Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania Union of Low
German Theatres] which was founded in 1991:
Niederdeutsche Bühne Rostock [Low German Theatre, Rostock]
Founded in 1920
Plattdütsch Späldäl to Stralsund [Low German Drama Club in Stralsund] Founded in 1920
Niederdeutsche Bühne Wismar [Low German Theatre, Wismar]
Founded in 1925
Niederdeutsche Bühne der Stadt Neubrandenburg [Low German
Theatre of Neubrandenburg Town]
Founded in 1934
Schönbarger Späldäl [Schönberg Drama Club]
Founded in 1947

- 365 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

Niederdeutsche Bühne Grevesmühlen [Low German Theatre,
Founded in 1954

Grevesmühlen]

Other theatres, e.g. in Schwerin, Güstrow, Greesenhorst, Ahrenshoop, Bad Doberan
and Parchim, no longer existed at the time of the Union's foundation.
The Low German theatres are well-known, popular and esteemed institutions for the
active cultivation and dissemination of the Low German language. They intensively
cultivate and publicize the language and tradition in a way that meets with a positive
public response. They also provide possibilities for learning, using and cultivating the
Low German language. Children and youngsters increasingly and successfully are
making use of this opportunity. With growing success, the theatres' offers meet with a
good response from children and adolescents.
The Niederdeutscher Bühnenbund supports and co-ordinates the theatres affiliated
to this Union on matters related to Low German stage-plays and helps them with applications for Land promotional funding. It co-operates with the unions of [Low German] theatres of Schleswig-Holstein and of Lower Saxony and Bremen. Since 1990,

Niederdeutscher Bühnenbund has organized two of its own "theatre days" and, in
Neubrandenburg, a joint "theatre day" of all three of these theatre unions. Representatives of this Union and its affiliated theatres participated - also with their own stage
productions - in the "theatre days" of other Unions of Theatres. Since no additional
Land funding could be obtained, the Bühnenbund did not hold its planned 2001
"theatre day" and will, for the time being, not organize any "theatre days" because it
wishes to use the available resources exclusively for its actual stage productions. As
a result, however, an essential element of Low German theatre work, communication
and exchanges of experience achieved through stage productions and encounters,
and the interaction and co-operation of the community of theatres will be hampered
and interrupted.
Since 1990, the intensive efforts made by these theatres resulted in large numbers of
stage productions and theatre-goers.
1999
2000
2001
2002

Performances
213

Spectators
27,105

219
29,888
213
25,666
the complete current figures are not yet available.

For comparison, the figures from previous years:
1990
64
11,869
1220.

During the period under review, the project "BIBLIA - Niederdeutsches Bibel-

zentrum Barth, internationale Begegnungsstätte im Ostseeraum" [Barth Low German
Bible Centre, international meeting centre in the Baltic region] was launched with the help of the

- 366 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

federal "improvement and development" programme "Kultur in den neuen Ländern"
["culture in the new Länder, i.e. the federal states in eastern Germany]. St. Jürgen Church, which
houses the Low German Bible Centre, has set itself the following tasks:
-

-

-

-

to show an important part of the cultural heritage to the public in an appropriate
form by means of the exhibition of the Barth Bible (Low German translation of
1487 by Johannes Bugenhagen);
by means of a permanent exhibition on the content, cultural links and handing
down of the Bible, organized in co-operation with the Theological Department of
the Greifswald Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-Universität, to assume a religious education
function within the Land's educational system and, at the same time, to provide
the town of Barth and its visitors with an attractive place to visit;
as a centre for the cultivation of Low German within the church, to contribute its
share to the preservation of the cultural heritage and, at the same time, to directly
support the Land Government's cultural policy aimed at promoting the Low German language;
by organizing Bible-related meetings and conferences throughout the Baltic region, to strengthen the international contacts with the Baltic and Scandinavian
countries; to this end, the Niederdeutsches Bibelzentrum plans to hold international workcamps for young people during the summer months, as a permanent
element of its work.

5. Lower Saxony
1221. The Land of Lower Saxony generally takes a particular interest in promoting
initiatives in the cultural sphere, and especially with regard to the literature in the regional and minority languages. Literature and language play a central role in the
identification of the individual and of the community. Thus, the notion of 'language'
must not be confined to the standard language; rather, it also includes regional languages such as Low German or the languages of the other ethnic groups residing
here. On this basis, Low German literature can be included in all areas of the promotion of literature (promotion of production, distribution and reception) in Lower
Saxony Land. In 1983, the East Frisian author Oswald Andrae was awarded the
Lower Saxony artists' grant "Künstlerstipendium des Landes Niedersachsen" for his
Low German poetry. Promotion of writings as well as the publication of literary works
by Low German publishing houses are evaluated by an expert jury proficient in the
Low German language. However, the literary quality of the submitted works not all
too often meets the criteria applied by the jury.

- 367 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

1222. Many clubs, societies and associations - which in instances are also granted
Land subsidies - pursue various activities, also in public, for the cultivation and preservation of Low German. Among these are the Low German theatres established in
many places of this region.
1223. The Ministry for Scientific and Cultural Affairs encourages events regarding
the subject of Low German and organized by Land-subsidized institutions such as
the Literaturrat [Literature Council] or the Literaturbüros [Literature Offices]. For example,
several Low German readings were held in the course of the Land-wide literature
event "Bücherfrühling" ["Spring of Books"].
1224. Implementation of the undertaking entered into is also accomplished with the
support of the Institut für niederdeutsche Sprache (INS - Institute for the Low German Language) in Bremen (cf. the introductory remarks in our comments on Article 12, para 1,
sub-para. (a)) and of the Land-funded libraries (cf. the comments above on Article 12,
para. 1, sub-para. (g)).
1225. In 2002, the publishing house Schuster Verlag in Leer was awarded the Niedersächsischer Verlagspreis with a 12,500 € purse. Schuster Verlag is considered
one of the most eminent publishing houses for the publication of Low German works;
in this context, it co-operates with renowned scholars and, for example, publishes the
Low German dictionaries edited by the Institut für niederdeutsche Sprache (INS) in
Bremen.
6. North Rhine/Westphalia
1226. Responsibility for the cultivation of cultural traditions in North Rhine/Westphalia essentially lies with the cities, towns, Kreise and Landschaftsverbände. Regarding Low German in North Rhine/Westphalia, promotion in the cultural field is
pursued, in particular, by the Landschaftsverband Westfalen-Lippe [regional local authority of Westfalen-Lippe]. This Regional Authority has six Commissions for studies covering the history, geography and political system of a region, with the sole task of
carrying out research on the history and geography of Westphalia, publishing the
findings, and holding conferences on their fields of activity. One of the subjects is
covered by the Commission for "Dialectology and Names Research [Onomastics, Toponymy] of Westphalia", covering research on the Westphalian language history, especially archiving of Low German word material, and registration of the Westphalian
dialects, local field names and proverbs. For this purpose, this Commission publishes
the journal "Niederdeutsches Wort. Beiträge zur niederdeutschen Philologie" ["The
Low German Word. Articles on Low German Philology"] and two series, "Niederdeutsche Stu- 368 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

dien" ["Low German Studies"] and "Westfälische Beiträge zur niederdeutschen Philologie" ["Westphalian Contributions to Low German Philology"].
1227. Dedicated funds of the budget of the Landschaftsverband Westfalen-Lippe
are employed for the promotion of Low German writings and language cultivation.
Part of these funds are allocated to the Augustin-Wibbelt-Gesellschaft. The activities
of this Low German literary society are focused on the work of the Low German writer
Augustin Wibbelt and on the cultivation and promotion of, and research on, the
Low German literature and language of Westphalia. Inter alia, a yearbook and a new
edition of Augustin Wibbelt's work are published by the Society.
1228. The share of institution-based support provided by the Institut für Niederdeutsche Sprache (INS) in Bremen helps - also within the meaning of Article 12,
para. 1 - to encourage types of expression specific to the regional language Low
German and to foster means of access to works produced in this regional language
(see also Nos. 1185 - 1188 above).
7. Saxony-Anhalt
1229. Promotion of cultural activities regarding music, literature, language history
and history/geography is one of the sectors laid down in the Directives on the Allocation of Grants (in this regard, reference is made to the comments in Nos. 1144 and
1145 above).
1230. A major part of the activities to cultivate and preserve the vernacular in
Saxony-Anhalt is looked after by committed individuals, assocations, societies and
interest groups, whose declared aims include the cultivation, fostering and preservation of Low German in the sense of cultivating the linguistic milieu. The pertinent activities range from scholarly research and documentation on the use of the language
in everyday life, to Low German working panels and Dialect Days which are also
attended by large numbers of children and youngsters from the various regions. In
this regard, mention must be made, for example, of the annual expert conferences
organized by the Landesheimatbund Sachsen-Anhalt e.V. [Saxony-Anhalt Land Union for
Local and Regional Traditions, reg'd] on specific Low German subjects; a co-organizer is
the Arbeitsstelle Niederdeutsch [Workshop for Low German] of the Germanistisches Institut of the Magdeburg Otto-von-Guericke-Universität. The findings/conclusions of
these expert conferences (subsidized with funds of the Ministry of Education and
Cultural Affairs) are published so that the interested individuals and groups can then
be provided access to them through universities, libraries, clubs/associations and
schools of the Land.
- 369 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

1231. The Arbeitsstelle Niederdeutsch of the Germanistisches Institut of Otto von
Guericke University in Magdeburg was founded already in 1990 with the task of looking into and dealing with matters regarding the use, acceptance and development of
Low German in Saxony-Anhalt. The focus is on sociolinguistic issues and also on
aspects of language cultivation and preservation; the results of this work are used, on
the one hand, in teacher training (cf. also the comments on Articl 8, para. 1, subpara. (h) above) and, on the other hand, form the basis of facultative courses offered
for persons interested in the language. The efforts of the Arbeitsstelle Niederdeutsch,
aimed at fostering, disseminating and cultivating Low German, include research on
dialects and the establishment of a reference library for vernacular literature.
1232. Another research project regarding sociolinguistic studies on Low German in
Saxony-Anhalt (sociolinguistic surveys in the Land's southern and eastern regions)
was carried out on the basis of the project "Untersuchungen zum Niederdeutschen
im Norden von Sachsen-Anhalt" ["Studies on the Low German Language in the North of
Saxony-Anhalt"].
As part of its programme, the Sächsische Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig
[Saxon Academy of Sciences of Leipzig] promotes the project "Mittelelbisches Wörterbuch"
["Dictionary for the Middle Elbe Region"]. This project ("Dictionary for the Middle Elbe Region") covers the recording and analysis of the vobabulary of the dialect spoken in
the Middle Elbe region (Altmark, Börde, Harz mountains, Jerichower Land, Anhalt)
and the presentation and description of the phonetic forms, distribution and meaning
of words, including their origin and the respective subject matter to which they refer.
Implementation of the project is based on the material collected in the period 1935 1958 under the direction, and with the personal commitment, of Karl Bischoff. The
"Mittelelbisches Wörterbuch" was subsidized by joint Bund/Länder funding in the
period 1992 - 1998. Since 1999, project-related subsidies have been allocated out of
research funds of the Land. The "Mittelelbisches Wörterbuch" project closely cooperates with Martin Luther University of Halle-Wittenberg. The work of the "Mittelelbisches Wörterbuch" project is intensively supported, in all aspects regarding the
Low German language in Saxony-Anhalt, by Arbeitsstelle Niederdeutsch of the Germanistisches Institut of Otto von Guericke University of Magdeburg and by the experts for Low German and folklore employed by the Landesheimatbund SaxonyAnhalt e.V. [Saxony-Anhalt Land Union for Local and Regional Traditions].
1233. As of the beginning of 1998, the Landesheimatbund Saxony-Anhalt e.V. established the post of the head of a section for the cultivation of dialects/Low German,
which is funded by the Land as part of the institution-based support for this Union.
Under a co-operation agreement with Otto von Guericke University of Magdeburg,
the Head of Section was assigned to work with the Arbeitsstelle Niederdeutsch and
- 370 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

thus is directly involved in all projects of academic relevance while the university
research community can share the results of the direct practice-oriented activities in
the cultural sector.
1234.

The year 2000 saw the completion of the research project on the subject of

"Sprachsoziologische Untersuchungen zum Niederdeutschen in Sachsen-Anhalt"
["Sociolinguistic Studies on Low German in Saxony-Anhalt"], which was carried out over a
period of several years by Arbeitsstelle Niederdeutsch at Otto von Guericke University with significant support provided by Landesheimatbund Sachsen-Anhalt e.V. The
publication on the research project's findings is entitled "Zum Status des Niederdeutschen in Sachsen-Anhalt - Kontinuität und Wandel in der Vergangenheit und Gegenwart, hrsg. von U. Föllner" ["On the Status of Low German in Saxony-Anhalt - Continuity and
Change in the Past and Present Times, ed. by U. Föllner"].
An overall number of 5,358 persons were interviewed in the northern part of SaxonyAnhalt. Of these, 36 % have a very good command of Low German. Low German is
understood well or very well by 62 % - with regional variations, however. In the western part of the Altmark region (33 %) and in Magdeburger Börde ["Börde" = fertile plain]
(43 %), proficiency in the Low German language is at its highest level. Extrapolating
from these figures with reference to the adult population of the Magdeburg Regierungsbezirk [Land administrative unit] - which more or less is the geographical centre of
Low German as spoken in Saxony-Anhalt - it can be safely assumed that at less a
quarter of the inhabitants speak Low German and about one half of the population
understand this language.
1235. In addition to the aforementioned Arbeitsstelle Niederdeutsch, the Institut für
Germanistik for the research sector, the Mittelelbisches Wörterbuch project, and the
Landesheimatbund Sachsen-Anhalt e.V., also the Arbeitskreis "Ostfälisches Platt"
e.V. [Working Panel on "Low German spoken in Ostfalen"] and the Ostfälisches Kulturinstitut
Helmstedt [Ostfalen Cultural Institute of Helmstedt] of the Landschaftsverband "Deuregio"
e.V. [regional local authority "Deuregio"] are working on the identification and support of
activities for the cultivation of dialects and, in particular, of the Low German language.
1236. Various scholarly and popularized publications such as the "Schriftenreihe
der Arbeitsstelle Niederdeutsch" ["Publication Series of the Arbeitsstelle Niederdeutsch"],
"Sprachsoziologische Untersuchungen zum Niederdeutschen in Sachsen-Anhalt"
["Sociolinguistic Studies on Low German in Saxony-Anhalt"], "Publikationen zur Dialektsituation
in Sachsen-Anhalt" ["Publications on the Situation regarding Dialects in Saxony-Anhalt"] (a
series published by the Landesheimatbund), and U. Föllner, ed.:"Zum Status des
Niederdeutschen in Sachsen-Anhalt - Kontinuität und Wandel in der Vergangenheit
- 371 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

und Gegenwart" ["On the Status of the Low German Language in Saxony-Anhalt - Continuity and
Change in the Past and Nowadays"], were subsidized by the Land.
Land funding is provided - usually within the framework of activities aimed at preserving local and regional traditions - also for Low German publications.
1237. In addition, Low German articles are regularly published in the "Sachsen-Anhalt-Journal" of the Landheimatbund Sachsen-Anhalt, and - to a lesser extent - literary texts appear in the literary journal of Saxony-Anhalt "Ort der Augen" ["Where Eyes
Dwell"].

1238. In the towns and villages of the Low German speech area in Saxony-Anhalt,
there are many groups dedicated to the cultivation of dialects, which are among the
registered clubs working for the preservation of local traditions or similar associations. The efforts of such groups are mainly directed at publicizing the vernacular
authors of the region, at establishing activity groups in schools, and at activities,
addressed to all generations, for the cultivation and preservation of the vernacular.
8. Schleswig-Holstein
1239. Like other undertakings under Article 12, this obligation is implemented indirectly through Land-sponsored promotion of institutions and associations dealing
with Low German matters. If and where required, the provisions of Article 12 can be
implemented by these bodies. These include, in particular, the Institut für niederdeutsche Sprache (INS - Institute for the Low German Language) in Bremen, the Regional
Centres for Low German in Leck and Ratzeburg, the Schleswig-Holsteinischer Heimatbund (SHHB - Schleswig-Holstein Union for Local and Regional Traditions), and the
foundation Stiftung Mecklenburg.
1240. The Centres for Low German in Leck (Schleswig region of the Land) and in
Ratzeburg (Holstein region) were opened in 1994. These Centres are two regional
institutions founded for the task of actively fostering Low German in Schleswig-Holstein and supporting the work of the groups, institutions and individuals devoted to
this subject matter in the Land. A Board of Curators, composed of representatives
from Low German interest groups and institutions of the Land, monitors and supports
the work of these Centres. This body is chaired by the President of the SchleswigHolstein Landtag.
1241. The Ministry for Education, Science, Research and Cultural Affairs supports
the work of these Centres, has technical supervision responsibility for them and allocates funds for their current activities. Teachers were assigned (as of 1 May and
- 372 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

1 August 2000, respectively) to the Centres by the provision of one established post
each. This was also done in response to the endeavours aimed, in particular, at
fostering Low German among children and youngsters in school. The focus of the
work of the two Centres is on information, establishing contacts, documentation,
promotional activities in schools, and public information/education.
1242. In the theatre sector, the multi-genre theatres in Kiel and Lübeck and the
Landestheater actively and continuously dedicate their efforts to the Low German
theatre. The Niederdeutscher Bühnenbund [Union of Low German Theatres] and the
Schleswig-Holstein Landesverband der Amateurtheater [Land Association of Amateur
Theatrical Societies] are supported with Land funds. About half of the performances by
the members - some 125 - of the Association of Amateur Theatrical Societies are in
the Low German language. Also, the two associations are granted additional funds
for further training, and the Union of Low German Theatres is refunded part of the
personnel costs for guest directors engaged for staging plays at Low German
theatres. In addition, project-related subsidies can be granted for events such as
Niederdeutsches Theatertreffen [Low German Theatre Meeting] held at the Molfsee
Open-Air Museum, where Low German stage productions from Schleswig-Holstein
and the neighbouring Länder were presented.
1243. In the music sector, several associations receiving institution-based support
with Land funding, especially the Sängerbund [choral society] Schleswig-Holstein e.V.
and the Musikerverband [Musicians' Union] Schleswig-Holstein e.V. also foster the
musical heritage comprising Low German texts. During the 1994 Schleswig-HolsteinTag, a much noted event was a Land-funded project of the Land Youth Orchestra,
presenting songs of Low German texts 'made up' in modern jazz arrangements.
1244. In the library sector, the Low German language is promoted, inter alia, by the
Schleswig Holstein Central Library Office which offers, and provides access to, literature about, and in, Low German and by organizing writers' readings in Low German. For this purpose, a special Readers' Department was established since this
sector of literature is not supported by nation-wide services.
1245.

In addition, the Schleswig-Holsteinischer Heimatbund (SHHB - Schleswig-Holstein Union for Local and Regional Traditions) and other institutions receive project-related
funds - in some cases substantial amounts - for Low German seminars (especially for
children and youngsters, but also for families, and events addressed to all generations) and for Low German theatre and directing workshops.

- 373 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (b) - Access to Works in the (Regional) Language (b)

to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in regional
or minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, postsynchronisation and subtitling activities;

1. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
1246. Bremen allocates funds for required translations, from Low German, of published works.
2. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
1247. On the basis of the Cultural Promotion Directive, Mecklenburg-Western
Pomerania Land in this context supports the following projects:
− publication of Middle Low German texts, together with standard German translations (e.g. Rostocker Burspraken [Rostock 'town meetings'/citizens' debates]);
− publication of Low German texts, with their standard German translations (e.g.
Kulturportal Niederdeutsch [cultural portal 'Low German']);
− translation of Low German stage-plays into standard German.
1248. As regards stage productions, however, there are only few translations from
Low German into standard German.
No cases of Low German/standard German dubbing, post-synchronization and subtitling are known.
3. Lower Saxony
1249. Within the framework of literature promotion, translators are allocated funds
for the translation of literary works. This also applies to translations both into and
from Low German. Also, a grant can be obtained for a study placement at a
translators' centre.
1250.

In this regard, the Institut für niederdeutsche Sprache (INS - Institute for the
Low German Language) in Bremen sees itself as a service establishment for all matters relating to translation. In Ostfriesland, translations are arranged for or made (with
Land funds) by the Plattdütskbüro [Low German Office] of Ostfriesische Landschaft. An
updated East Frisian dictionary, 'Low German - Standard German' and 'Standard
German - Low German', was published by Ostfriesische Landschaft.

- 374 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

4. Schleswig-Holstein
1251. To the extent desired and required, the Low German institutions can use
promotional funds provided by Schleswig-Holstein Land for the translation, dubbing,
post-synchronization and subtitling of works into, or in, the Low German language.
1252. At present, several Schoolbook Commissions develop a three-volume Low
German reader for Schleswig-Holstein and Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania. It is
suited for pupils of all age groups and was to be completed in 2000. Co-ordination of
the related work and financial promotion are mainly in the hands of the foundation
Stiftung Mecklenburg.
1253. In response to the Committee's request for further information on specific
steps taken by the authorities - cf. No. 417 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4
final] - it is reported that the Land Government subsidizes many translations, inter alia
through the Centres for Low German in Leck and Ratzeburg and through the Institut
für Niederdeutsche Sprache (INS) in Bremen, which is co-funded by Schleswig-Holstein Land. These are translations of: dictionaries; teaching materials for nursery
schools, schools and other educational institutions; poetry booklets, stage-play collections, material for further teacher training; written exam papers and coursework
papers written by students of Flensburg University; collections of stage plays and
speeches for use by theatre groups; cassettes and videos for general use; information papers for the agency Nationalparkamt in Tönning and for museums of local
history and culture.
Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (c) - Access to Works Produced in Other Languages (c)

to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages
by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling
activities;

1. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
1254. With funds allocated to the production of Low German stage performances of
plays originally written in other languages, Bremen promotes the required translations.
1255. In No. 278 of its Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], the Committee of Experts stated that, on the basis of the information it had received, it could not conclude
that this undertaking was fulfilled. In this regard, cf. the additional comments in No.
1136 above.

- 375 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

2. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
1256. On the basis of the Cultural Promotion Directive, Mecklenburg-Western
Pomerania Land in this context supports the following projects:
− Since the Low German theatres are interested also in staging plays of the
standard German or English speech areas, there are quite a few examples of Low
German translations of standard German or English texts.
− In the church sector, translations from standard German into the Low German language play a special role. A translation of "Dat oll Testament: dei Lihrbäuker" ["The
Old Testament: the instructive books" (extracts: Job, Book of Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Song
of Solomon)] by Karl Homuth from Rostock was published already in 1963. A "Platt-

düütsch Gesangbauk" ["Low German Hymn Book"], with Low German liturgy and Low
German prayers, appeared in 1989. The work "Dat ni Testament för plattdütsch
Lüd in ehr Muddersprak oewerdragen" ["The New Testament for Low German Speakers,
translated into their native tongue"] by Ernst Voß (1886 - 1936), which appeared in
1929, was used for church work. Several - including contemporary - new editions
of this work have been published.
− Especially with regard to the publication of children's literature, translation of
standard German texts into Low German plays a particular role.
− In the commercial music sector, there is, for instance, the trend that shanty groups
have folk songs or standard German folklore and sailor's songs translated into Low
German since there are only relatively few Low German shanties.
− The full text of the Constitution of the Land of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
was translated into Low German.
1257. In response to the Committee's request for further information - cf. No. 345 of
the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] - it is reported that Rostocker Offener Kanal (ROK-TV), since October 2001, has aired a live TV programme in Low German
(1 x 45 minutes per month; with five re-runs) on maritime and cultural traditions in the
Hanseatic City of Rostock. In this programme, Low German and standard German
are spoken alternately. Standard German inputs are dubbed in Low German. Low
German translation is provided for speakers of standard German who participate in
interactive telephone actions organized by broadcasting stations to include viewers in
the communication process. The various broadcasts are also transmitted over the
Internet.
3. Lower Saxony
1258.

Cf. the comments in Nos. 1249 and 1250 above.
- 376 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

1259.

In response to the Committee's request, in No. 379 of its report [MIN-LANG
(2002) 4 final], for further information on dubbing, it is reported that a documentation
and a documentary film were subsidized in 2001 and 2002, respectively, with funds
provided under film promotion schemes; both productions were recorded in Low German and sub-titled in standard German.
4. Schleswig-Holstein
1260. If so desired and required, the Low German institutions can use promotional
funds of Schleswig-Holstein Land for the translation, dubbing, post-synchronization
and subtitling of works into, or in, the Low German language.
1261. The Institut für Niederdeutsche Sprache (INS - Institute for the Low German Language) in Bremen, which is subsidized also by the Land of Schleswig-Holstein, published a Standard German/Low German Dictionary.
1262.

Several Schoolbook Commissions developed a three-volume Low German

reader for Schleswig-Holstein and Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania. The SchleswigHolstein volumes were completed in 2001. Volume 3 of the Mecklenburg-Western
Pomeria series appeared this year (i.e. in 2003). The reader is suited for pupils of all
age groups and has met with favourable response. Co-ordination of the related work
and financial promotion were mainly in the hands of the foundation Stiftung Mecklenburg.
1263. In early 2000, the Schleswig-Holstein Landtag published a Low German
translation of the Schleswig-Holstein Land Constitution.
1264. From 1995 until 2003, the frank(ing stamp) of the State Chancellery included
a Low German translation of parts of Article 1 of the Basic Law [Constitution of the
Federal Republic of Germany]. In 2003, the franking stamp is dedicated to the "European
Year of People with Disabilities".
1265. For the additional information requested by the Committee of Experts in No.
418 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], cf. the supplementary remarks in
No. 1253 above.

- 377 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (d) - Taking Account of the Regional or Minority Language in
Cultural Activities (d)

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of
various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of
regional or minority languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or
for which they provide backing;

1. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
1266. In response to the Committee's request for further information - cf. No. 279 of
the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] - it is reported that the Parliament of the
Free Hanseatic City of Bremen and the Senator for Cultural Affairs include applications by the organizers of this language group for the promotion of the Low German
language in the subsidizing schemes and encourage participation in general cultural
events.
1267. [deleted: paragraph contained in the 1st State Report]
2. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
1268. The Hamburg [Senate] Authority for Cultural Affairs itself, in handling applications for support for Low German literary projects, gives equal priority to such
projects and to those related to standard German. In addition, it encourages the institutions, which are firmly included in the budget, of the literature sector (Hamburger
Öffentliche Bücherhallen [Hamburg Public Libraries], Literaturhaus [House of Literature],
Freie Akademie der Künste [Academy of Liberal Arts]) to strive for equal treatment of
Low German.
1269. In response to the request of the Committee of Experts in No. 314 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], for further information on the extent to which
the institutions mentioned above actually take into consideration the Low German
background of proposed activities, Hamburg provides the following information:
1270. Generally it must be noted that the aforementioned institutions are independent, autonomous bodies not bound by directives, which do not have to comply with
state regulations as regards the contents of their cultural work. The competent Senate Authority must observe the rule of freedom of the arts.
- The Hamburger Öffentliche Bücherhallen [Hamburg Free Library] have a stock of
some 1500 Low German titles.
- According to its own information, the Literaturhaus e.V. did not organize any Low
German events over the past few years.

- 378 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

- The Freie Akademie der Künste [Free Academy of Arts] in 2001 organized a composer portrait concert with Professor Dr. Manfred Stahnke who is also known for
his Low German choral works.
3. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
1271. For the accomplishment of their language-related and cultural work, the
associations, poets'/literary societies, publishing houses, theatres, etc., have the required linguistic expertise at their disposal (cf. the comments above on Article 12,
para. 1, sub-para. (a) - no. 4 (Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania)). Counselling is offered by
the Low German Chairs of the Rostock and Greifswald Universities, the Volkskulturinstitut [Institute of the Kulturbund for Folk Culture, Mecklenburg and Western Pomerania] in
Rostock and Landesheimatverband Mecklenburg-Vorpommern [Mecklenburg-Western
Pomerania Land Union for Local and Regional Traditions].
1272.

Nearly all of the members of the Niederdeutsch-Beirat [Low German Consultative Council] have a command also of Low German. Also, the criteria for membership
of the Kulturbeirat [Cultural Consultative Council] of the Ministry of Education include
proficiency in the Low German language, in addition to specialist qualifications.
4. Lower Saxony
1273. Throughout Lower Saxony, regional cultural associations of local communities (so-called Landschaften) have been established, which include regional-language activities and products in their cultural work and are supported in this field by
the Land of Lower Saxony.
1274. The Ostfriesische Landschaft in Aurich receives institution-based promotional
funds from the Lower Saxony Ministry of Scientific and Cultural Affairs. On the basis
of the history and structure of this Landschaft, its tasks refer both to the cultural
sector and to science and education. This ensures that the Low German language
and Low German culture are taken into consideration in keeping with the accepted
obligation.
1275. On account of its history as the last remaining representation of the historic
entity of East Friesland, "Ostfriesische Landschaft" is deeply anchored in the population's awareness. It continues to represent the entire population of its region. Nowadays the Assembly of Ostfriesische Landschaft, which is democratically legitimized
by local elections and organized as a chamber of deputies, constitutes a regional
cultural parliament with a regular statute.
- 379 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

1276. Within the organizational structure of Ostfriesische Landschaft, the Plattdütskbüro [Low German Office] is part of the Cultural Department. It has the crosssector task of developing the use of "East Frisian Low German" (Ostfriesisches Platt)
as a regional language in private, public and working life. This requires networking
with all other activities pursued by the Landschaft.
1277. The following institutions are operated by Ostfriesische Landschaft, with
headquarters in Aurich, under a contract of 20 June 2001:
a)
the Landschaft Library;
b)
the East Frisian Educational Centre;
c)
Regionale Kulturagentur [Regional Cultural Agency];
d)

Regionalsprachliche Fachstelle - Plattdütskbüro [Regional Language Specialist
Centre - Low German Office]; and

e)

Forschungsinstitut für den friesischen Küstenraum - Archäologischer Dienst
[Research Institute for the Frisian Coastal Region - Archeological Service].

1278. The Plattdütskbüro of Ostfriesische Landschaft sees itself as a regional-language information and networking agency for institutions, groups and individuals in
and outside Ostfriesland. It is involved in many cultural activities organized by clubs,
associations or local authorities, such as the Störtebeker-Freilichtspiele [Störtebeker
Open-Air Theatre Festival] taking place in Marienhafe since 1996.
1279. The Niedersächsischer Heimatbund, which also receives Land funds, has a
"Fachgruppe Niederdeutsch" ["Low German" Subject-Matter Group]; the members (working
as volunteers) of this group are specialized in various aspects of Low German and
develop proposals for language promotion. A Working Group - composed of representatives of the Landtag parliamentary groups, of the Ministries responsible for
matters related to the Charter, and of the Niedersächsischer Heimatbund - confers on
initiatives for the Charter's implementation. The latter bodies can only serve in an advisory function.
5. North Rhine/Westphalia
1280. The Landschaftsverband [regional local authority] of Westfalen-Lippe is a coprovider of the Westphalia and the Lippe Associations for Local/Regional Traditions,
which also support the cultivation of Low German in cultural areas. In this way, the
undertakings initiated or supported by these bodies make appropriate allowance for
incorporating the cultivation of the regional language (cf. Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para.
(d) of the Charter).

- 380 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

1281. In response to the statement of the Committee of Experts in No. 125 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that the information provided was not sufficient to conclude this undertaking was fulfilled, the following is reported:
The Westfalen-Lippe Landschaftsverband subsidizes the Westphalian Union for
Local and Regional Traditions (Westfälischer Heimatbund) and, in addition, meets all
of the Union's personnel costs. As a result, the Union's activities can be pursued on a
broad basis. Thus, Westfälischer Heimatbund has two working groups, so-called
Fachstellen [specialist panels], dealing with the Low German language: the Fachstelle
"Niederdeutsche Sprachpflege" [responsible for 'cultivation of the Low German language'] and
the circle of Low German writers "Schriewerkrink". Both working panels pursue intensive activities for the cultivation and preservation of Low German and regularly
organize conferences and other meetings twice per year. The subject of the next
working panel meeting is "Possibilities to use the Internet for Low German". Under a
transfrontier co-operation project with the Netherlands circle of writers "Achterhoek
en Liemers", the Schriewerkrink published a 450-page anthology entitled "alles
plat(t)" (ISBN 3-933377-32-3).
In addition, Westfälischer Heimatbund every two years organizes a Low German
reading competition for school-children in those regions of Westphalia where Low
German is still perceptibly in use. Unfortunately, a sharp decrease in the number of
participants has been in evidence since 1993. The sponsoring company withdrew its
support. The prevailing financial constraints will, for the time being, preclude continuation of these, or initiation of new, activities.
1282. Also, it should be noted that many of the local associations of Westfälischer
Heimatbund (520 associations/clubs) maintain Low German working groups and
round tables, etc.
6. Schleswig-Holstein
1283. With subsidies provided by Schleswig-Holstein, the institutions of the
speakers of Low German ensure that appropriate provision is made for incorporating
the knowledge and use of the Low German language and culture in their cultural
activities.
1284. The regional language Low German still is, as a secondary language, widely
used mainly in rural areas and by the older population.
1285. In response to the request of the Committee of Experts in No. 419 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], the following additional information is provided:
- 381 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

Schleswig-Holstein has a well-functioning network for exerting an influence on cultural events. This network is formed, inter alia, by the Centres for Low German in
Leck and Ratzeburg; Schleswig-Holsteinischer Heimatbund with its regional associations and the Committee for Low German and Frisian; the Low-German Consultative
Council established at the Office of the President of the Landtag; the Minister-President's Commissioner for Low German; Plattdüütsche Rat för Sleswig-Holsteen [Low
German Council]; Förderverein [support association] for the Leck Zentrum für Niederdeutsch; the Low German Working Panel of the Protestant Church; the Institut für
Niederdeutsche Sprache (INS) in Bremen; the Landeskuratorium für den SchleswigHolstein-Tag; Fehrs-Gilde; Klaus-Groth-Gesellschaft; and Niederdeutscher Bühnenbund [Union of Low German Theatres]. The representatives of these institutions can at all
times exert an influence on cultural events. This applies to general cultural events
held in several languages as well as to events giving priority to regional and minority
languages, e.g. Plattdeutsche Tage [Low German Days] organized by Schleswig-Holsteinischer Heimatbund in September; 'theatre weeks'; 'language festivals' of Nordfriesland in its role as a region of language diversity; the Low German Day and 'Low
German evenings' organized by the Centres for Low German; Christmas parties,
readings or "Plattdeutsche Jahre" [Low German years] in local communities and towns
and cities; and church services and school events.
1286. Schleswig-Holsteinischer Heimatbund (SHHB), which is subsidized by the
Land, has already announced the 5th Land-wide Plattdeutscher Tag to be held in
2003. The motto of this year's [2003] Low German Day is "Plattdüütsch un Politik"
["Low German and Politics"]. One of the objectives is to achieve that a still greater number
of political representatives in the municipalities, towns and villages will be informed
on, and involved in, Low German activities. The Land Government expressly welcomes the SHHB's initiatives.
Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (e) - Employment of Staff Proficient in the Language(s) Concerned (e)

to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting
cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of the regional
or minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest of the
population;

1. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
1287. The Ernst-Waldau-Theater in Bremen has a drama school where young
actors are familiarized with the Low German language.

- 382 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

1288. In No. 280 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], the Committee of
Experts asked for information to allow assessment of the implementation of this provision.
2. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
1289. As already stated in Nos. 1271 and 1272 above, the institutions for languagerelated and cultural work have at their disposal staff members speaking the Low German language. Further examples of the active involvement of staff speaking Low
German are the Fachgruppe Niederdeutsch ["Low German" Subject-Matter Group] of
the Landesheimatverband [Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania Land Union for Local and Regional
Traditions] and the body co-ordinating the Low German Competition in MecklenburgWestern Pomerania.
1290.

Speakers of the Low German language are also represented on the Landes-

arbeitskreis Kultur, a joint body of Land Associations which every year prepare and
organize the Landeskulturtage [Land Cultural Days] in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania.
The Landeskulturtage and Mecklenburg-Vorpommern-Tag, which are both held
annually, always include Low German programmes (theatre, choir singing, literature).
In addition to the cultural events listed in No. 1025 above, the Internationales Folkloretanzfest in Ribnitz-Damgarten is presented every year in the Low German language by a couple wearing traditional costumes.
3. Lower Saxony
1291. Like the many other unions and associations organizing events, such as
Oostfreeske Taal [East Frisian Low German] or De Spieker, Heimatbund für niederdeutsche Kultur e.V. [a local/regional traditions association for Low German culture], Ostfriesische Landschaft has staff members speaking the Low German language.
4. North Rhine/Westphalia
1292. The activities of Landschaftsverband Westfalen-Lippe, as described in
No. 1280 above, promote measures, also within the meaning of Article 12, para. 1,
sub-para. (e), in order to ensure that the bodies responsible for organizing cultural
activities also have Low German speaking staff at their disposal.
1293. In response to the Committee's request for further information, cf. No. 126 of
the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], it is reported that the members of the
specialist panel Fachstelle "Niederdeutsche Sprachpflege" and the writers' circle
- 383 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

"Schriewerkrink" have a command of the Low German language in both its spoken
and written form.
Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (f) - Participation of Representatives of the Group Speaking the
Given Language in Cultural Activities (f)

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or
minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

1. Brandenburg
1294. Legislation to regulate the participation by Low German speakers in cultural
institutions is considered unnecessary: dealing with the Low German language and
culture requires proficiency in this language; thus, participation of users of the Low
German language is already ensured within the institutions concerned.
1295. In response to the comment of the Committee of Experts in No. 100 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that it had not been made aware of any
measures of encouragement and that it therefore was not in a position to conclude
that this undertaking was fulfilled, Brandenburg states that it upholds its view that
legislative participation is not necessary. No further information, as requested by the
Committee, can be provided on specific measures of encouragement since it is not
clear what type of measures the Committee has in mind.
2. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
1296. As regards the institutions described under para. 1, sub-paras. (a) to (g), and
their activities and events, it is primarily persons having a command of the Low German language who are the initiators and who carry out the pertinent activities.
1297.

As regards the Committee's request for further information, cf. No. 281 of the

Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], the Land reports that the participation of
authors and linguists in the planning and implementation of cultural activities is on a
voluntary basis and cannot be influenced by public authorities.
3. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
1298. The Hamburg [Senate] Authority for Cultural Affairs provides co-funding for the
Institut für niederdeutsche Sprache (INS - Institute for the Low German Language) in Bremen; the Institute's full-time and voluntary staff and members carry out a considerable range of cultural planning and counselling.

- 384 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

1299. As regards No. 315 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], where the
Committee of Experts found that the information provided was not sufficient to conclude that this undertaking was fulfilled, it is reported that the Institut für Niederdeutsche Sprache closely co-operates with a very active "circle of friends" and with many
speakers and promoters of Low German who give planning and advisory support to
the Institute's work.
4. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
1300. The comments on para. 1, sub-para. (e), under no. 2, show that representatives speaking the regional language Low German participate in the planning and coordination of Land-wide activities (e.g. Low German Competition, Land Cultural Days)
and are represented at many local and municipal jubilees. In 1999, the first Landwide 'Low German Day' was organized at the initiative of the Landesheimatverband
Mecklenburg-Vorpommern e.V. [Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania Land Union for Local and
Regional Traditions].
5. Lower Saxony
1301. As already stated under Nos. 1273 - 1279 and 1291 above, many full-time
and voluntary helpers are involved in the planning and organization of activities/
events in the regional language. In this context, mention should be made of an event
held in 1996 at the Land Mission of Lower Saxony [at the site of the Federal Government]
in Bonn and organized in co-operation with the aforementioned associations with the
aim of increasing the awareness of Members of the Bundestag with regard to Low
German.
1302.

In response to the Committee's comment in No. 382 of the Monitoring Report
[MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that it needed further information concerning the direct participation of representatives of the users of Low German in order to be able to conclude
whether this undertaking was fulfilled, Lower Saxony reports that, as a rule, the Land
does not intervene as a direct organizer and that this undertaking can be fulfilled only
indirectly, in accordance with the principles of cultural promotion. This is mostly
achieved by institution-based promotion of relevant institutions (Ostfriesische Landschaft which operates the "Plattdütsk Büro" [Low German Office], or Niedersächsicher
Heimatbund e.V. (NHB - Lower Saxony Union for Local and Regional Traditions) with its Niederdeutsch-Fachgruppe). For example, the NHB, with support provided by the Land,
organized the competition "Twee spraken sünd mehr as een" ["Two languages are more
than one"] on the occasion of the European Year of Languages in 2001 and, in February 2003, in close co-ordination with the Land Ministries, it held a symposium on the
- 385 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

Charter's implementation, to which participants from all parts of the Land were invited.
6. North Rhine/Westphalia
1303. The activities of the Landschaftsverband [regional local authority] of WestfalenLippe, as described under Article 12, para. 1, sub-para. (d) above, also provide, within the meaning of para. 1, sub-para. (f), for encouraging direct participation by representatives of the users of the Low German language in the provision of facilities and
planning of cultural activities.
1304. In response to the request of the Committee of Experts in No. 127 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], the following additional information is provided: the members of Fachstellen [specialist panels], working panels, Küerkringe [discussion groups], etc., within the region are regularly informed of the activities of the
existing bodies and are asked for participation in such activities, for suggestions,
initiatives, etc. Their annual programmes - e.g. the Annual Programme of ChristineKoch-Gesellschaft - are published in the large-circulation membership journal of
Westfälischer Heimatbund (number of copies: 10,000).
7. Saxony-Anhalt
1305. Direct participation in the provision of facilities and planning of cultural activities is ensured through the Landesheimatbund Sachsen-Anhalt e.V. [Saxony-Anhalt
Land Union for Local and Regional Traditions] (especially the Head of the Low German Section) and the Arbeitsstelle Niederdeutsch [Workshop for Low German] of Otto von Guericke University in Magdeburg. Both institutions usually are also the main actors as
regards a wide range of Low German activities.
1306. Participation in the planning of cultural activities is, in addition, possible
through the Landesheimatbund Sachsen-Anhalt e.V. since the Chairman of Arbeitskeis "Ostfälisches Platt" e.V. [Working Panel "Low German of Ostfalen"] is a member of the
Executive Board.
8. Schleswig-Holstein
1307. Every two years, Schleswig-Holstein Land organizes the Schleswig-HolsteinTag [a "day" dedicated to the special character of the Land] as a central cultural event.
Among the clubs, associations and unions participating in that event are many that
have their roots in the Low German culture. The functions of the executive secretariat
of the Landeskuratorium for the Schleswig-Holstein Day are performed by the
- 386 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

Schleswig-Holsteinischer Heimatbund (SHHB), an association which vigorously supports Low German interests. The Land provides moral, financial and organizational
support for the organization of the Schleswig-Holstein-Tag and for the work of the
Landeskuratorium.
1308.

Since 1993, the Schleswig-Holstein Land Mission [at the site of the Federal Government] (previously in Bonn) has, in co-operation with the SHHB, organized a "Low
German evening" with music, theatre and literature. Members of the Bundestag, from
all parliamentary groups, are thus brought into contact with Low German.
1309. On 12 September 1999, the first Land-wide "Plattdeutscher Tag" ["Low German
Day"] was held at the initiative of the SHHB. For the duration of one month (September), more than 100 events were organized in many places throughout SchleswigHolstein.
1310. For the additional information requested by the Committee of Experts in
No. 420 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], cf. the supplementary remarks
in Nos. 1285 and 1286 above.
Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (g) - Creation of Archive Bodies (g)

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for
collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the
regional or minority languages;

1. Brandenburg
1311. Publishers are required to offer at least one copy of every printed work that is
newly published in Brandenburg to the Staats- und Landesbibliothek [State and Land
Library]. This also covers publications in the Low German language. The extent to which
use is made of such offers is not known. Otherwise, there is no central registration of
Low German writings and documents.
1312. Otherwise, there are no libraries or archives dedicated exclusively to the collection of Low German writings; rather, they are collected in public libraries and archives of various providing bodies, especially Kreis and municipal archives and
libraries, as part of their respective assigned tasks. No central surveys are made on
the size and contents of such archives so that no information can be provided on the
subject.
1313. These archives provide the interested public with access to Low German
writings and other materials held in the archives in accordance with the provisions of
- 387 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

the "Act of 7 April 1994 on the Safeguarding and Use of Public Archives in the Land of
Brandenburg". Public access to libraries is ensured anyhow.
1314. Regarding additional information on the size of collections and archive holdings, as requested by the Committee of Experts in No. 101 of the Monitoring Report
[MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], Brandenburg reports the following:
As regards the size of Low German collections, only approximate estimates can be
given because systematic surveys have not been carried out and could only be
achieved with disproportionate investments of time and effort. The Stadt- und Landesbibliothek in Potsdam (which is outside the Low German speech area) holds approximately 100 volumes, most of which are copies of newly published books which
publishers are required to offer to libraries. It should be noted that the majority of Low
German works are marketed by publishing houses domiciled in other Länder and
therefore are not subject to the free-copy rule in Brandenburg.
Apart from that, literature in the Low German language (usually in Uckermärker Platt)
is offered, in particular, by the following public libraries in Uckermarck Landkreis:
Uckermark Kreis Library (in the town of Prenzlau)
Prenzlau Municipal Library
Schwedt Municipal Library
Templin Municipal Library
The publications are not separately registered by language, but the responsible
librarians estimate that each of the aforementioned libraries holds about 20 to 30
titles.
In addition to public libraries, Low German literature is also held by a number of cultural associations in the Uckermark region, which pursue research on, and cultivation
of, the regional Low German dialect Uckermärker Platt and publish Low German
works. These are, in particular:
Zentralstelle für Sprache und Kultur der Uckermark [Centre for the Language and
Culture of the Uckermark Region] (located at the Prenzlau Dominikanerkloster
[Blackfriar Monastery]);
Kulturverein [Cultural Association] of Prenzlau Town;
the association "Uckermärker Heidestruck" in Templin.
Another example is the unpublished works of the dialect writer Erna Taege-Röhnisch,
which are likely to be handed over to the Templin Municipal Museum where the
public will be provided access to them.
2. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
1315. The archives in the Land of Bremen include many works by Low German
writers and various writings/manuscripts in the Low German language. The public
- 388 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

has unrestricted access to them. The holdings of such writings/documents and of
pertinent aids (inter alia, dictionaries, lexicons) are complemented on a continuing
basis. As a result of the close co-operation between archives and institutions, whose
tasks include the cultivation and fostering of the Low German language, the records
and documents of these institutions are taken over by the archives so as to make
them available to the public. The Stadtarchiv [Municipal Archives] in Bremen promotes
historical research carried out by the various associations and "Krings" ["Circles"] as
well as research on the Low German language.
1316. The libraries in the Land of Bremen make a basic stock of Low German titles
available, the selection of which is based on target groups and which are treated on
an equal basis with regard to other categories of books. The libraries co-operate with
the Institut für niederdeutsche Sprache (INS - Institute for the Low German Language) within the framework of external loan services.
1317. The collection activities of the historical museums of the Free Hanseatic City
of Bremen include the fields of dialect literature and dialectology. The museum
libraries maintain similar collections which are constantly expanded.
1318. In the two cities of Bremen and Bremerhaven, the respective Department for
Cultural Affairs provides advice and funding to the associations and initiatives dedicated to the promotion of the Low German language. These institutions include
"Krings" [Circles] and "Speeldeels" [drama clubs] as well as local/regional traditions clubs
which devote their efforts to the presentation of Low German literature. In Bremerhaven, the Niederdeutsche Bühne [Low German Theatre] is supported by the Bremerhaven
Stadttheater [Municipal Theatre]; in Bremen, the Ernst-Waldau-Theater which presents
part of its stage productions in Low German is granted an annual subsidy.
Publications in the Low German language are subsidized, for a major part, by the Institut für niederdeutsche Sprache (INS).
3. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
1319. This obligation is implemented through the promotion of the Institut für Niederdeutsche Sprache, INS (in this regard, cf. the introductory remarks in Nos. 1185 1188 above).
1320. The Hamburger Öffentliche Bücherhallen [Hamburg Free Library] have a stock
of some 1,500 Low German titles.
There is no systematic recording of the holdings of Low German texts in the State Archives, the Carl von Ossietzky State and University Library or the library of Germa- 389 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

nistisches Institut of Hamburg University. At present, therefore, only generalized information can be provided on the holdings of the State Archives and of the University
Library:
1. The State Archives hold a large number of Middle Low German texts, including texts of practical use, because Middle Low German had been Hamburg's administrative language at that time.
2. The Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek has prints and old manuscripts and a
collection of Low German publications of more recent date.
3. It is planned to provide a separate library for the Linguistics Department; so
far, however, Hamburg University only has the Institute Library of the Institut
für Germanistik I. This library has a wide range of Low German texts dating
from the 19th and 20th centuries. These also include Mecklenburgian and
Westphalian texts; the majority, however, are texts in the Low German dialect
of northern Lower Saxony. The texts originated in Hamburg constitute the
main body of the holdings of this library; they furnished the lexical material for
the preparation of the specialized dictionary Hamburgisches Wörterbuch. Also
included are Middle Low German source texts where these have been made
accessible in publications of more recent date (in part, also texts published by
the Institute itself).
4. Lower Saxony
1321.

Central tasks of the Institut für niederdeutsche Sprache (INS - Institute for the
Low German Language) in Bremen, which is also subsidized by the Land of Lower
Saxony, are the collection, classification and scholarly analysis of Low German linguistic material. At present, the INS library comprises some 15,000 media units.
1322. Both the Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek [State and University Library] in Göttingen and the library of Carl von Ossietzky University in Oldenburg have abundant
holdings of Low German literature. In addition, the Municipal Libraries of the Land
capital Hanover own the Börsmann Collection, comprising some 5,000 media units.
The (Land-funded) library of Ostfriesische Landschaft also owns a collection of Low
German literature.
1323. The publishing house Verlag Schuster in Leer attends to the dictionaries published by the INS and by Ostfriesische Landschaft and to the Low German Grammar;
it also publishes standard works of the Low German language and folklore as well as
a number of works by well-known old and new Low German authors.

- 390 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

5. North Rhine/Westphalia
1324.

One of the priority tasks of the "Dialects and Study of Names [Onomastics,
Toponymy]" Commission of the Landschaftsverband of Westfalen-Lippe - cf. the comments above on para. 1, sub-para. (a), under no. "6. North Rhine/Westphalia" - is
archival recording of Low German linguistic material and registration of Westphalian
dialects, local field names and proverbs.
1325. As regards additional information on the collection and presentation of works
in Low German, as requested by the Committee of Experts in No. 128 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], North-Rhine/Westphalia reports the following:
Westfälischer Heimatbund [Westphalian Union for Local and Regional Traditions] systematically collects Low German literature. Some of its local associations have theatre
groups which present stage-plays in Low German.
In this context, it should be mentioned that dialect literature has, for many years
already, been collected also by the Kommission für Mundart- und Namensforschung
which makes these texts available to interested parties, i.e. both universities and the
public sector.
6. Saxony-Anhalt
1326. The establishments and institutions subsidized by the Land of Saxony-Anhalt
(cf. also the comments in Nos. 1305 and 1306 above) collect Low German works
and, within the framework of public information/education, make them known to a
large reading public.
1327. In response to the statement of the Committee of Experts in No. 114 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that the information provided was not sufficient to take a position on this undertaking, Saxony-Anhalt reports the following:
In Saxony-Anhalt Land, there are two institutions dedicated to this task:
1. The Arbeitsstelle "Niederdeutsch" of the Landesheimatbund, which works in close
contact with the Magdeburg Otto von Guericke University.
2. The Karl Bischoff Archives established at Martin Luther University of Halle-Wittenberg.
The Land Government encourages or facilitates the collection and presentation or
publication of works in the regional language Low German by granting Land subsidies to these two institutions which are thus enabled to pursue pertinent activities. In
addition, the Arbeitsstelle "Niederdeutsch" can - and in practice does - apply for promotional funds allocated for specific projects.
- 391 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

7. Schleswig-Holstein
1328. The Low German language is promoted in many and various ways by the
library system of Schleswig-Holstein, among others by the Büchereizentrale Schleswig-Holstein [Library Centre of Schleswig-Holstein]. This is done by offering and publicizing
literature about, and in, Low German and by organizing writers' readings in Low German. For this purpose, a special Readers' Department was established since this
sector of literature is not supported by nation-wide services. A comprehensive review
of the market - advertising leaflets of publishing houses, journals, and contacts with
the relevant authors - ensures that account is taken also of publications on the nonprofessional sector. These books are reviewed by the Readers' Department, and lists
are drawn up of those recommended for purchase by libraries.
1329. Literature about, and in, Low German is kept as a separate category so that
library customers have quick and direct access to such books.
1330.

Mention should be made of the following libraries:

Schleswig-Holsteinische Landesbibliothek (Schleswig-Holstein Land Library)

One of the priorities of the Schleswig-Holstein Land Library is the collection of works
related to the Low German language and Schleswig-Holstein Low German literature.
Books on the Low German language (language history, grammar, dictionaries, onomastics/toponymy, dialects, church language) as well as relevant journals have been
collected since the 19th century.
To the extent possible, the aim is complete procurement of the works of all Schleswig-Holstein authors writing in standard German and/or Low German and of the literature about them. In addition, there are collections of Low German legends, folk
tales, nursery rhymes, proverbs and anecdotes, and Low German songbooks and
works on the Land's history and geography.
The Manuscripts and Unpublished Works Section of the Landesbibliothek owns the
unpublished works of several authors writing in Low German (Klaus Groth, Johann
Hinrich Fehrs, Hans Ehrke, Waltrud Bruhn, and others) and of folklorists who left
many Low German notes (Gustav Friedrich Meyer, Paul Selk, and others).
Universitätsbibliothek Kiel (Kiel University Library)

Kiel University Library owns several manuscripts and incunabula in the Low German
language. Of particular importance is the Middle Low German Bordesholmer Marienklage [Mary's Lament, of Bordesholm], of which a TV production video and a CD are
available. In addition, there are several thousands of books, mainly on the subjects of
linguistics, study of literature, fiction and poetry [belles lettres], and the study of the
material culture and customs.
- 392 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

The Germanistisches Institut of Christian Albrechts University in Kiel has a Department for (and Chair of) Low German Language and Literature, to which the KlausGroth-Archiv for research on the beginnings of New Low German dialect literature is
affiliated. With more than 5,000 Low German titles, the Department for Low German
Language and Literature is one of the largest specialized libraries in this field. Almost
half of the books are literary works in the Low German language published since
1850. Also, past and contemporary works referring to the Low German language and
literature are collected. These holdings also include manuscripts of Low German
radio plays. In addition, the Department has various collections referring to Low German.
Zentrale Hochschulbibliothek Flensburg (Central University Library of Flensburg)

The Flensburg Central University Library has a basic stock of Low German literature.
The major part of these holdings is professional literature of more recent date. The
focus is on grammar, dictionaries, linguistics, the study of literature, Low German
fiction and poetry, and the study of regional folklore. All holdings are listed in an online library catalogue and in the database Gemeinsamer Bibliotheksverbund (GBV).
Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (h) - Translation and Terminological Research Services (h)

if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and terminological
research services, particularly with a view to maintaining and developing appropriate
administrative, commercial, economic, social, technical or legal terminology in each
regional or minority language.

1. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
1331. As regards the regional language Low German, the requirement is not for
any newly created translation and terminological research services. Rather, the important task is to make use of the existing capacities also for the purposes of administration, commerce, economy, society, technology and law. The aim is, in particular,
to develop appropriate terminology, in co-operation with the Low German Chairs of
the Rostock and Greifswald Universities and with the Institut für Volkskunde [Institute
of Folklore] of the Rostock University (Wossidlo Archives). Additional sources available are the Mecklenburgisches Wörterbuch [Mecklenburg Dictionary] and the Pommersches Wörterbuch [Pomeranian Dictionary].
1332.

Help with translations and terminology is also provided by the Volkskultur-

institut Mecklenburg und Vorpommern im Kulturbund e.V. [Folk Culture Institute of the
Kulturbund, Mecklenburg and Western Pomerania] and by the Institut für niederdeutsche
Sprache e.V. (INS - Institute for the Low German Language) in Bremen.

- 393 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

2. North Rhine/Westphalia
1333.

As regards the tasks of the Commission on "Dialects and Name Research
[Onomastics/Toponymy]", mentioned in the comments in No. 1226 above, terminological
research services within the meaning of Article 12, para. 1, sub-para. (h), of the
Charter have been established.
1334. In response to the Committee's request for further information on the output
of these research services, cf. No. 129 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final],
North-Rhine/Westphalia reports that, at present, no specific additional information on
this subject is available.
3. Saxony-Anhalt
1335. If required, the establishments and institutions listed in Nos. 1305 and 1306
above provide translation and terminological research services as part of their ongoing Land-funded activities.
1336. In response to the Committee's comment that it needed further information
and practical examples in order to be able to take a position on this undertaking, cf.
No. 115 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], Saxony-Anhalt provides the
following information:
Saxony-Anhalt Land takes the view that there is no need for establishing a translation
and terminological research centre in addition to the establishments and institutions
listed in Nos. 1305 and 1306 above - referring to Art. 12, para. 1, sub-para. (f) - because in practice no applications are filed for such services. Almost all applications
for such services are submitted by local chroniclers who are well served by the aforementioned establishments.
On a monthly average, the Arbeitsstelle "Niederdeutsch" handles around 10 inquiries
or requests, most of which refer to local toponymy or translation of documents/deeds.
Article 12, para. 2
Paragraph 2
In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are
traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language
justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in
accordance with the preceding paragraph.

1337. In the Federal Republic of Germany, cultural activities complying with the law
in force are not subject to any permit procedure or restrictions. Thus, the above obligation is already fulfilled by the system of law in the Federal Republic of Germany.
- 394 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

More extensive implementation of this obligation by encouraging or providing such
activities will have to be decided by the Länder on a case-by-case basis.
1. Lower Saxony
1338. Since cultural promotion in Lower Saxony generally includes Low German,
there are (in this Land) no regional limitations to the territory in which Low German is
mainly spoken.
1339. In response to the Committee's request for information on the activities in the
southern part of Lower Saxony, cf. No. 384 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4
final], Lower Saxony reports that activities of groups of Low German speakers also
take place in Southern Lower Saxony. For additional information, cf. the comments in
No. 944 above.
2. North Rhine/Westphalia
1340. Under the existing system of law, cultural activities in North Rhine/Westphalia
are admitted also in territorial areas other than those where the regional language
Low German is traditionally used.
1341. In response to the statement of the Committee of Experts in No. 130 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that it would need more information in order
to be able to conclude that this undertaking was fulfilled, North-Rhine/Westphalia
reports that the Siegerland region, for example, is not part of the Low German
speech area, but must be grouped among the standard German speech areas. Low
German activities are not pursued in the Siegerland because the Low German language is not sufficiently rooted in the region's culture. However, Westfälischer Heimatbund would support and monitor any activity required in this area.
Article 12, para. 3
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for
regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.

1342. For the measures regarding Germany's cultural policy abroad, cf. No. 505
above.
1. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
1343. Within the "Neue Hanse Interregio" (NHI - New Hanseatic Interregio), an association of the Länder of Bremen and Lower Saxony, and of West-Friesland (Nether- 395 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

lands, provinces of Drenthe, Fryslân, Groningen and Overijssel), cultural events - e.g. lectures
and readings - also include Low German as the typical language of Northern Germany.
2. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
1344. The Hamburg Senate Authority for Cultural Affairs makes provision for the
accepted obligation in its activities. So far, however, no concrete information is available on participation in the cultural policy abroad.
1345. In response to the statement of the Committee of Experts in No. 317 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that this undertaking was not fulfilled, the following information is provided by Hamburg:
In its cultural exchanges, especially with Hamburg's twin-towns in other countries, the
Senate Authority for Cultural Affairs supports the presentation of artistic productions
of the Hanseatic City: often performing/interpretative arts, visual arts (plastic and
graphic arts), and music; to a lesser extent, literature. Low German literature which
would be internationally presentable on the basis of its artistic reputation does not
exist in Hamburg; with regard to stage productions, however, Hamburg has the Ohnsorg-Theater which indeed gives performances abroad, but in recent times the
theatre had to confine its international performances to Austria and Switzerland on
account of the enormous costs entailed by such guest-performance tours.
These Low German stage-plays are performed in the standard German language
but, by their flair and liveliness, they perfectly reflect the Low German atmosphere;
TV broadcasts of these performances are very popular with the viewers in Germany,
even in the most southernly regions, as well as in the Austrian and Swiss German
speech areas.
Major guest-performance tours abroad:
1990/91
U.S.A. (New York, New Jersey, White Plains)
Palma de Mallorca/Spain
1991/92
Jakarta/Indonesia
1992/93
Japan (Osaka, Tokyo, Kobe, Yokohama)
2003
Palma de Mallorca/Spain

4 performances
2 performances
3 performances
5 performances
6 performances

3. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
1346. Within the framework of cultural exchanges with the Baltic Republics, the
Scandinavian countries and Poland, folklore ensembles from the Land of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania give performances abroad. In addition to the presentation

- 396 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

of the customs and traditions as a part of the Low German culture, choral works and
songs also use the Low German language.
1347. The holder of the Low German Chair at Rostock University gave lectures and
seminars on the Low German language and culture in Scandinavia, the Baltic
countries and Russia. As a spin-off of these activities, new Low German projects
were jointly developed by the various universities/colleges.
1348. Various clubs and associations (e.g. Fritz Reuter Gesellschaft e.V., Johannes-Gillhoff-Gesellschaft e.V., etc.) maintain close contacts with partners in the
United States.
4. Lower Saxony
1349.

[deleted: paragraph contained in the 1st State Report]

1350. Mention must be made also of an Art School Project subsidized by the Land
of Lower Saxony; under this project, Internet contacts were established with the descendants of Lower Saxony emigrants to America. The Low German language is used
for mutual communication in this context.
5. Schleswig-Holstein
1351. In the 19th Century, many inhabitants of Schleswig-Holstein emigrated to the
United States. The focus of Schleswig-Holstein immigration to the U.S. was the State
of Iowa, with Davenport, west of Chicago, as its central place. Until our days, people
there - often the fourth or fifth generation - have been using German or Low German
as their language of everyday oral communication.
1352. Until this day, close contacts have been maintained between Schleswig-Holstein and the descendants of the former immigrants.
1353. In 1998, with funds provided by the Minister-President, a Low German Conference was held at the Schleswig-Holstein open-air museum of Molfsee. Participants
included a delegation of the American/Schleswig-Holstein Heritage Society (ASHHS)
of Davenport. The ASHHS was founded in 1986 by descendants of immigrants from
Schleswig-Holstein, and has a membership of some 1,000 in forty U.S. States. Within
the ASHHS, the Low German language is cultivated; even a Low German/English
Dictionary was published. The Society is keeping up close co-operation with associations in Schleswig-Holstein.

- 397 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

In 1999, a Plattdüütsch Konferenz [Low German Conference] took place in Wausau
(Wisconsin), in which also a group from Schleswig-Holstein took part. The Conference featured a number of presentations and examples, also with regard to the use
of the Schleswig-Holstein variety of Low German in Iowa. Additional conferences
were held in Grundhof, near Flensburg, in 2000 and in Grand Island (Nebraska) in
2001. In 2002, also with funds provided by the Land, the 5th of these Low German
Conferences was held in Bredenbek in Schleswig-Holstein. The following conference
was scheduled to take place in Manning/Iowa in October 2003.
1354. The Kiel University Department of Low German Language and Literature
carried out a research project funded by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG German Research Foundation) on Low German speech islands abroad, in North
America (Iowa) and Paraguay.
1355. There is lively co-operation with scholars from Scandinavia, the Baltic
countries, Russia, the Netherlands and Belgium in the field of Low German philology.
These contacts are complemented by student exchange programmes with Groningen
(Netherlands), Gent (Belgium) and Halden (Norway). Also, the Internationaler Wissenschaftlicher Ferienkurs der Universität Kiel [International Academic Holiday Course of
Kiel University"] entitled "Deutschland heute - Sprache, Gesellschaft, Staat, Kultur"
["Present-Day Germany - Language, Society, State, Culture"] offers an annual series of
courses and lectures on Low German, which are attended by the foreign participants.

- 398 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

Article 13
Economic and Social Life
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake within the whole country:
(a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without
justifiable reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to
economic or social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical
documents such as instructions for the use of products or installations;
(b) to prohibit the insertion - in internal regulations of companies and private documents of any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or minority languages, at
least between users of the same language;
(c) to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority languages in
connection with economic or social activities;

The obligations under sub-paras. (a) and (c) have been accepted by the Länder of
Bremen, Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Lower Saxony, North Rhine/
Westphalia and Schleswig-Holstein.
1356.

In this regard, cf. the general comments in No. 248 above.

1357. These obligations are in compliance with the established law of the Federal
Republic of Germany and thus are fulfilled nation-wide for all regional or minority languages. Therefore, no special measures had to be taken by the Länder.
Art. 13, para. 1, sub-para. (d) - Facilitating the Use of the Regional or Minority Language
(d)

to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by means other
than those specified in the above sub-paragraphs.

This obligation has been accepted by the Länder of Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western
Pomerania, Lower Saxony, North Rhine/Westphalia and Schleswig-Holstein.
1358.

In this regard, cf. the general comments in No. 249 above.

1359. In Germany, the freedom to use one's own language - in public and in private
life - is guaranteed by Article 2, paragraph 1, of the Basic Law. Use of the minority
languages in public is generally accepted by the German population. No reservations
exist in this respect.
1360. There are many and various ways in which the learning and use of minority
languages are promoted by the state (cf. the comments on the various obligations),
and thus, in implementation of this obligation, use of Low German is encouraged and
facilitated. In particular, efforts are encouraged also among the general public to
keep these languages alive by using them within the family and in extra-familiar
everyday-life situations. In this regard, the cultural value of the minority languages for
- 399 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

Germany's cultural life is particularly emphasized so that, on the basis of the resultant
self-esteem and self-assurance, the younger generation will be more willing to adopt
these languages and pass them on.
1361. For the Land of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, the following additional
information is provided: In the area of tourism, particular importance attaches to the
use of Low German. Examples are brochures and leaflets, menu cards, the aforementioned display of Low German plant names at the German Pavilion of the international horticultural exhibition IGA 2003 in the Hanseatic City of Rostock, and
specially planned and organized visits to the places where Low German writers lived
and wrote. Environmental aspects are included in the Low German activities under
the project "Natur und Literatur - Auf den Spuren von Fritz Reuter" ["Nature and Literature - Where Fritz Reuter walked"] which is carried out by the Fritz Reuter Literature Museum in Reuter's native town of Stavenhagen. A CD with Low German texts on endangered animal species is being developed by Wolfgang Kniep.
1362.

In 2001,

the

Landesheimatverband

Mecklenburg-Vorpommern e.V.

[Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania Land Union for Local and Regional Traditions, reg'd]

published a folder with regard to the implementation of the European Charter for
Regional or Minority Languages.
1363. In co-operation with the Mecklenburg-Western Pomeranian company MVweb
GmbH und Co. KG, the Volkskulturinstitut Mecklenburg und Vorpommern im Kulturbund e.V. [Folk Culture Institute of the Kulturbund, Mecklenburg and Western Pomerania]
develops a Low German "cultural" Internet portal.
1364. In Schwerin, guided city tours are conducted in Low German. In addition,
Staatliches Museum Schwerin offers guided tours of the museum in the Low German
language.
1365. In terms of private enterprise, Low German is a top product which is a determining feature of the special character of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania. Thus, a
possibility would be to develop an alternative tourism programme under which
tourists would not only enjoy the beautiful landscape but would, during their vacation,
take a beginners' course in the Low German language, literature and culture. After
two annual courses, participants might acquire the Low German Diploma - Stage 1
while the Diploma - Stage 2 would be granted only after an additional stay. At the
tourist centres, Low German theatre groups might give performances, and specific
language learning courses in Low German might be taught.

- 400 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

1366. For Lower Saxony, the following information is provided: with the support of
the Land Government and in co-operation with the Institut für Niederdeutsche Sprache [INS - Institute for the Low German Language], Niedersächsischer Heimatbund
(NHB - Lower Saxony Union for Local and Regional Traditions) developed a folder
informing on the Regional/Minority Language Charter and distributed a large number
of copies.
1367. In 2002, Ostfriesische Landschaft and the registered association Oostfreeske
Taal [East Frisian Language] carried out a project entitled "Plattdütsk bi d' Arbeid" ["Low
German at work"] which had been developed, on a very broad basis, jointly with all the
major employers, employers' associations and employees' associations in the region.
Co-operation in planning, designing and organizing the project met with a wider and
more positive response among the population than had been expected. The project
will be continued.
Article 13, para. 2
Paragraph 2
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the public
authorities are competent, within the territory in which the regional or minority languages are
used, and as far as this is reasonably possible:

Art. 13, para. 2, sub-para. (c) - Use of a Regional or Minority Language in Social Care
Facilities (c)

1368.

to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and hostels offer
the possibility of receiving and treating in their own language persons using a regional
or minority language who are in need of care on grounds of ill-health, old age or for
other reasons;

In this regard, cf. the general comments in No. 250 above.

1. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
1369. In Bremen, hospitals, retirement homes and nursing services offer their services in such a way that speakers of Low German can be admitted and treated in their
own language. Various establishments are preparing lists of the staff members
having a knowledge of this language. Special account is taken of the Low German
language in the information brochure on the existing care and nursing facilities, which
was prepared by the Verbraucherzentrale Bremen [Bremen Consumer Protection
Centre] on behalf of governmental agencies.

1370. In response to the statement of the Committee of Experts in No. 286 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that implementation of this undertaking was
not ensured, the following information is provided by Bremen:
- 401 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

Bilingualism is the general rule in the Free Hanseatic City of Bremen. Therefore, publicly maintained hospitals are free to decide on recruitment of Low German speaking
staff. The personnel strength at municipal hospitals usually ensures that communication in and with the regional language takes place.
2. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
1371. A number of retirement homes have occupants who still speak Low German.
In such cases it is ensured, as a rule, that the nursing staff/attendants can provide
such language-specific care. What the city of Hamburg cannot do, however, is to
ensure that all persons in need of care can generally be provided such care also in
the Low German language. Yet in view of the actual state of affairs, this would not
seem necessary since, even among the elderly, there usually is nobody who understands and speaks Low German but not the standard German language. Should
such cases exist, however, the respective establishment will endeavour to find an
adequate solution.
1372. In response to the statement of the Committee of Experts in No. 286 of the
Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that implementation of this undertaking was
not ensured, the following information is provided by Hamburg:
The Senate Authority for Social and Family Affairs sees to it that the mentioned publicly promoted social care facilities generally offer the possibility to communicate in
the Low German language to persons who so wish.
So far, this has been ensured without any specific measures. As before, no persons
in need of nursing or care have notified a demand for Low German advisory services
in social care facilites. In view of this supply-and-demand situation, the competent
Senate Authority does not envisage any special additional measures. However,
should any requirements arise with regard to persons in need of care who wish to
communicate in Low German, the Authority will see to it that this possibility is promptly provided.
3. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
1373. At present, use of the regional language Low German in social care facilities,
such as hospitals, retirement homes and hostels, depends on whether these facilities
accommodate persons having a command of Low German. Use of the regional language Low German in social care facilities is more frequent and widespread in rural
areas than in towns and cities.

- 402 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

1374. In response to the comment of the Committee of Experts in No. 254 [354] of
the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that the information provided did not allow
the Committee to assess if this undertaking was fulfilled, Mecklenburg-Western
Pomerania provides the following information:
In 2000, 67,465 persons were employed in the sectors health care, veterinary service, and social services (25,999) in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania. Physicians/
surgeons employed in hospitals numbered 2,459 persons; other hospital staff numbered 16,479 persons. On the basis of sample surveys, it may be assumed that
around 10 per cent of non-medical hospital staff (1,647.9) and about 12 per cent of
the persons employed in the sectors health care, veterinary services, and social
services (8,095.8) have a command of the Low German language.
In the geriatric nursing homes operated by the German Red Cross (DRK) in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Low German is a regular feature of daily life. The majority
of the patients understand the Low German language, and many use it as a language of daily communication. In Nordvorpommern Landkreis, the staff of old age
homes and nursing homes in 2003 followed a 36-hours' Low German course held at
the Grimmen adult education centre.
While in some facilities Low German is spoken with patients, who wish to communicate in this language, mostly only during the daily nursing and therapies, other facilities specifically foster use of the Low German language.
To give some examples:
-

Volunteers produce a one-hour/week radio programme in five old age and nursing
homes of Schwerin. The "Heimradio" ["Home Radio"] project also covers Low German items.

-

In the geriatric nursing home "Elbtalaue" in Dömitz, ten patients formed a group
exclusively conversing in Low German. Occasionally, readings in Low German
are organized: for example, poems by Rudolf Tarnow are recited, or passages
from Fritz Reuter's book "Ut mine Festungstid" ["About my detention in fortresses"] and
his "Urgeschicht von Meckelnborg" ["Earliest history of Mecklenburg"] are read. Low
German poems or stories are also presented on the occasion of celebrations and
parties with the patients. The "weekly paper" of this geriatric nursing home regularly includes Low German poetry.

-

The geriatric nursing homes in Malchow and Rechlin organize 'Low German
evenings' twice per year. At Christmas celebrations, a 'Santa Claus' is presented
in the Low German tradition.

-

Christmas celebrations at the nursing homes in Grevesmühlen and Schönberg
are also attended by a "Santa Claus from the Low German Theatre". In addition,
the Grevesmühlen "Low German Theatre" once or twice a year gives perform- 403 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

ances in these homes. Some of the monthly events organized for the patients include Low German.
The directors of the facilities operated by the German Red Cross (DRK) and their
staffs agree that use and cultivation of the Low German language in these facilities
helps to make the patients feel at home and cared for.
Initial concepts are being developed for introducing an approach similar to that applied in schools also for hospitals, old age homes and other facilities, i.e. to appoint
one voluntary Low German contact person per facility. Implementation of this concept
must be co-ordinated with the competent agencies.
4. Schleswig-Holstein
1375.

Cf. the comments in Nos. 352 - 353 above.

1376. Staff members speaking Low German are available in the specialized clinics
of the Land. The exact number of these persons is not known.
1377. Also, it should be pointed out that direct nursing and other care of persons in
need of nursing and care is not a public-sector responsibility, but rather is carried out
mostly by private-sector and voluntary providing bodies. For instance, only 8 % of the
more than 1,000 approved nursing facilities in Schleswig-Holstein are provided by
incorporated public-law institutions. None of these facilities is provided directly by the
Land. Therefore, it is not possible to lay down any requirements to be met by the
various providing bodies as regards the use of the regional language Low German.
However, the Ministries with responsibility in this field have until now not been notified of any cases which might give reason to require certain institutions to provide
permanently for staff with knowledge of this language. Anyhow, there are no language barriers regarding oral communication in the various regions of the Land.
1378. In response to the view expressed by the Committee of Experts in No. 426 of
the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] that a systematic approach was necessary with regard to the provision of staff speaking the Low German language, Schleswig-Holstein provides the following additional information:
As already mentioned, Low German is used - even though with varying intensity - as
a regional language throughout the Land of Schleswig-Holstein. Therefore, facilities
providing care for the elderly regularly employ staff having a command of the Low
German language. No language barriers regarding oral communication in the respective regions of the Land are known. The same can be said of many hospitals.

- 404 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

With regard to hospitals and other social care facilities, it is pointed out again that the
Land does not have responsible as a public authority within the meaning of the
Charter. It is not possible to lay down any binding requirements to be met as regards
use of the regional or minority language. As far as we know, no language barriers
exist as regards social care services for members of this language group.

- 405 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

Article 14
Transfrontier Exchanges
The Parties undertake:
(a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the States
in which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if necessary to seek
to conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster contacts between the users of
the same language in the States concerned in the fields of culture, education,
information, vocational training and permanent education;
(b) for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or promote cooperation across borders, in particular between regional or local authorities in whose
territory the same language is used in identical or similar form.

1. Lower Saxony
The obligations under paragraphs (a) and (b) have been accepted only by the Land
of Lower Saxony.
1379. The Neue Hanse Interregio (NHI - New Hanseatic Interregio) was founded
in 1991 by the Heads of Government of the German Länder of Lower Saxony and
Bremen, and of the Netherlands [West-Friesland] provinces of Drenthe, Fryslân, Groningen and Overijssel. The agreement concluded by these co-operation partners is
geared to transfrontier co-operation designed to strengthen the regions involved. The
NHI's central policy areas are trade and industry, transport, research and development, environmental protection and nature conservation, agriculture and farming,
culture and education, and labour market and social policy.
1380. For the area of 'culture and education', the following was agreed, inter alia:
"In the context of European integration and in view of the networking of regions, interregional cultural exchanges and transfrontier co-operation in the cultural area have
an outstanding function because they help to bring people together and to foster
mutual understanding."
1381. In this context, increasing attention must also be given to the instruction in
the various languages in schools and in all areas of adult education. Against this
background, the Länder and Provinces work towards achieving increased co-operation among cultural institutions and in educational matters of the co-operation area.
This co-operation is to focus on promoting cultivation of regional languages and
dialects in their respective speech area.
1382. Local governments, municipalities, local authority unions, Landkreise,
Chambers and other public-law corporations in the Netherlands Provinces of Groningen and Drenthe and, in Germany, in the Landkreise of Aurich, Leer, Wittmund,
Emsland and Cloppenburg and in the kreisfreie Stadt of Emden in Ostfriesland
- 406 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part D: Low German

formed the special-purpose association Ems-Dollart Region (Eems-Dollar Regio EDR). In addition to economic co-operation, the task of this community syndicate is
to promote the region's culture in a transfrontier context.
1383. The common language spoken in this border region was used, for instance,
during the 1997 EDR Festival, an event commemorating the 20th anniversary of the
Ems-Dollart Region and providing the occasion for holding the European Cultural
Days in the town of Leer. Reciters, readers, writers and similar artists from the
Province of Groningen were, and still are, invited to participate in events within the
framework of the Bücherfrühling ["Spring of Books", a Land-wide literature event] in
LowerSaxony.
1384. In response to the request made by the Committee of Experts in No. 389 of
the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final], Lower Saxony's answer is that no additional information on this subject is available.
2. Schleswig-Holstein
1385. These obligations are not explicitly adopted by the Land of Schleswig-Holstein. Nevertheless, reference is made in this context to the comments in Nos. 1351 1355 above.

- 407 -

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

- 408 -

Part D: Low German

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

Part E Comments by the minorities/language groups

Comments by the Danish minority
on the Second State Report submitted by Germany on the
implementation of the Regional/Minority Language Charter
1. The Charter's importance to the minority language Danish
For the Danish minority, the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages,
which entered into force on 1 January 1999, and its concrete implementation in
Schleswig-Holstein are an important signal calling for the Bund's and the Land's active promotion of, and support for, the minority language Danish. This has been, for
the roughly 50,000 members of the Danish minority in Schleswig-Holstein, an important step towards according equal status, in terms of culture and language, to the
minority and the majority population in the border region.
Implementation of the various provisions of the European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages provided, for the first time, the Danish minority with a specific
instrument for gauging promotion of the Danish language in everyday life and in public.
In this respect, particular importance attaches to the brochure "Sprache ist Vielfalt"
["Language is diversity"] published by the Land Government. We hope that this bro-

chure will help to inform decision-makers and multipliers, in particular, on the meaning and contents of the European Regional/Minority Language Charter. The brochure
gives pertinent information on the rights and possibilities entailed by the Charter for
the members of the Danish minority.
Generally we welcome the fact that the Land Government, with the planned report on
the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, takes the Charter's evaluation process in Schleswig-Holstein seriously and thus allows us to offer our detailed comments on the current situation of the Danish language in the Land's northern
region.

E 1

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

2. What has been achieved, and what is expected for the future
Article 8 outlines the conditions with regard to Danish-language instruction. This refers to pre-school education, schools, teacher training, university studies, and inclusion of Danish in general education.
Dansk Skoleforening for Sydslesvig (the Danish Schools Association for South
Schleswig) is the providing body for Danish nursery schools and schools in the
Schleswig region of the Land. Dansk Skoleforening thus meets the requirements
stipulated by the Land with regard to Article 8, sub-paras. (1) (a), (1) (b) and (1) (c) of
the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages and in this respect fulfils
tasks which otherwise would be incumbent on the Land. Despite the foregoing, only
around 47 % of the activities of Dansk Skoleforening for Sydslesvig are subsidized by
the Land. For the transport of non-local pupils, in particular, the Land only pays for
just under 7 % of the costs. In the long run, this cost distribution will not be acceptable and jeopardizes the Schools Association's work.
In addition, Dansk Skoleforening for Sydslesvig wishes to state expressly that the
principle of according equal status with publicly maintained schools - i.e. the principle
that since the mid-1980s had been the basis for subsidizing - was abandoned in
1997 as a result of Budget Support Acts and changes to the Schleswig-Holstein
Schools Act.
The various models for linking the overall subsidy to a fixed reference year (as has
been done since 1998) or linking the non-personnel costs to a fixed reference year,
combined with the dynamization of personnel costs, by analogy with civil service pay
(as has been the case since 2001) are asymmetric savings measures at the expense
of the Danish schools which in this way are cut off from the development of publicly
maintained schools. Similarly, unequal treatment is also evidenced by the deduction
of personnel costs incurred for so-called "non-curricular classes".
Unlike the providing bodies for publicly maintained schools (i.e. local authorities),
Dansk Skoleforening for Sydslesvig pays for more than two thirds - as opposed to
one third - of the costs of transportation of non-local pupils while a minority schools
system, on account of its specific features, is particularly cost-intensive. The aim envisaged by Dansk Skoleforening for Sydslesvig in this respect is that the Association
will pay for one third of the costs actually incurred for the transportation of its pupils
out of its own funds and thus will, in term of its own expenditure, be on an equal footing with public providing bodies.
In addition, the Association's administrative costs are not subsidizable at all, and
capital spending on new construction is covered only in part by a separate subsidy
granted by the Land.

E 2

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

In the last analysis, the aforementioned factors result in a cost-coverage deficit for
Dansk Skoleforening for Sydslesvig as compared with the costs incurred by publicly
maintained schools.
The negative development as regards the subsidies granted by Schleswig-Holstein
Land increases the asymmetry in terms of the subsidies provided by Germany and
Denmark, respectively.
The aim pursued by Dansk Skoleforening for Sydslesvig in the negotiations with the
inter-departmental working group in Kiel is to have the Danish schools recognized as
'regular schools' of the Danish minority, backed up by a real 100-percent arrangement providing for subsidizing of the Danish schools, taking account of all costs incurred by publicly maintained school for the given fiscal year, with subsequent setoff
of costs.
We welcome that Danish-language instruction at publicly maintained schools in
Schleswig-Holstein has been extended over the past few years. The minority shares
the view of the Regional Council for the Schleswig/Sønderjylland region, calling for
Danish classes to be introduced by 2006, as instruction in a second foreign language, from the 7th grade onwards at all secondary modern schools, Realschulen,
comprehensive schools and Gymnasien in the Schleswig region of the Land. Even
today, however, most of the majority population in the border region do not have a
command of the Danish language. Therefore, further development of Danish-language instruction at publicly maintained schools is urgently required, also in view of
the resultant improved chances on the transfrontier labour market.
This also implies, of course, that Danish-language education at Flensburg University
will have to be further developed so that a sufficient number of teachers are available
for teaching this language at the publicly maintained schools. With a view to enhancing the border region's attractiveness as part of the education system, we consider it an indispensable requisite that the joint transfrontier courses of studies at
Flensburg University and Syddansk Universitet [University of Southern Denmark] be
continued.
Article 9 regulates the use of documents and evidence in the regional and minority
languages. It is a positive fact that Danish documents can be used in relations with
judicial authorities. It should be laid down, however, that the costs incurred for translation of such documents will not have to be borne by the person submitting them.
The same goes for the obligation, as guaranteed by the Parties in Article 10, to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document in
these languages. While Section 82a, para. 2, of the Land Administration Act provides
for the general possibility to submit applications, petitions, records, deeds or other
E 3

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

documents in a foreign language, i.e. a language other than the official language, it
does not say anything about the extent to which the person submitting them might
have to meet the costs of such translations. Inclusion of a statutory regulation similar
to the Charter's "expense" provision would be desirable.
The Danish minority appreciates it that the Schleswig-Holstein Landtag, following the
SSW's initiative, unanimously passed a Resolution on taking job applicants' ability to
speak a regional or minority language into consideration as a recruitment criterion for
employment in the public service (Parliamentary Papers 15/82 and 15/459). In doing
so, the Landtag acted in the spirit of Article 10.
Article 10, sub-para. 4 (c), deals with the problem of compliance with requests from
public service employees having a knowledge of a regional or minority language to
be appointed in the territory in which that language is used. We would welcome implementation of this obligation in the form of a special promotional programme for
Danish speaking employees. This would make it possible specifically to increase the
number of Danish speaking public service employees in the Schleswig region of the
Land. Such a promotional programme would support the initiatives launched by a
number of local authorities - e.g. Flensburg municipality - which indicate their staff's
proficiency in the Danish language on office doorplates. In the Danish minority's view,
the possibility for its members to use their native language in relations with public
authorities continues to be a central element of the European Regional/Minority Language Charter.
Article 11 deals with the subject of "languages and the media". It is true that, since
the settlement area borders directly on Denmark, the members of this minority can
receive the entire broadcasting programme of the Kingdom of Denmark. However,
very little or nothing at all of these programmes deals with the everyday life of the
Danish minority in Schleswig-Holstein; as we see it, therefore, they do not meet the
requirements stipulated in Article 11 of the European Regional/Minority Language
Charter. Now as before, it is incumbent on the public authorities to encourage the
media to regularly broadcast radio and television programmes in the Danish language.
Although some progress has been made as regards broadcasting of Danish-language programmes by public broadcasting corporations, it is a fact that the visibility
of the Danish language in the media of Schleswig-Holstein remains at a low level.
Against this background, we would have liked to see the continuation of the GermanDanish magazine "Hier Her". In this regard, the Land Government should look into
the expediency of taking up the SSW's 1999 initiative on the "Promotion of Regional
or Minority Languages in the Media" (Parliamentary Paper 14/2597). The aim of this
initiative was, by amending the State Treaty on the Broadcasting Corporation NDR,
E 4

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

"to ensure that an adequate number of regular programmes, of adequate length, are
broadcast in the regional or minority languages used in the transmission area".
The Danish minority regrets that it is no longer represented on the bodies of Unabhängige Landesanstalt für das Rundfunkwesen (ULR) although a legislative initiative
of the SSW [South Schleswig Association of Voters] had called for such representation.
Given his/her cultural background, a representative of this minority would be quite an
asset to the ULR's work and would be in a position to bring up the subject of "regional
and minority languages in the media" for discussion in the competent bodies.
With reference to the provisions of Article 11, sub-para. 1 (e), regarding publication of
newspaper articles in the Danish language on a regular basis, it must be pointed out
that the bilingual daily "Flensborg Avis" is subsidized exclusively by the Danish state.
We do not know of any other daily papers in Schleswig-Holstein publishing articles in
the Danish language. Thus we see a deficit as regards implementation of the provisions under Article 11, sub-para. 1 (e), of the Charter.
Article 12 deals with cultural activities and facilities required for promoting the Danish language. In this regard, Sydslesvigsk Forening appreciates that the Land Government provides Land funds to support the Danish cultural providers Sydslesvigsk
Forening [South Schleswig Association], Jaruplund Højskole [Jarplund residential adult
education college] and Dansk Centralbibliotek for Sydslesvig [Danish Central Library]. It

must be pointed out, however, that the Land only funds a minor part of the overall
budget of the Danish cultural organizations - especially in the case of Dansk Centralbibliotek which receives Land funds only for 3 % of its expenses.
Moreover, Land subsidies have been continuously reduced over the past few years,
which has already had a negative impact on the promotion of the Danish language in
the northern region of the Land. In particular, the number of theatre performances in
the Danish language has decreased. In view of the Land's tight budget situation, we
wonder whether institution-based support with federal funds might help to consolidate
the funding of Danish cultural providers. We expect the support of the Land Government in this matter.

3. Significance, and outlook
The Danish minority lives in a region of cultural and linguistic diversity, which is considered a particular feature of our region of the Land not only by the minorities but
also by the majority population. In everyday life, there are no longer any rigid language borders; rather, our border region is characterized by the use, side by side, of
Danish, German, Low German, Frisian or Sønderjysk [South Jutish form of Danish].
E 5

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

This development - which had been impeded by the so-called "(Schleswig) border
conflict" - has evolved in the course of several centuries.
Preservation of this cultural heritage has increasingly come under pressure, not last
as a result of the global developments in the cultural and linguistic fields - for example, spreading of the English language especially among young people in matters
relating to the Internet and the media. This also affects the use of the minority language Danish in our region.
The Danish minority therefore takes the view that implementation of the European
Charter for Regional or Minority Languages can play a decisive future role in the
preservation and cultivation of the Danish language in the Schleswig region of the
Land.

E 6

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

Comments by the Frisian Council (Frasche Rädj)
on the Second State Report submitted by the
Federal Republic of Germany on the implementation of the
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
1.

The Charter's importance to the minority language North Frisian

The existence of the Regional/Minority Language Charter, its signing by the Federal
Government, and the active support given by the Land Government are, in many regards, extremely important to the minority language North Frisian. Generally it can be
said that the Bund [Federation], by its recognition of North Frisian as a minority language protected under the Charter, gives expression to a higher esteem for this language. Such recognition and appreciation benefit both sides. For North Frisian this
entails upgrading and promotion, and the Federal Republic of Germany officially rallies to a modern European minority policy which is also noted favourably in Europe.
The activities of the Land Government and the Landtag of Schleswig-Holstein, which
pursue open co-operation with the Frisians, must also be seen in this context. The
Frisians themselves have made it their duty to support the cause of their language
and will further intensify their pertinent efforts but - as citizens of the Federal Republic
of Germany - they also perceive the state per se as being under the obligation to
protect and promote the Frisian language. These endeavours should be continued in
an atmosphere of mutual trust between the state and the representatives of the
minority language Frisian, and the results of the co-operation pursued in SchleswigHolstein and the first tentative steps undertaken at the federal level show that this is
indeed possible.

2.

What has been achieved, and what is expected for the future

Article 8 formulates the conditions for Frisian classroom instruction, teacher training,
courses of university studies, and inclusion of Frisian in general education. The figures referring to Frisian instruction speak for themselves. Over the past ten years
and more, both the numbers of students and of class hours have markedly increased, and this development is also, and particularly, due to the Land Government's policy. However, the aim must be to consolidate this development and to ensure that Frisian will be sufficiently covered despite the envisaged introduction of foreign language instruction in elementary education. This means that [Frisian] instruction must be developed further, and teacher training at institutions of higher learning
must be improved. The modification of the Land Teacher Examination Regulations

E 7

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

has not improved the situation although the Land Government permitted a special
regulation for Frisian in this context.
In this respect, the Frisians expect concrete measures for the inclusion of the subject
'Frisian' in the general curricula of the Land. This would provide the basis for expanding Frisian instruction, and prospective teachers would be more strongly motivated to
include Frisian in their course of studies. Moreover, it would open up new possibilities
for fulfilling additional provisions of the Charter.
Also, the Frisians expect the Land Government to ensure - in the course of the future
negotiations with the colleges and universities concerned about target agreements that Frisian will be sufficiently included in higher education and, wherever possible,
Frisian studies will be extended.

Article 9 deals with the use of regional or minority languages before judicial authorities. In certain proceedings, documents and evidence may also be submitted in the
Frisian language. We do not know of any proceedings so far where Frisian-language
documents and evidence were submitted; however, also against the background of
experience gained in relations with administrative authorities, it would be a positive
step to lay down in advance that any necessary costs incurred for the translation of
such documents will not be charged to the respective applicant.
Article 10 deals with the use of regional or minority languages in dealings with administrative authorities and public services. First of all, it should be noted that particular scope exists in this respect to use the Frisian language. First experience has
shown that submission of documents drafted in a minority language is not always
unproblematic. While no problems were encountered in some cases, public authorities in a number of isolated cases required applicants to produce a German translation. In this regard, it would be expedient to instruct public authorities to make their
own arrangements for obtaining translations since otherwise the intention of the
relevant Charter provisions would be bypassed. Against this background, it would
surely be useful to allow administrative authorities to draft documents also in Frisian
and explicitly allow use of Frisian in dealings with authorities (at present, such permission exists only with regard to Low German); as a result, additional provisions of
the Charter would be fulfilled. In this context, the Frisian Council expressly notes that
the Schleswig-Holstein Landtag, with its Resolution on taking job applicants' ability to
speak a regional or minority language into consideration as a recruitment criterion for
employment in the public service (Parliamentary Papers 15/82 and 15/459), has already made a start in the right direction which must be followed up by further concrete provisions. Even more life could be brought into the Charter's provisions if em-

E 8

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

ployment of Frisian-speaking staff would be considered on a preferential basis in relation to other job applicants otherwise having the same professional qualifications.
The Frisian Council considers it an extremely positive fact that the obligation under
Article 10, para. 2 (g) - on the use or adoption of place-names [in the regional or
minority languages] - has subsequently been accepted as well. This provision and its
inclusion in Land law resulted in bilingual signposting in Nordfriesland as had been
the Frisians' wish all along. However, such signposting raises some problems since
every community must make a majority decision on the introduction of bilingual
place-name signs and, consequently, implementation depends on the initiative taken
locally and on the open-mindedness and awareness of the respective actors. In this
respect, it would be very helpful to have a supra-local obligatory regulation in future.
Similarly, Frisians would like to have bilingual signs in and on public buildings. While
this is not regulated by the Charter, it is closely related to the purport of Article 10,
para. 2 (g). The Frisians would welcome an arrangement similar to that existing for
Sorbian, under which - equally on the basis of an obligatory regulation - essential
signs in and on public buildings in Nordfriesland would have bilingual inscriptions in
German and Frisian. Accordingly, the Frisian Council expressly welcomes the fact
that an initiative launched by Members of the Landtag is put into practice by the
Landtag President so that a number of multilingual signs are now posted in the Landtag building.
Article 11 deals with the subject of "languages and the media". The Frisian Council
notes that the Land Government and the Landtag have tried in many ways to encourage broadcasters to offer programmes in the Frisian language. In instances,
these efforts have had positive results. In this context, the Frisian Council welcomes
the NDR's willingness to sponsor and train talented Frisian journalists. The NDR's
willingness to support the efforts of the Frisian ethnic group to promote their language is evidenced by the NDR's co-operation with the Open Channel, the inclusion
of a Frisian item on the homepage of Welle Nord, the organization of the competition
Ferteel iinjsen ["Tell a tale"], and the NDR's intention to air the maximum number of
authentic Frisian-language radio and TV items. Nevertheless, it must be pointed out
that representation of Frisian in the media at present is still entirely insufficient and by
far falls short of the standards achieved for minorities at the European level. A particular responsibility in this respect falls to Norddeutscher Rundfunk (NDR), a public
broadcasting corporation, over which also Schleswig-Holstein Land exercises indirect
control. The mass media, in particular, are extremely important as regards the general presence and qualitative development of [this] language, and this is why the
Frisians wish to bring about radical positive changes especially in this field. The legal
and material feasibility of such changes is evidenced by the situation of the Sorbs in
E 9

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

Brandenburg and Saxony who have a several-hours' daily radio programme and
regular - though short - TV programmes in the Sorbian language. Therefore the
Frisian Council suggests that the Land Government should aim at modifying the NDR
State Treaty along these lines and adjust the Land law provisions on private broadcasting accordingly. As a result, it would be possible to fulfil additional provisions of
the Charter.
All of the aims listed in Article 12 with regard to cultural activities and facilities have
been notified for Frisian. All of these provisions deal, more or less directly, with the
general scope for cultural promotion. In this field, considerable results have been obtained for the Frisians over the past few years, and this achievement to a major extent was due to the positive influence exerted by the Land Government and the Landtag. For the first time, Frisians receive project-oriented promotional funds from the
Bund [Federation], which initially amounted to 100,000 deutschmark and subsequently
was raised to 500,000 deutschmark (255,000 €). This made it possible - for the first
time - to carry out major projects for language promotion. At the same time it must be
noted that the amount of Land funds allocated to the Frisians has over the past few
years been essentially the same - which the Frisian Council also sees as a positive
signal in view of the Land's generally tight budget situation. Nobody will be surprised
at hearing that the Frisian Council would, of course, like to see the amount of such
financial support to be maintained and even increased, and in this regard draws attention to the fact that both the minorities in Germany and German minorities abroad
dispose of better, and better guaranteed, promotional funding. Therefore, the medium-term and long-term objectives are a significant increase of budget appropriations and their integration into budgetary law.
The Frisian Council notes that it is necessary to appropriate budgetary funds in the
short term in order to enable Nordfriisk Instituut in Bräist/Bredstedt at least to maintain its present activities. With its scholarly work and activities aimed at language
promotion, Nordfriisk Instituut fulfils public tasks requiring adequate public funding.
At present the scope of activities of Nordfriisk Instituut is, for financial reasons, in
danger of being curtailed.
In addition, the Frisian Council pursues the matter of having promotion of the Frisian
language included as a regular budgetary item in the federal budget so as to guarantee the annual project-oriented promotion.
With regard to economic and social life, a number of obligations under Article 13
have been notified, which aim at preventing discrimination against the Frisian language. In respect of this Article, the Frisian Council suggests that consideration be
given to a provision which would lead to active promotion of the Frisian language.
Paragraph 2, sub-para. (b), states that the use of regional or minority languages
E 10

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

should be promoted in the economic and social sectors directly under state control
[public sector]. However, this obligation has not been notified for Frisian. Given that the
Landtag, by passing the Resolution on taking job applicants' ability to speak a regional or minority language into consideration as a recruitment criterion for employment in the public service, has already made a start in this direction, it would seem
expedient to apply this Resolution also to the public sector as regards economic and
social activities. An examination of this matter might show that also the aforementioned provision of the Charter would then be fulfilled.
Article 14 deals with co-operation across borders and covers the obligation to apply
or conclude bilateral or multilateral agreements with States in which the same regional or minority language is used in identical or similar form. For Frisian, such cooperation could be envisaged with Westfriesland (Westerlauwersk Fryslân) in the
Netherlands. Also, the North Frisians wish to have more close, institutionalized cooperation between Schleswig-Holstein Land and the North Frisians, on the one hand,
and institutions of the province of Fryslân (Friesland), on the other hand. Such cooperation could lead to positive results in many fields and strengthen the present
inter-Frisian activities. The Frisian Council acknowledges the general open-mindedness of the Land Government in this matter, and views promotion of exchange
programmes between the German Friesland and the Netherlands region of Friesland
as a particularly important action field.

3.

Significance, and outlook

The impetus given by the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages is
inspiring for the Frisians and the majority population alike. Both sides are inspired by
the Charter to search for solutions to concrete problems in constant contact with
each other. An important element in this regard is the reporting requirement stipulated in Articles 15 and 16, which is additionally fulfilled by Schleswig-Holstein in a
particular way by means of its own Land Report. Also the very fact that the language
groups in Schleswig-Holstein were asked to comment on the Charter and its implementation shows that in this Land there is not just talking about languages, but that
an active language policy is pursued in co-ordination with the language groups. This
constitutes a valuable asset in itself, and indeed sets a commendable example at the
European level. At the federal level, the reporting requirement is met by the Implementation Conference and the resultant State Report as presented here for the
second time. However, a pertinent debate in the German Bundestag on the Report
would also be desirable.
In order to bring even more life into the Charter, it is important for the Frisians to be
given a certain financial scope for action. This requirement was already recognized
E 11

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

by the Land Government and the Landtag some time ago when they came out in
favour of a "Foundation for the Frisian People" and set up a capital stock to this end
at the Land level. Regrettably, the Bund's reaction to the idea of creating a "Foundation for the Frisian People" has so far been very reserved; however, the Frisian
Council continues to feel at one with the Land Government and the Landtag in pursuing the aim of establishing the "Foundation for the Frisian People".
At the federal level it will be important in future to sensitize the federal policy to the
minorities issue. The appointment of a Federal Commissioner for Matters Related to
National Minorities (Frisians, Danes, Sorbs, and Sinti and Roma) was an important
and commendable first step. In addition to this measure, the Frisian Council suggests
that a body be set up to deal with matters related to the national minorities (Frisians,
Danes, Sorbs, and Sinti and Roma) in Germany under the lead responsibility of the
President of the Bundestag. This [federal] body might be modeled on the Body established at the Schleswig-Holstein Landtag to deal with matters related to the Frisian
population group, which has been very successful and proved its effectiveness over
the past few years.
For more targeted and more effective use of federal funds in future, the Frisian Council suggests that the Federal Republic establish a language promotion plan for North
Frisian, which would list the objectives and future measures subsidized by the Federal Republic and, after a certain lapse of time, could be evaluated. By defining language-policy objectives and specifically implementing its planned measures, the Federal Republic could set European standards. Sooner or later, this will open up possibilities for fulfilling - and subsequently notifying - other provisions of the Charter in
addition to those already notified. This, in particular, would also be in accordance
with the dynamic character of the Charter for Regional and Minority Languages.
Spräkeårbe:

Language work:

Di goue wale as e forütseeting,

Good will is the basic requirement;

dåt müülj stoont fååst bai e kiming,

the goal stands fast on the horizon;

jü plooning wiset e wäi,

planning shows the way;

dåt konkreet hooneln brängt laawen,

concrete action brings life;

än goue waane schan åltens deertu;

and having good friends is always part
of it;

dan bloot gemiinsom wårt dåt müülj långd.

for only together will you reach this
goal.

In this spirit, the Frisian Council is looking forward to continued positive co-operation
at the federal and Land levels.
E 12

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

Comments by Domowina - Bund Lausitzer Sorben e.V.
on the Second State Report submitted by the
Federal Republic of Germany on the implementation of the
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

No. 109:
The decision taken by the Federal Government against the adoption of
specific legal provisions in view of implementing the undertakings accepted by the
Federal Republic of Germany - cf. the recommendation of the Committee of Ministers
in Part B.1, No. 105 above - is not comprehensible in our view.
1. adopt specific legal provisions, where these are still lacking, in order to implement the undertakings which Germany has entered into under the Charter;

The Federal Republic of Germany takes the view that additional legal regulations
would not offer any further legal advantage regarding implementation of the Charter's
provisions. In our view, the reason given for rejecting the above recommendation that such legal provisions would be "redundant" (i.e. would only duplicate existing
rules of law) - is disproved by the example of the closure of the Sorbian "Jurij
Chěžka" Mittelschule in Crostwitz.
Although the Federal Republic of Germany itself points out that in Germany the
Charter ranks as a federal law which takes precedence over subordinate law - including Land laws - and, as a matter of principle, is to be applied as the more specific
law overriding other federal laws, the Court's decision on the closure of the Sorbian
secondary technical school in Crostwitz was that the existing schools legislation took
precedence over the right to promotion under the Charter provisions.
This decision clearly demonstrates the lack of enforceable legal provisions and underpins the call for creating a legal framework of specific regulations on Sorbian
schools for the Sorbian settlement area in the Free State of Saxony and the traditional settlement area of the Sorbs/Wends in Brandenburg Land. With due regard to
the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, such legal provisions
should cover adequate resources for promoting and developing the Sorbian schools,
which will not give rise to the suspicion that they would curtail the budget for German
schools.

Updating of the Report should include the fact that the Children's DayNo. 360:
Care Centres Act of 18 December 2001 is the legal basis for imparting and cultivating
the Sorbian/Wendish language and culture in Sorbian and bilingual children's day-

E 13

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

care centres in the traditional settlement area of the Sorbs/Wends in Brandenburg
Land.
The Brandenburg Schools Act of 12 April 1996 was amended on 1 June 2001.

With regard to training and continuing education, it should be noted that
No. 364:
the Sorbian-language intensive courses offered by Domowina/WITAJ-Sprachzentrum
for educators have so far not been recognized by the Labour Office as a qualifying
measure eligible for continuing-education promotion. This means that, despite the
lack of trained bilingual educators, those educators who are temporarily out of work
cannot obtain the qualification for later employment with a Sorbian or WITAJ children's day-care centre or with a Sorbian or WITAJ group at a bilingual children's daycare centre.

No. 367:

The Report should be corrected to the effect that a total of seven children's day-care centres of Brandenburg Land give priority to imparting the Sorbian
(Wendish) language and culture: Two institutions give total-immersion instruction to
all of their children, while another 5 centres have one or two group/s learning the
Sorbian language by the immersion teaching method.

No. 368:

We have no information about the implementation of this plan.

No. 369:
While the financial structures laid down in the Act on Children's DayCare Centres provide a budgetary-law framework for children's day-care activities in
Brandenburg Land, promotion of WITAJ projects is not included. Restricted funding
schemes at the local government level leave little scope for the necessary additional
expenditure entailed by the implementation of bilingual education; often, such expenses cannot be funded at all. Brandenburg Land does not have adequate regulations along the lines of an Ordinance, enacted in the Free State of Saxony, on the
Act on Children's Day-Care Centres, which authorizes further measures covering
12.5 % of the additional payroll costs for Sorbian or German-Sorbian groups. There
is a compelling need for meeting the catch-up demand existing in this respect.

No. 370:
At the primary schools in the traditional settlement area of the Sorbs/
Wends, Lower Sorbian (Wendish) is offered as a regular subject. At present, some
1,000 pupils at 26 primary schools avail themselves of this offer.

E 14

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

The status of Sorbian-language education must be urgently enhanced.
No. 372:
As a result of the introduction, in the current school year, of the compulsory subject
'English' from grade 3 onwards and the fact that Sorbian instruction is, in most cases,
given at times outside the main school hours, parents will increasingly withdraw their
children from Sorbian lessons or will not enrol them for such instruction in the first
place. The increase in the number of hours per week for the subjects 'religious instruction / Lifestyle Choices, Moral Philosophy, Study of Religion' and 'English' will
exacerbate this situation even more.

It is true that the Bautzen Regional Schools Office, Division 2, examines
No. 377:
the scope for ensuring that pupils who have completed their pre-school education are
given the possibility to continue an education in Upper Sorbian, and on a case-bycase basis may approve such continued education. However, Article 8, para. 1, subpara. (b), on primary education, is not sufficiently taken into consideration. This refers, in particular, to the requirement stated under no. (iv): "to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii at least to those pupils whose families so request and
whose number is considered sufficient". In consideration of the phrase "pupils ...
whose number is considered sufficient", in particular, the competent Land Ministries
should lay down a general regulation. Families are confused when deciding on
whether their children should receive early bilingual education, because there are no
specific figures given on the number of pupils required for setting up a separate
group for bilingual instruction in a regional or minority language.

No. 381:

The Report should be corrected to the effect that, in addition to the
secondary technical schools in the area of the Regional Education Office, another 4
Mittelschulen offer Sorbian as a secondary language.

Sorbian instruction was given, in the 2002/2003 school year, at 33 (not
No. 384:
36) schools in Saxony. Overall, Sorbian instruction was attended by 2,534 pupils.
1254 pupils were instructed in their mother tongue Sorbian under the "Schulartübergreifendes Konzept" [Overarching Concept for All Types of School] for bilingual Sorbian-German schools.

No. 386:
The concern expressed by the Committee of Experts in Nos. 431 and
432 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] - with regard to the rationalisation
measures taken at Crostwitz secondary technical school - is absolutely justified. The
numbers of pupils specified by the Saxon State Ministry provide no exact information

E 15

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

about the current situation. This leads to irritation and misinterpretation on the side of
parents and the general public. The numbers of enrolled pupils given by the State
Ministry of Education and Cultural Affairs do not tally with the actual number of pupils
who would attend the Sorbian Mittelschule if it were continued. Moreover, the school
attendance statistics provided by the Regional Education Office only cover the number of pupils from the respective local community. Thus, no account is taken of nonlocal pupils commuting from neighbouring communities who want Sorbian-language
education but cannot take such Sorbian native-language courses at the primary
school in their respective school district.
So far, all pupils of the Sorbian elementary school in Crostwitz, after completion of
the 4th grade, went on to the 5th grade of the Sorbian Mittelschule of the same town.
Please find enclosed a set of figures; on the basis of the numbers of prospective
pupils given in that paper, a more positive development is to be expected.

No. 390:

The Institut für Sorabistik of Leipzig University offers a course of Sorbian Studies (Sorabistics) both for a Master's degree or for the teaching profession.
Despite the surplus number of teachers available in the area of the Bautzen Regional
Education Office, there is a lack of trained teachers who are Sorbian native speakers
at Sorbian schools and at schools offering Sorbian instruction. The Saxon State Ministry of Education and Cultural Affairs authorized a one-year Sorbian follow-up training course for elementary school teachers who are not sufficiently proficient in the
Sorbian language. However, this follow-up training which was taken up in September
2003 is only an interim solution. Elementary school teachers with optimum training
undergone at appropriate colleges and universities are a sine qua non for optimum
instruction at Sorbian schools. In view of a surplus number of applicants for university
places for the course of study for primary school teachers, Leipzig University introduced a limited admissions policy (Numerus clausus).
If this mandatory limitation of access to university (Numerus clausus) is applied also
to university applicants for a major or minor in Sorbian, this might result in the situation that, on account of their small number, none of them would achieve the required
Abitur [A-level] average grade required for admission, and thus all would be refused
admission to a university or college. A specific regulation must be laid down for the
course of study for elementary school teachers with a major or minor in Sorbian. To
this end, the responsible Saxon State Ministry of Education and Cultural Affairs
should modify the pertinent legal provisions accordingly and implement this modification in co-ordination with the Saxon State Ministry of Science and Arts so that a
large number of elementary school teachers can be trained for their employment with

E 16

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

bilingual Sorbian-German schools and with schools offering bilingual Sorbian-German instruction.

Attention is drawn to the fact that, despite resource sharing by the two
No. 395:
universities of Potsdam and Leipzig, the Institut für Sorabistik of Leipzig University
cannot ensure an adequate level of university/college training in Lower Sorbian on
account of the Institute's present staffing level, especially as concerns teacher training with particular reference to practical language use.

Nos. 417/419/421: The supervisory body designed to monitor the measures taken in
developing the education in Upper Sorbian and to draw up periodic reports on its
findings - as called for by the Committee of Experts under No. 438 of the Monitoring
Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] - does not exist in this form. The respective desk officers
of the Regional Education Office deal with Sorbian school matters in addition to their
area of responsibility. The required and necessary in-depth monitoring, control and
reporting tasks by far exceed the available work capacities. We recommend and request that expert [technical] supervision both for bilingual Sorbian-German schools
and bilingual Sorbian-German and Sorbian education at other schools should be
transferred by the supreme supervisory school authority to a division of the Bautzen
Educational Office staffed with Sorbian specialized personnel and reporting directly
to the Ministry of Education and Cultural Affairs. Given the Sorbs' right to be heard (in
decision-making), this division should independently regulate the Sorbian school
matters in consultation with the legitimate representative groups of the Sorbs and in
co-ordination with the Ministry of Education and Cultural Affairs. In this way it can be
ensured that Sorbian, as a regular classroom subject among the overall set of
subjects covered by the breakdown of approved teaching periods, and the subjects
taught in Sorbian will receive specific and practice-oriented scholarly attention and
support. All documents concerning Sorbian schools and Sorbian instruction must be
published in bilingual Sorbian-German versions.

No. 420:
We request amendment of the Report to the effect that the established
project group works in close co-operation with Sorbischer Schulverein e.V. and the
WITAJ-Sprachzentrum of Domowina - Bund Lausitzer Sorben e.V.

A working group set up by the federal executive committee of Domowina - Bund Lausitzer Sorben e.V. developed a proposition paper setting out requirements for upholding the Sorbs' interests in the field of education, with due regard to the Sorbs' right to
be heard in decision-making. In consultation with the Saxon State Ministry of EducaE 17

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

tion and Cultural Affairs and representatives of the parliamentary groups of the
Saxon Landtag, this paper will have to be discussed, and a concept for the preservation of the remaining network of Sorbian schools, which is indispensable for the continued existence of the Sorbian people, will have to be developed. The decision on
the network of Sorbian schools should be incumbent on the legitimate representatives of the Sorbs' interests, in consultation with the Saxon Ministry of Education and
Cultural Affairs.

E 18

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

Comments by the Zentralrat deutscher Sinti und Roma
on the Second State Report submitted by Germany
on the Regional/Minority Language Charter

1. General criticism / Statements submitted to the Council of Europe Committee of Experts in accordance with Article 16, paragraphs 2 and 3, of the
Charter
The Central Council of German Sinti and Roma (Zentralrat Deutscher Sinti and
Roma) requests the Committee of Experts (pursuant to Article 16, paras. 2 and 3, of
the Regional/Minority Language Charter) to recommend that the Federal Republic
of Germany amend the practice pursued so far with regard to the points made under
(a) and (b) below:
(a)
The Central Council of German Sinti and Roma criticizes the procedure applied by
the German Federal Government to the involvement of the respective language
groups in the implementation of the Regional/Minority Language Charter. In particular, this criticism refers to the Charter Implementation Conferences (so-called "Federation/Länder Conferences") organized at regular intervals by the German Federal
Ministry of the Interior. Participation in these conferences includes representatives of
the Governments of all federal Länder, and usually representatives of the Council of
Europe are present as well. As claimed by the Federal Government in its State Report (No. 59 above), "representatives of the umbrella organizations of these language
groups and their scholarly institutions" are also among the participants.
Actually however, the Land Associations of German Sinti and Roma, i.e. organizations supported by the Government of the respective Land, have so far been excluded from participation in these conferences. The only reasons given by the Federal Government refer to organizational aspects (lack of space); this argument, however, does not hold in this respect (room for one or two representative/s each of the
nine Land Associations). An initiative to obtain involvement of the Sinti and Roma
Land Associations prior to the last Implementation Conference held on 25 - 26
June 2002 in preparation of the drafting of the present State Report was rejected by
the Federal Ministry of the Interior and the Federal Government Commissioner for
Matters Related to National Minorities in Germany. Instead, the number of participating representatives of the Central Council was raised from two to four.
E 19

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

The Central Council of German Sinti and Roma and the Land Associations of German Sinti and Roma had suggested changes to the practice pursued so far, in view
of the substance-related and political requirement for proper implementation of the
Charter. This is based on the fact that the Federation/Länder Conferences with the
language groups are the only forum of this kind where also the Land Associations of
German Sinti and Roma would have an opportunity for talks and exchanges with the
various Land Governments on the varying implementation policies of the Länder. In
addition to the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma - which, as the federal association, is responsible for implementing the Charter which is a European treaty
concluded with the Federal Republic of Germany - the Land Associations themselves
deal with the implementation of various provisions of the Charter. This applies, in particular, to the areas of culture, media and education where the Länder, under the
German Basic Law, have their own - and, in part, exclusive - jurisdiction. The need
for participation arises, in particular, in the federal state of Hesse which now recognized and ratified the Romany language under Part III of the Charter - a measure expressly welcomed by the Central Council. However, all other Land Associations of
German Sinti and Roma must be involved as well since they also call upon their respective Land Government to recognize the quorum of provisions under Part III of the
Charter; these Land Governments mostly attend the Implementation Conference primarily on account of the protection of Romany.
For instance, direct talks about Part III of the Charter - although requested by the respective Associations - were refused by the Land Governments of Rhineland-Palatinate, Bremen and North-Rhine/Westphalia in 1999 and 2000. In this respect, the
situation in the various federal states is quite different. Therefore it is necessary to
make it possible for representatives of the Land Associations concerned to take part
in direct discussions during the Implementation Conferences.

(b)
Also, the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma criticizes the fact that in some
cases relevant information was not included in the main body of the State Report
(Parts A to D) although the Council had addressed an express request to this effect
to the Federal Ministry of the Interior, i.e. the department with lead responsibility for
this matter. Irrespective of the opportunity given to language groups to have their
own comments included in Part E, the State Report proper - for which the Fedreal
Government takes responsibility - must be accurate (in terms of substance) and
complete as regards all important processes in connection with the Charter's implementation. Otherwise, a distorted picture would form the basis of the appraisal carE 20

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

ried out by the Committee of Experts. In addition to the necessary additions listed
below with specific reference to some of the numbered paragraphs of the State Report, particular attention is drawn to the following example:
Under No. 93 [Nos. 92 and 93] of the present State Report, the Federal Government with reference to the Sinti and Roma - introduces terms of a marginalizing jargon,
such as "representatives of tribes" and "millennia-old taboo system". Nor are these
terms identified as quotations (by the insertion of quotation marks). At the same time,
the Federal Government refuses to include a critical annotation by the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma on this point. Such practices, too, impart incorrect
ideas about the German Sinti and Roma.
A recommendation should be addressed to the Federal Government in view of correcting such course of action.

2.

Comments on specific numbered paragraphs (Nos.) of the State Report

No. 16
In autumn 2001, the Committee of Experts - preparing its Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG
(2002) 4 final] on the First State Report submitted by Germany - visited local facilities of
the Sorbian minority in Brandenburg and Saxony and of the Danish and Frisian
minorities in Schleswig-Holstein. At the time, the Central Council of German Sinti and
Roma asked the Committee also to visit the Dokumentations- und Kulturzentrum
Deutscher Sinti und Roma and the Central Council in Heidelberg so as to arrive at an
accurate evaluation with regard to German Romany (see also the following comments on No. 102).

No. 102
On 14 November 2001, the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma provided the
Committee of Experts with written comments on the First State Report, together with
additional material concerning recognition, as requested by a number of federal
states, of 39 protective provisions under Part III of the Charter. Subsequently, in a
letter dated 5 December 2002, the Head of Directorate-General I - Legal Affairs,
Philip Blair, informed the Central Council that the Committee would take account of
this information in its evaluation and its report on the situation of the German Romany language, but that it would not be possible for the Committee of Experts to visit
E 21

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

the Documentation Centre of German Sinti and Roma originally planned to take
place on 11 December 2001. The Central Council criticizes that the Monitoring Report on Germany did not contain comments on the implementation of the specific
provisions on the protection of the Romany language of the German Sinti and Roma
while these items were considered as "fulfilled" or "formally fulfilled" for the other regional or minority languages.

No. 104
The overall concept and the contents of the brochure on the situation of national
minorities in Germany should, before going into print, be co-ordinated with the organizations of the national minorities.

No. 109
The negative view taken by the Federal Government, i.e. that further legal regulations would be "redundant" (i.e. would only duplicate existing rules of law) is seen by
the language minorities as disproved by the example described in Nos. 107 and 108
with regard to Sorbian schools. In this case, the Court found that the existing schools
legislation of Saxony Land took precedence over the Sorbian minority's right to promotion under the Charter's provisions. The Central Council criticizes that, on the one
hand, the Federal Republic of Germany ratifies international treaties implying the obligation to regulate the substance of such instruments in specific legislation and, on
the other hand, rejects creation of such legal provisions as a "flood of legal rules".
With reference to No. 77 of the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final] which states
that the Sinti and Roma are particularly affected by discriminating practices, the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma points out that creation of specific legal provisions would not only be necessary in Saxony in respect of the Sorbian language, but
throughout Germany for the protection of minorities against racism and discrimination. In view of the prejudice-fomenting practice that, at the instance of public authorities, media reports regularly identify persons charged with an offence as members of
a given minority, the organizations of the four national minorities call for a ban on discrimination to be included in civil service law and media law (see also No. 178), as
well as a regulation prohibiting data collection by public authorities specifically on the
members of a minority, and legal protection against right-wing extremist outrages.
Also, legal provisions in civil law to prevent and punish racist practices directed
against minorities are urgently needed. To give an example: the "Advisory Board" of
E 22

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

a group of condo owners in Speyer (Rhineland-Palatinate) wrote to one of the owners with reference to the "granting of a new lease" in a letter of 18 October 2002: "On
the basis of my own observations, I learnt that you plan to rent your apartment to a
Gypsy family. In this context, other owners obviously fear that the family - given their
origin and way of life - will not integrate themselves into the residents' established
house order and that domestic peace will be seriously disturbed."
As the Central Council sees it, the discussion panels and dialogues mentioned under
"2. Political education and schools" (Nos. 179 - 184) or the Round Tables and intellectual/political discussions described under "5. Government initiatives" [Nos. 189
seqq.] cannot be a substitute for the legal provisions yet to be established.

No. 188
In contrast to other national minorities, representatives of the German Sinti and
Roma continue to be excluded from membership on all supervisory bodies for both
public-service and private radio and TV broadcasting (Broadcasting Councils and
Landesmedienanstalten [Land supervisory authorities for private broadcasters]) although this
is the minority that is particularly victimized and targeted by the existing forms of
racism and prejudice. In the view of the Central Council, this is a blatant violation of
the Charter's principles.

No. 203
Following the recommendation of the Central Council of 31 May 2001 concerning a
letter to be sent by the Land Associations of German Sinti and Roma to the respective heads of government of the Länder on the last amendment of the Act Ratifying
the Charter, the Land Associations of Rhineland-Palatinate, Baden-Wurttemberg,
North-Rhine/Westphalia, Bremen, Bavaria and Saarland adopted the proposed letter
worded as follows:
"Our Land Association strongly supports implementation of the decision of the
Hessian Cabinet of 14 July 1998 as a follow-up to the amendment of the Act
Ratifying the Charter. You are kindly requested to include these 35 provisions of
Part III and, if possible, the additional four points proposed by us in that amendment with regard to our Land. For the 35 provisions, cf. the 'Declaration ... in
preparation of a notication ... to the Council of Europe' forwarded by the Federal
Ministry of the Interior on 16 July 1998 to the Ländervertretung. The additional
four provisions are: Art. 10, para. 4 (b); Art. 11, para. 3; Art. 12, para. 1 (e); and
Art. 13, para. 1 (b)."
For Rhineland-Palatinate, Minister-President Beck on 27 June 2001 wrote a letter of
refusal informing the Land Association, without any further reasons given, that the
E 23

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

Land Government was not prepared to accept any provisions of Part III of the Charter
in addition to the 18 accepted so far by the Federal Government and the 6 accepted
by the Land Government. As the Central Council and the Land Association - after the
Minister-President had repeatedly promised to have talks with these bodies - were
not prepared to accept that refusal, they held a press conference at the RhinelandPalatinate Landtag in Mainz on 27 July 2001. At the press conference, the Central
Council issued a press release describing the Land Government's negative attitude.
This press release was sent to the Committee of Experts of the Council of Europe on
14 November 2001. During a constructive discussion with the Land Association in
Mainz on 12 September 2003, the Head of the State Chancellery, State Secretary
Stadelmaier, promised to have further talks with the Land Association - also with the
participation of the Central Council - to discuss the Charter's implementation and
possible acceptance of additional protective provisions of Part III of the Charter with
regard to the Romany language in Rhineland-Palatinate. (see also comments below
on No. 822)
On the other hand, developments in Baden-Wurttemberg have been of a more constructive nature. On the basis of the first two expert talks in 1998 and in May 2000,
the Head of the State Chancellery and the Minister of Culture, Education, and Church
Affairs wrote a letter to inform the Central Council that, in each case, an additional
number of five provisions of Part III of the Regional/Minority Language Charter would
be accepted, bringing the original 21 provisions to the present number of 31. Regarding the acceptance of another four provisions required for ratification, the Central
Council on 26 July 2001 had an expert discussion at the Ministry of Justice; this is
still to be followed by the pertinent discussion between the Baden-Wurttemberg Land
Ministry of the Interior and representatives of the Central Council and the Land Association of German Sinti and Roma.
As regards North-Rhine/Westphalia, however, the Office of the Head of the State
Chancellery on 8 July 2001 sent a negative answer, with no further reasons given, to
the North-Rhine/Westphalia Land Association of German Sinti and Roma in Düsseldorf. In addition to the 18 provisions falling under federal jurisdiction, the Land at
present accepts three provisions coming within the Land's purview. After 8 July 2001,
neither the competent departments nor the political leadership of the Land Government promised to have talks about any additional provisions of Part III of the Charter.
The Central Council and the Land Association do not accept this refusal.

E 24

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

Also the Land Association of Bremen received a negative answer, without any further
reasons given, from the Senate Chancellery on 15 August 2001. Despite repeated
initiatives, the Land of Bremen has so far not been prepared to have talks with the
Land Association and the Central Council on the 39 provisions of Part III of the
Charter as proposed for the quorum. An expert discussion initially promised by Bremen's Mayor Scherf on 1 November 1999 subsequently was cancelled by the Head
of the Senate Chancellery. The Central Council has never received a response from
the Head of the Senate Chancellery to its preparatory letter concerning the planned
expert discussion in Bremen and to its phone calls seeking information on the matter.
For Bavaria, the Head of the State Chancellery in a letter of 18 July 2001 provided
the information that the Bavarian Land Government did not see any scope for accepting more than the 18 provisions coming within the federal purview. The Central
Council criticized this as an incorrect statement since, during earlier talks with representatives of the Central Council and the Land Association of German Sinti and
Roma, officials of the Ministry of Education and Cultural Affairs, which is responsible
for matters related to the Charter, had declared that, while all of the provisions proposed for the quorum (especially those under Art. 8 - Education) were practicable in
Bavaria and the Land did indeed promote them, Bavaria was "not prepared to enter
into an undertaking in this respect". In another, more recent letter of 8 February 2002
to the Chairman of the Land Association, the Head of the State Chancellery in the
meantime provided the clarification that acceptance of additional provisions would
not be refused as a matter of principle. The Head of the Chancellery said that the
Bavarian Land Goverment was prepared to "confirm what in Bavaria can be of direct
applicability" but that acceptance of pertinent obligations would, on principle, have to
be made conditional on the tackling of actual implementation of the various stipulations. This prompted the Land Assocation, in a letter of 1 July 2003 to the responsible
State Secretary of the Bavarian Ministry of Education and Cultural Affairs, to apply for
promotional funding of practical measures implementing Article 8. The Land Association wants to organize homework assistance and catch-up tuition groups for Sinti and
Roma children with teachers belonging to the minority at various schools in Nürnberg, as a first step, and later also in other towns and cities of Bavaria. (see also
No. 93)
For the Saarland, the State Chancellery on 25 July 2001 wrote a letter informing the
Land Association, without any further reasons given, that it did not see any scope for
the acceptance of provisions in addition to the 18 coming within the federal purview.
Nor have the Länder of Hamburg, Lower Saxony, Schleswig-Holstein and Berlin so
far been prepared to recognize the quorum of 35 provisions.
E 25

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

At a meeting chaired by Bundesrat President Dr. Böhmer on 20 December 2002, a
delegation of the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma, including several Holocaust survivors, and representatives of several Land Governments, including Mr.
Beck and Mr. Scherf, the Minister-Presidents of Rhineland-Palatinate and Bremen,
respectively, discussed the requirement for acceptance of the quorum of 35 protective provisions of Part III of the Charter for the German Romany language in other
Länder following the example set by the Land of Hesse. The Central Council asked
the Bundesrat, i.e. the chamber of the Länder, to pass a resolution on the implementation of these rights of minorities. On 29 January 2003, the Central Council addressed another letter on the subject to the Minister-Presidents of all federal states, and
did not receive any positive answers.

No. 204
The statement in the State Report that so-called "tribes" of German Sinti and an unspecified number of associations co-operate within the Sinti Allianz Deutschland is
incorrect or gives a wrong impression. The Lower Saxony and Hamburg Land Associations, which are not affiliated to the Central Council, and the Cologne-based association ROM e.V. - which are supported by the respective Land Governments - are
not members of the Allianz, either, and decline co-operation with this Alliance. This
association, which was founded as late as in February 2000 by 19 individuals from
the Cologne/Dortmund area, disseminated among government agencies the allegation that the Council of Europe Framework Convention for the Protection of National
Minorities recalled the Nazi "Laws on Citizenship and Race", i.e. the so-called "Nuremberg Racial Laws" of 1935. This is just as untenable as the Alliance's allegation,
as quoted in the State Report, that protection of the Romany language under the
Charter violated an alleged "millennia-old taboo system". In the view of the Central Council, the Alliance's intention to have the rights to protection and preservation
of their language withheld from other members of the minority is in contradiction to
the Charter's spirit and tasks. Therefore, it cannot be accepted that such an association is invited to the Implementation Conferences while the Land Associations, which
are engaged in implementing the Charter and the Framework Convention, are not
invited.

No. 235
Initially, acceptance of Art. 11, para. 3, had initially been envisaged for the ratification
of Part III of the Charter with regard to the Danish, Sorbian and Low German languages, but had then - only after the Central Council had requested acceptance of
this Article for the German Romany language as well - been declared "unconstituE 26

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

tional" and been cancelled by the Federal Ministry of the Interior. On this point, the
Central Council submitted an opposing expert opinion drafted by the former vicepresident of the Federal Constitutional Court, Prof. Dr. E.G. Mahrenholz. Article 11,
para. 3, of the Charter calls upon the Parties to ensure that "the interests" of linguistic
minorities "are represented or taken into account within ... bodies ... with responsibility for guaranteeing the freedom and pluralism of the media".
No. 716
In letters to Finance Minister Mittler of 18 June 2003 and to the Minister for Labour
and Social Affairs, Ms. Malu Dreyer, of 10 July 2003, the Rhineland-Palatinate Land
Association of German Sinti and Roma - in view of the initiatives of Sinti families asked for additional funding support from the Land Government for the practical implementation of Art. 8 of the Charta - "Education" - and of Art. 14 of the Framework
Convention. Minister Mittler agreed to talks to be held on 30 July 2003. Also with
reference to Art. 8 of the Charter and Art. 14 of the Framework Convention, the Land
Association on 10 July 2003 wrote to the new Head of the State Chancellery of
Rhineland-Palatinate Land, State Secretary Stadelmaier, about the planned initiatives for Sinti and Roma children. (For the pertinent initiatives, cf. No. 93)

No. 777
In its letter to the Minister-President, the Central Council made the following specific
remarks: "The two provisions of Art. 10, para. 1, sub-para. (a) (v), and para. 2, subpara. (b), under which it shall be ensured that documents and applications in a regional or minority language may be submitted to all public authorities, was criticized
by the Central Council ... also with regard to Low German, because there are no
such applications, for example, for driving licences, identity cards, or building permits." Also, the members of the minorities concerned do not want this since they use
the official language German for such applications. In its letter to the Minister-President, the Central Council termed notification of these provisions of the Charter for
Romany as "not acceptable and impracticable". Nor do the Central Council, the
Documentation Centre and the Land Associations have any interpreters for courts or
other public authorities, and also in future do not want any.
In a letter of 26 January 1999 to the Minister-President, the Central Council repudiated the 'discrimination' argument by pointing out that the Land Government's refusal to accept the quorum of at least 35 protective provisions of Part III of the Charter
for Romany in Schleswig-Holstein amounted to discrimination against the minority
language Romany in comparison with the other minority languages (Danish, Frisian,
Low German).

E 27

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

No. 822
The present State Report draws a positive picture of cultural and language promotion
in the Land of Rhineland-Palatinate. No mention is made of the information provided
by the Land Association of German Sinti and Roma pointing out that such support is
not granted with reference to the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages and is not intended for the preservation of Romany, but that the grants amounting to only 13,600.00 € so far - were allocated for "expenditure on educational
work and public events". However, as directed by a letter of the Minister for Labour
and Social Affairs of 3 February 2003, this amount had to be cut down to only
5,500.00 € per year. The Minister's letter also listed further cuts, referred to as a "reduction" of the allegedly "voluntary" Land subsidy. The Land Association therefore
asked the Minister for a meeting to discuss these cuts which will seriously impairm
the anti-discrimination and public information activities.
In view of the announced cutback in Land promotional funds and in order to support
a new initiative related to the Charter, the Land Association on 10 July 2003 asked
the new Head of the State Chancellery of Rhineland-Palatinate, State Secretary Stadelmaier, for a meeting to discuss a different political decision. This meeting took
place at the State Chancellery in Mainz on 12 September 2003 with representatives
of the Central Council and a delegation of Holocaust survivors from various towns of
Rhineland-Palatinate. The Head of the State Chancellery promised to have further
talks with the Land Association - also with the participation of the Central Council - to
discuss the Charter's implementation and possible acceptance of additional protective provisions of Part III of the Charter with regard to the Romany language of the
German Sinti and Roma in Rhineland-Palatinate. State Secretary Stadelmaier said
that, together with the Minister for Social Affairs, he would look into the possibility of
averting the reduction of promotional funding for the Land Association.

E 28

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

Comments by the Sinti Allianz Deutschland e.V.
on the Second State Report submitted by the Federal Republic of Germany

No. 33
We should like to point out that no governmental estimates or surveys are available
on the number of users of Rrommenes (the Romany language) of the Sinti or Roma.
Therefore, the numbers given in the Report - 60,000 Sinti and 10,000 Roma - are
random figures which, on the basis of the experience of the counselling bureaus of the Sinti Allianz Deutschland, are not correct. In the German cities
alone, the number of Sinti users of Romany is significantly higher as shown by
the estimates obtained by the Sinti Allianz Deutschland and other independent
Sinti associations in the context of their social work and counselling bureaus.
No. 34
The statement in No. 34 - that the Sinti's Rrommenes (Rromani language) can historically be assigned to quite a number of small regions in Germany - is not correct.
According to their own traditions, the Romany language of the Sinti (Sintetikes) has
been spoken for about 1000 years in the entire German speech area and in the
Western European countries. Documentary evidence of this - inter alia, birth and
marriage certificates and extracts from parish registers and population (identification)
registers - dates back to 600 years ago.
The Rrommenes language of the German Romm (Lowara, Geldeari, and others) who, for political reasons, are called 'Roma'/'Rroma' and immigrated to the German
Reich in the middle of the 19th Century - was also spoken in all German-speaking
regions.
This is also quite clear from other passages of the State Report, e.g. No. 35,
No. 216:
"The German Sinti and Roma are dispersed more or less throughout Germany, while no major number
of them - in quantitative terms comparable to those of the aforementioned groups - is known to live in
one particular place or region."

and
No. 744:
"As regards imparting of knowledge of the history and culture of the German Sinti and Roma who live
dispersed in almost all parts of the Federal Republic, ..."

E 29

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

Thus the Sinti language and the language of the German Romm (Roma) have been,
and still are, spoken throughout the Federal Republic and consequently are not territorial languages.
The statement "In everyday life, however, they are still subject to ... This also is one
of the reasons why the Romany language is rarely used in public" is not true for the
Sinti, in particular, since the Sinti perceive their language as a characteristic element
of their identity and, in conformity with their cultural legal system, are not allowed to
use it in the public sphere, but may speak it only within their community. In relations
with others, of course, they use the German language.
Giving outsiders access to their language or using it in the public sphere (public authorities, the judiciary, the media, or in the entire field of education) is perceived by the
Sinti as jeopardizing and violating their cultural heritage which finds expression in the
language.
For the reasons given above, the Sinti Allianz Deutschland requests the Länder to
abstain from entering into any additional obligations or adopting promotional measures with regard to this language because the Sinti's language has an oral tradition
and may, under the Sinti's millennia-old legal system, be passed on only orally.
No. 87
The priority tasks listed here are shared by the representative groups of all German
Gypsies. They are pursued in the same way by the Sinti Allianz Deutschland e.V., its
Land and local associations, and the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma.
Thus, the Sinti Allianz Deutschland - with regard to the creation, in Berlin, of the central memorial for European Gypsies persecuted by the Nazi regime - plead for a dedication that will not only take account of the fate of the persecuted Sinti and Roma (as
stipulated by the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma), but will also pay tribute
to the victims among all affected Gypsy peoples of Europe, e.g. the [French] Manush,
[Spanish] Kalé, and others.
No. 88
In the view of those Sinti who are represented by the Sinti Allianz Deutschland, a particular problem arises from the organizational structure and legal basis of the Documentation and Cultural Centre of German Sinti and Roma in Heidelberg.
The Central Council uses the Centre as a place of work and as a platform for projecting an image and publicizing political claims and declarations for the entire Gypsy

E 30

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

population of Germany, without any co-ordination with the representatives of our umbrella organization, the Sinti Allianz Deutschland.
The Centre is (as far as is known) subsidized by the Federal Government - 90 % and by Baden-Wurttemberg Land - 10 % -, and in staffing and technical terms is
closely interlinked with the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma.
The priority tasks of the Documentation and Cultural Centre refer to activities designed to benefit national minorities as a whole and the ethnic group of German Gypsies.
Consequently it must be assured that this Documentation and Cultural Centre caters
to the interests of all groups, and not exclusively to those of one particular association.
The reason underlying our demand put forward in the preceding paragraph is that our
population group is presented by the Documentation and Cultural Centre in a way reflecting neither the wish of the majority of Gypsies nor the real situation.
To give just one example: the description of the Sinti and Roma as one ethnic group or
one national minority with a shared language and culture is tantamount to negating the
Sinti's taboo system, which is rooted in the Sinti culture, and the related purity and
avoidance rules, precepts and prohibitions - which are cultural laws governing the Sinti's
social and physical life.
For the Sinti this implies that the taboo system is disregarded, in particular, in the case
of socially/economically disadvantaged persons with regard to housing and job placement, of recipients of social assistance benefits, and prison inmates, and that consequently the Sinti's economic subsistence is threatened and Sinti identity is jeopardized.
These cultural lawsof the Sinti are not valid for the Roma.
Moreover, despite the actual historical facts, the millennia-old history of the Sinti in Germany is reduced to their fate under the Nazi dictatorship.
(On this point, we refer to the Internet address of the Documentation and Cultural
Centre: http:/www.sintiundroma.de/Home.htm)
Also, the Documentation and Cultural Centre reduces the Gypsy victims of National
Socialism to the Sinti and Roma. No mention is made of the persecution of the victi-

E 31

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

mized Kale, Manush and other groups, and the Central Council of German Sinti
and Roma even negates the existence of these Gypsy peoples.
The Documentation and Cultural Centre provides the Central Council of German Sinti
and Roma with a platform for presenting priority aspects - which are important only from
the Council's point of view - of the documentation on, and of the history and culture of,
the Sinti.
The Sinti Allianz Deutschland does not have any comparable institution subsidized by
the Bund [Federal Government] for presenting the overall historic events of importance to
the Alliance, elucidating the Sinti's precepts and prohibitions, originally based on religious tenets, and imparting the Sinti's particular culture so as to achieve that it will be
recognized by state institutions as a factor relevant to decision-making.
An important aspect of our work is not only to describe the negative events in our history in Germany and the concomitant assignment of guilt and blame, but also to present
the positive aspects and the peaceful co-existence of the majority and minority populations with the aim of overcoming enemy stereotypes on both sides and creating possibilities for reconciliation.
For the reasons stated above, the Sinti Allianz Deutschland advocates that the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma should cease to be the sole entity responsible
for the Documentation and Cultural Centre and that, instead, the Centre should be
transformed into a public law foundation or be placed under the responsibility of a
free nonprofit institution so that in future steps will be taken against a one-sided presentation of the history, the current state of affairs and monopolization of the Documentation and Cultural Centre, and in order to ensure that the Sinti Allianz Deutschland and possibly other pluralistic representatives of Gypsies will be able to have
their share in the activities of presentation, shaping of policy, and decision-making.
No. 90
Reference is made to the comments above on No. 88. This applies, in particular, to
the provision of public funds for financing staff posts established at the umbrella organizations.

E 32

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

Comments by the group of Low German speakers
[Federal Council for Low German]

on the Second State Report submitted by the Federal Republic of
Germany on the Implementation of the Regional/Minority Language
Charter
The Second State Report of the Federal Republic of Germany on the European
Charter for Regional or Minority Languages is an impressive and absolutely essential
instrument on the way to progressive implementation of the undertakings entered into
by the federal states (Länder). With the notified provisions, the Länder identified the
actual status of the measures taken to promote the respective languages at the time
of accession to the Charter; this status has, for the first time, been officially established in the First State Report. These initial statements are to be considered as
benchmark requirements that must be maintained as the minimum standards. Proceeding from the concept of language promotion, the practical scope for implementation must be widened.
The State Report clearly shows that the federal states have given intensive thought
to the suggestions and the criticism contained in the Monitoring Report [MIN-LANG (2002)
4 final] of the Committee of Experts. We also welcome the fact that, for the first time,

the authorized representatives of the group of Low German speakers were involved
in the related procedure. The Länder's responses clearly show that they have a
strong interest in a constructive discourse and in developing common envisaged objectives with the participation of governmental and non-governmental actors.
With regard to the participation of the representatives of Low German in the procedures leading up to the Second State Report, a number of organizational difficulties
arose which should, wherever possible, be remedied in future. The Bundesrat für
Niederdeutsch [Bundesraat för Nedderdüütsch; Federal Council for Low German] has a federal
structure, composed of voluntary delegates from eight Länder. This structure affects
the Council's working practices and, above all, its various time schedules. On account of the large variety of subjects covered and the given significant regional
variations, critical monitoring of the State Report generally requires checkback and
feedback among the representatives of the various Länder. Due to the little time
available under this particular procedure, this proved to be problematic in several
instances. Moreover, extraordinary organizational efforts were expected of the executive secretariat of the Federal Council for Low German - which is a responsibility of
the Institut für niederdeutsche Sprache [Institut för nedderdüütsche Spraak; Institute for the
Low German Language] in Bremen - so that the Institute's capacities, which were already

E 33

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

fully stretched, were rather overtaxed. In view of these unfavourable conditions, there
is an urgent reqirement for negotiations about the Bund's share in the funding of the
financial and/or staffing resources of the Secretariat of the Federal Council for Low
German.
While the initial State Report was, in many instances, characterized by vagueness
and tended to be confined to declarations of intention, the updating report often reflects pragmatic matter-of-factness. As the Low German speakers' group sees it, the
various "one-time" examples are less relevant than sustained measures, and the
group is primarily interested in anchoring the relevant requirements in the actual
structures. In this respect, the majority of the Länder have started to develop appropriate structures. This is the case, in particular, for the field of education where the
state intrinsically has the greatest scope for exerting an influence and intervention.
The Second State Report, in various passages, also lacks the desired precision. A
case in point is No. 866 where Bremen states that it intends to make additions to the
subject-related framework curricula for elementary schools; here the Low German
speakers' group would expect some information on the regional language elements
involved and on the timeframe envisaged for implementing this administrative act.
Generally it must be pointed out that the notion of "regional language" continues to
be employed with some uncertainty. "Regional language" is a relatively new term
which was introduced in distinction from "minority language"; accordingly, the set of
legal instruments introduced for minorities and their languages have been much
more extensive. Concrete application of the term of "regional language" to Low German implies that the pertinent efforts are not aimed at preserving an ethnic group, but
at preserving a language. Notwithstanding the differentiation called for in this respect,
it is equally important to avoid the impression that the regional languages are languages of inferior status; rather, they exist and function in cultural-political contexts
different from those of minority languages. They can, however, forge identity in the
same way as minority languages.
Membership of the group of Low German users is not effected by 'proclamation' - and
this is a decisive contradistinction to [membership of] national minorities. This refers
exclusively to the actual speakers of Low German. It is exactly on this point, however, that no sound empirical data are available. The available figures on the number
of speakers are obsolete and are applicable only to a limited extent: the data obtained from the last comprehensive survey in West Germany are about twenty years old
and are of little use for present-day purposes. Reliable figures are urgently required
as a basis for target-oriented work in the field of language and cultural policy. It is
only on the basis of valid data that it will be possible to quantify the extent to which
Low German is threatened by extinction.
E 34

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

The following presentation of five demands - which entail central tasks for the current
language-related activities of the group of Low German speakers - primarily refers to
Article 8 - Education. These requirements can, however, also be applied to other
subject areas relevant in terms of the Charter.

1. Proof of the regional character
Low German is used as a language of every usage in the regions of Northern Germany to a varying extent. The State Report hardly ever takes account of this fact. It is
rather conspicuous that Lower Saxony Land lists a large number of language promotion measures in the Ostfriesland region. A similar regional emphasis is evident in
Schleswig-Holstein where a major part of the pertinent activities relate to the north
western region of this Land. In Hamburg, individual measures are taken primarily in
the Süderelbe region. Under the Charter, the Länder commit themselves generally to
the cultivation and promotion of Low German; this requires that the focus must continue to be on full territorial coverage. Being content with a number of 'showcase'
regions - where, it is true, a lot of effective and useful work is done - is in contradiction with the spirit of the Charter. Each of the Land Reports must address the question of what activities and language developments take place in other places, i.e. in
places where use of Low German has been seriously declining already for decades
and for this reason, in particular, urgently requires supporting programmes. Specific
cases in point are the Lüneburg Heath, the south eastern regions of Lower Saxony
and Schleswig-Holstein, the suburbanized hinterland of Hamburg and, above all, the
larger cities. Special promotion measures must be taken for these problem zones of
Low German use; priority areas for this might be nursery schools and primary
schools.

2. Proof of the quantitative requirements
As regards the quantitative aspects of the promotion of the Low German language, a
considerable portion of the information provided in the State Report is vague. The information on how knowledge of Low German is taught at public and non-public educational institutions is not very specific. In most cases, the comments are noncommittal. Saxony-Anhalt Land at least explicitly states (in No. 861) that: "statistical data
on the extent to which Low German is used ... in pre-school education .. are not collected. For cost-benefit reasons, it is at present not possible to introduce Land-wide
subject-specific surveys." (No. 861) Brandenburg makes a similar observation (in
No. 885): "Statistical data on the number of ... activity groups and of the pupils
making use of this option are not available and can be obtained only with extreme
E 35

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

difficulty." This cost-benefit argument, on which the Land's refusal is based, regarding
collection of data on the language's actual status can be countered most effectively
by carrying out a data survey that covers all of Northern Germany. This might be
patterned on the survey on the current status carried out in Mecklenburg-Western
Pomerania by the Schools Working Group (cf. No. 874). The Länder are requested to
take part in a joint and co-ordinated course of action.
Generally, an inventory and medium-term definition of objectives are better served by
honest and frank statements than by any glossing over the facts involved. The observation by North-Rhine/Westphalia that "the present financial situation at the universities will not allow a positive development in the near future as regards intensification
of the pertinent offers and thus precludes institutional backstopping" (No. 938) at
least notes for the record that such an objective is envisaged. The credibility of such
envisaged objectives must be established in the further course of this process. The
Low German speakers' group will address pertinent inquiries to the Länder which the
group expects to initiate positive developments. The Low German speakers' group
will insist on their demands also in those cases where the actual level of Low German offers is below the limit established by the state itself - cf. for instance, the comment by Schleswig-Holstein that "In Flensburg, the offers (...) are, however, not yet
sufficient in quantitative terms to properly allow students to meet the requirements
(...) stipulated in the currently applicable teacher examination regulations" (No. 936).
In such cases, the speakers' group expects that immediate governmental measures
will be taken.
The extent of Low German educational offers must be geared to policy-based considerations, i.e. which can be controlled by the state, instead of being oriented towards fortuitous circumstances. Hamburg's observation with regard to primary education - i.e. that inclusion of Low German in classroom instruction was "very much
dependent on the teachers' language proficiency and also on that of the pupils"
(No. 869) - turns the matter of proficiency right round since it is the pupils' proficiency
that should be developed and improved. If, however, it is found that deficits exist
already with regard to the teachers' own proficiency, the question arises as to what
has been done to remedy these deficits.

3. Proof of quality requirements
If Low German offers are to be included in education as a matter of course, appropriate qualitative bases must be provided in the first place. An indispensable requisite
is, without doubt, the creation of a structural framework for language promotion in the
form of legal regulations and curricula. Just as important, however, is the definition of
quality standards. There is a substantial difference between a teacher reading a Low
E 36

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

German poem to his/her pupils once a year, and inclusion, in the second stage of
secondary education, of a six-month course dealing with cultural history and literature. The requirement for the development and review of quality standards also applies, on principle, to activity groups outside the usual classroom hours.
The State Report discloses that teachers/instructors increasingly are unable to offer
Low German classroom instruction. Reliance on outside staff proficient in the language should be encouraged on a wider scale than has been the case so far. The
important thing is that schools and/or supervisory school authorities are ready to assume responsibility also for these fields, e.g. in the form of further training measures
for committed grandparents and other interested persons who are not trained educators.
In the long run, quality in terms of both content and methodology can be achieved
only by well trained teachers. In this field, the Länder will have to step up their efforts
significantly. As regards the work on the didactics and methodology required for Low
German instruction, first steps have been made only in a limited number of cases
which are confined to Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania (No. 856). Similarly, as regards concepts for follow-up training of teachers, pertinent offers are confined to
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, with a "language-acquisition course Low German
for Teachers" as the flagship project (No. 981). The Länder are called upon to provide the general framework enabling teachers to deal with the Low German language
and Low German culture in keeping with good teaching standards. Information on the
development and testing of concepts in the field of didactics or methodology for the
learning of the regional language and for dealing with the regional culture or Low
German literature is practically non-existent in the Report.

4. Proof of the binding character
The State Report is characterized by a distinct tendency towards noncommittal application of the various promotional measures. This is exemplified by the following
statement: "In Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Low German instruction can be
given in the following forms" (No. 871). Such provisions certainly prevent discriminatory exclusion of the respective share of regional-language lessons in relation to
overall classroom instruction. However, if teachers do not know the language and
pupils or their parents do not notify any requirement for language promotion, noncommittal recommendations will not suffice to ensure concrete protection of Low
German.
The speakers' group welcomes the fact that the State Report documents the first
steps taken to anchor training and further training measures in the institution-related
E 37

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

system and legally relevant provisions. In Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, for example, it is planned to train 40 nursery-school teachers and to issue certificates of
successful completion of this training (No. 856); Schleswig-Holstein reports that kindergarten teachers take part, "on a continuing basis, in the further training courses
offered by the Zentrum für Niederdeutsch [Low German Centre] in Leck" (No. 862).
While it is gratifying that such measures are taken in a number of cases, they still
lack a binding character. This is the only way to ensure that appropriate similar education will be offered also in future. While quantitative and qualitative progress can be
observed across the spectrum of training and further training related to the regional
language, the State Report gives little reason to be optimistic as regards publicly
maintained schools.
The demand for binding offers refers both to the training and follow-up training of
teachers and to classroom instruction. Such instruction offers must not necessarily
cover language acquisition; a mandatory requirement, however, is that the teaching
about the regional language be included in the curricula in order to reduce the still
surviving preconceptions against the Low German language and to achieve that it will
be seen as a matter-of-fact element of the general setting. In the view of the speakers' group, the Länder's present restrictive position is hardly forward-looking; a case
in point is the comment, referring to Schleswig-Holstein, that: "Significant regional
differences and, above all, the fact that there are only relatively few teachers speaking Low German, preclude the introduction of a general regulation stipulating the extent to which Low German must be included in classroom instruction" (No. 880).

5. Proof of consolidation
Directly related to the lack of binding character is the fact that a continuous schooling
history regarding Low German education can hardly be expected for interested
pupils. Continuity as regards transfer from nursery school to primary school and
lower secondary school is an exception and must be seen as occuring by chance.
Also within individual educational establishments, the aim must be to provide structures which at least offer the option of continuous utilization of Low German educational offers. The Länder are requested to intensify their efforts aimed at interlinking
the various instruction offers. The only attempt at such interlinking is made by Lower
Saxony (No. 858). This approach is suited for adoption or adaptation by the other
Länder as a model for forward-looking practices as regards inclusion of the regional
language.
The representatives of Low German welcome the instrument provided by the State
Report and the related reporting obligations of the Bund and the federal states. HowE 38

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

ever, they would like to see closer linkage between the described factual circumstances and the practical conditions concerning the Low German language. It is obvious, though, that it is a long distance from a political expression of intent to the institution of appropriate governmental administrative measures for the promotion of
the regional language, and still farther on to actual substantial promotion for the
speakers of Low German. As a minimum, the State Report should, with greater
distinctness, point out the discrepancy between the expression of the political will to
promote a language, on the one hand, and the uncertainty as regards the scope for
actually implementing such intent with the resources available, on the other.
As regards the year 2003, in particular, an observer of the Low German cultural
scene will note that the research and teaching capacities of universities/colleges are
declining. To give only the most striking examples: Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
cancelled the Low German Chair at Greifswald University; Saxony-Anhalt discontinued the work on the uncompleted Mittelelbisches Wörterbuch [Dictionary for the
Middle Elbe Region]; in Lower Saxony, it is uncertain whether the Low German Chair
at Göttingen University will be continued (by a new appointment). The State Report
makes no mention at all of the resultant incisive and far-reaching consequences. The
speakers' group urges the Länder not only to confine their reporting to logging their
achievements and acquired enriching assets, but also to deal with negative developments in a self-critical way and not to shy away from the true-to-fact description of
actual developments.
The future handling of the Göttingen University Chair for Low German Philology is a
critical test of the sincerity of the intention to implement the Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages. Time will show whether the Land of Lower Saxony will keep up
the protection of this language, to which it committed itself, or whether budgetary
constraints might abruptly lead to abandonment of the relevant obligations.
Regarding the future updating report, the group of Low German speakers would like
to see better comparability of the respective accounts given by the eight federal
states which have committed themselves to protect the regional language. Every
Land is quite at liberty to set different priorities and to deal with the various aspects in
varying detail provided that comparability is ensured. Under the present practice, it is
not ensured in all instances.
Notwithstanding the fact that the Länder have autonomy in cultural (and educational)
affairs, increased networking would be desirable. Cross-State measures can be expected to entail synergy effects; moreover, they are likely to help to achieve cost reductions.
At the time of its ratification, the Charter was only a set of rules on paper. Governmental and non-governmental actors are called upon to apply these rules to practical
E 39

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part E

experience of life, and thus actively shape social life. A number of tentative efforts
made in this regard are quite promising. However, scope for intensification and further development is just as much in evidence, particularly in those fields where the
state's influence is relatively negligible. Greater use should be made of means of
encouragement and mediation, for example in the fields "Media" and "Economic and
social life". The representatives of the speakers' group offer their help with these
efforts to all governmental institutions.

E 40

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Annex 1

Federal Law Gazette (BGBl II) 1998, p. 1314

Act to implement the European Charter
for Regional or Minority Languages of 5 November 1992
Of 9 July 1998

With the consent of the Bundesrat, the Bundestag adopted the following Act:
Article 1

Consent is given to the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
which was signed by the Federal Republic of Germany in Strasbourg on 5 November 1992, including the Declaration by the Federal Republic of Germany in
Preparation of the Ratification of the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages, of 23 January 1998, and the Declaration by the Federal Republic of
Germany for the Implementation of the Obligations under the European Charter for
Regional or Minority Languages regarding Part II of the Charter, of 26 January
1998. The Charter,* together with an official German translation, and the
Declarations of 23 January 1998 and of 26 January 1998 are published below.
Article 2

(1)

This Act shall enter into operation on the day following its promulgation.

(2) The date on which the Charter, under its Article 19, paragraph 2, will enter
into force for the Federal Republic of Germany shall be published in the
Bundesgesetzblatt [Federal Law Gazette].
------------------------------------The above Act is hereby enacted and shall be promulgated in the Bundesgesetzblatt.
Berlin, 9 July 1998
The Federal President

Roman Herzog
The Federal Chancellor

Dr. Helmut Kohl
The Federal Minister of the Interior

Kanther
The Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs

Kinkel
The Federal Minister of Justice

Schmidt-Jortzig
_____________________
*
for the text of the Charter, cf. Annex 2 below

1

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

2

Annex 1

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Annex 1

Federal Law Gazette (BGBl II) 1998, pp. 1334 seq.
Declaration by the Federal Republic of Germany
in Preparation of the Ratification of the
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
of 23 January 1998
(Translation)

"Minority languages within the meaning of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages in the
Federal Republic of Germany shall be the Danish, Upper Sorbian, Lower Sorbian, North Frisian and Sater
Frisian languages and the Romany language of the German Sinti and Roma; a regional language within the
meaning of the Charter in the Federal Republic shall be the Low German language.
Pursuant to Article 3 paragraph 1 of the Charter, the Federal Republic of Germany shall specify the regional
or minority languages to which the provisions selected pursuant to Article 2 paragraph 2 of the Charter shall
apply upon the entry into force of the Charter in the Federal Republic of Germany:
Danish in the Danish language area in Land Schleswig-Holstein:
Article 8 paragraph 1a iv; b iv; c iii/iv; d iii; e ii; f ii/iii; g; h; i; paragraph 2;
Article 9 paragraph 1b iii; c iii; paragraph 2a;
Article 10 paragraph 1a v; paragraph 4c; paragraph 5;
Article 11 paragraph 1b ii; cii; d; e ii; f ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12 paragraph 1c; d; e; f; g; paragraph 2; paragraph 3;
Article 13 paragraph 1a; c; d; paragraph 2c;
Article 14a; b.
Upper Sorbian in the Upper Sorbian language area in the Free State of Saxony:
Article 8 paragraph 1a iii; b iv; c iv; d iv; e ii; f iii; g; h; i; paragraph 2;
Article 9 paragraph 1a ii; a iii; b ii; b iii; c ii; c iii; d; paragraph 2a;
Article 10 paragraph 1a iv/v; paragraph 2a; b; g; paragraph 3b/c; paragraph 4c; paragraph 5;
Article 11 paragraph 1b ii; c ii; d; e i; f ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12 paragraph 1a; b; c; d; e; f; g; h; paragraph 2; paragraph 3;
Article 13 paragraph 1a; c; d; paragraph 2c.
Lower Sorbian in the Lower Sorbian language area in Land Brandenburg:
Article 8 paragraph 1a iv; b iv; c iv; e iii; f iii; g; h; i;
Article 9 paragraph 1a ii; a iii; b iii; c iii; paragraph 2a;
Article 10 paragraph 1a iv/v; paragraph 2b; g; paragraph 3b/c; paragraph 4a; c; paragraph 5;
Article 11 paragraph 1b ii; c ii; d; e i; paragraph 2;
Article 12 paragraph 1a; b; c; d; e; f; g; h; paragraph 2; paragraph 3;
Article 13 paragraph 1a; c; d.
North Frisian in the North Frisian language area in Land Schleswig-Holstein:
Article 8 paragraph 1a iii/iv; b iv; c iv; e ii; f iii; g; h; i; paragraph 2;
Article 9 paragraph 1b iii; c iii; paragraph 2a;
Article 10 paragraph 1a v; paragraph 4c; paragraph 5;
Article 11 paragraph 1b ii; c ii; d; e ii; f ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12 paragraph 1a; b; c; d; e; f; g; h; paragraph 2; paragraph 3;
Article 13 paragraph 1a; c; d;
Article 14a.
Sater Frisian in the Sater Frisian language area in Land Lower Saxony:
Article 8 paragraph 1a iv; e ii; f iii; g;
Article 9 paragraph 1b iii; c iii; paragraph 2a;
Article 10 paragraph 1a v; c; paragraph 2a; b; c; d; e; f; paragraph 4a; c; paragraph 5;
Article 11 paragraph 1b ii; c ii; d; e ii; f ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12 paragraph 1a; b; c; d; e; f; g; paragraph 2; paragraph 3;
Article 13 paragraph 1a; c; d.

3

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Annex 1

Low German in the Länder Free Hanseatic City of Bremen, Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg,
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Lower Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein:
Obligations regarding Low German in the territory of the Länder Free Hanseatic City of Bremen, Free and
Hanseatic City of Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Lower Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein:
Article 8 paragraph 1a iv; e ii; g;
Article 9 paragraph 1b iii; c iii; paragraph 2a;
Article 10 paragraph 1a v; c; paragraph 2a; b; f;
Article 11 paragraph 1b ii; c ii; d; e ii; f ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12 paragraph 1a; d; f; paragraph 3;
Article 13 paragraph 1a; c;
and additionally:
- in the Free Hanseatic City of Bremen:
Article 8 paragraph 1b iii; c iii; f i; h;
Article 10 paragraph 2c; d; e;
Article 11 paragraph 1g;
Article 12 paragraph 1b; c; e; g;
Article 13 paragraph 2c;
- in the Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg:
Article 8 paragraph 1b iii; c iii; d iii; f ii; h; i;
Article 10 paragraph 2e; paragraph 4c;
Article 11 paragraph 1g;
Article 12 paragraph 1g;
Article 13 paragraph 1d; paragraph 2c;
- in Land Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania:
Article 8 paragraph 1b iii; c iii; d iii; h; i;
Article 10 paragraph 4c;
Article 12 paragraph 1b; c; e; h;
Article 13 paragraph 1d; paragraph 2c;
- in Land Lower Saxony:
Article 8 paragraph 1f iii; i;
Article 10 paragraph 2c; d; e; paragraph 4a; c;
Article 12 paragraph 1b; c; e; g; paragraph 2;
Article 13 paragraph 1d;
Article 14a; b;
- in Land Schleswig-Holstein:
Article 8 paragraph 1b iii; c iii; f iii; h; i; paragraph 2;
Article 10 paragraph 4c;
Article 12 paragraph 1b; c; g;
Article 13 paragraph 1d; paragraph 2c.
The separate specification of these provisions for the territories of each individual Land is in keeping with
the federal structure of the Federal Republic of Germany and takes into account the situation of each of these
languages in the Land in question.
The Romany language of the German Sinti and Roma in the territory of the Federal Republic of Germany
and the Low German language in the territory of the Länder Brandenburg, North Rhine/Westphalia and
Saxony-Anhalt shall be protected pursuant to Part II of the Charter."

4

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Annex 1

Federal Law Gazette (BGBl II) 1998, pp. 1336 seq.
Declaration by the Federal Republic of Germany
for the Implementation of the Obligations under the
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages regarding Part II of the Charter
of 26 January 1998
(Translation)
"Part II of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages shall be applied to Romany, the minority
language of the German Sinti and Roma in the territory of the Federal Republic of Germany, and to the
regional language Low German in the territory of the Länder Brandenburg, North Rhine/Westphalia and
Saxony-Anhalt upon its entry into force in the Federal Republic of Germany in accordance with the declaration
of the Federal Republic of Germany of 23 January 1998. The objectives and principles laid down in Article 7 of
the Charter shall form the basis with regard to these languages. At the same time, German law and
Germany's administrative practice thus meet individual requirements laid down in Part III of the Charter:
With regard to Romany:
for the territory of the Federal Republic of Germany:
Article
Article
Article
Article
Article
Article
Article

8 paragraph 1f iii; g; h;
9 paragraph 1b iii; c iii; paragraph 2a;
10 paragraph 5;
11 paragraph 1d; e ii; f ii; paragraph 2;
12 paragraph 1g; paragraph 3;
13 paragraph 1a; c; d;
14a;

and additionally:
- in Land Baden-Württemberg:
Article 8 paragraph 1a iv;*)
Article 10 paragraph 4c;
Article 12 paragraph 1a;**)
- in Land Berlin:
Article 8 paragraph 1a i/ii; b i/ii/iii/iv; e i/ii/iii; i; paragraph 2;
Article 11 paragraph 1b i/ii; c ii; e i/ii;
Article 12 paragraph 1a; d; f;
- in the Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg:
Article 8 paragraph 1b iv; c iv;
Article 11 paragraph 1b ii; c ii;
Article 12 paragraph 1a; d; f;
- in Land Hessen:
Article 8 paragraph 1a iii/iv; b iv; c iv; d iv; e iii; i; paragraph 2;
Article 11 paragraph 1b ii; c ii; e i;
Article 12 paragraph 1a; d; f; paragraph 2;
- in Land North Rhine/Westphalia:
Article 8 paragraph 1e iii; paragraph 2;
Article 12 paragraph 1a; d; f; paragraph 2;
- in Land Lower Saxony:
Article 12 paragraph 1a; d; f;

______________________
*)
Article 8: paragraph 1e iii [cf. p. 7 below of Annex 1]
**)
Article 12: paragraph 1d; f; paragraph 2 [cf. p. 7 below of Annex 1]

5

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Annex 1

- in Land Rhineland-Palatinate:
Article 8 paragraph 1a v; e iii;
Article 11 paragraph 1c ii;
Article 12 paragraph 1a; d; f;
- in Land Schleswig-Holstein:
Article 10 paragraph 1a v; paragraph 2b; paragraph 4c;
Article 11 paragraph 1b ii; c ii;
Article 12 paragraph 1a; d; f; paragraph 2.

With regard to Low German:
- in Land Brandenburg:
Article 8 paragraph 1a iv; b iv; c iv; f iii; g;
Article 9 paragraph 2a;
Article 10 paragraph 2b; paragraph 3c;
Article 11 paragraph 1b ii; c ii; d; e ii; f ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12 paragraph 1a; f; g;
- in Land North Rhine/Westphalia:
Article 8 paragraph 1e iii; g; h; paragraph 2;
Article 9 paragraph 1b iii; c iii; paragraph 2a;
Article 11 paragraph 1d; paragraph 2;
Article 12 paragraph 1a; d; e; f; g; h; paragraph 2;
Article 13 paragraph 1a; c; d;
- in Land Saxony-Anhalt:
Article 8 paragraph 1a iv; b iv; c iv; g; h;
Article 9 paragraph 2a;
Article 11 paragraph 1b ii; c ii; e ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12 paragraph 1a; f; g; h.
The separate specification of these provisions for the territory of each individual Land is in keeping with the
federal structure of the Federal Republic of Germany and takes into account the situation of each of these
languages in the Land in question.
In accordance with the national distribution of competences, the way in which the above-mentioned
provisions of Part III of the Charter are implemented through legal regulations and Germany's administrative
practice with due regard to the objectives and principles specified in Article 7 of the Charter shall be the
responsibility of either the Federation or the competent Land. Details will be provided in the procedure for
implementing the federal act with which the legislature consents to the Charter as laid down in the
Memorandum to the Charter."

6

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Annex 1

Additional Declaration by the Federal Republic of Germany
for the Implementation of Obligations under the European Charter
for Regional or Minority Languages, regarding Part II of the Charter
"Part II of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages shall be
applied to Romany, the minority language of the German Sinti and Roma, in the
territory of the Federal Republic of Germany in accordance with the Declaration by
the Federal Republic of Germany of 23 January 1998. Therefore, the objectives and
principles laid down in Article 7 of the Charter shall form the basis with regard to
the Romany language. With reference to the Romany language, inter alia, the
Declaration by the Federal Republic of Germany of 26 January 1998 comprises a
catalogue of provisions of Part III of the Charter, which are also met by German law
and Germany's current administrative practice. For the Land of Baden-Württemberg,
the following provisions are added to that catalogue*):
Article 8, paragraph 1e iii;
Article 12, paragraphs 1d and 1f; paragraph 2."

______________________________
*)

cf. p. 5 above of Annex 1

7

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

8

Annex 1

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Annex 1

Federal Law Gazette (BGBl II) 2002, p. 2450 seq.

Second Act
to implement the European Charter
for Regional or Minority Languages of 5 November 1992
Of 11 September 2002

With the consent of the Bundesrat, the Bundestag adopted the following Act:
Article 1

Consent is given to the Additional Declaration regarding Part II of the European
Charter for Regional or Minority Languages of 5 November 1992 (BGBl. 1998 II, p.
1314). The Declaration is published below.
Article 2

The Federal Government is authorized to issue a statutory ordinance, with the
consent of the Βundesrat, for the acceptance of additional undertakings under Part
III of the Charter for those languages which are already the subject of a declaration
submitted under Article 3 of the Charter.
Article 3

(1) This Act shall enter into operation on the day following its promulgation.
(2) The date on which the Declaration mentioned in Article 1 above will enter
into force, under Article 3, paragraph 3, of the Charter, for the Federal Republic of
Germany shall be published in the Bundesgesetzblatt [BGBl. - Federal Law Gazette].
------------------------------------The above Act is hereby enacted. It shall be promulgated in the Bundesgesetzblatt.
Berlin, 11 September 2002
The Federal President

Johannes Rau
The Federal Chancellor

Gerhard Schröder
The Federal Minister of the Interior

Schily
The Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs

J. Fischer
The Federal Minister of Justice

Däubler-Gmelin

9

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Annex 1

Declaration by the Federal Republic of Germany
on the acceptance of additional undertakings ensuing from other provisions of the
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages of 5 November 1992
and not yet listed in the Declaration of 23 January 1998

(Translation)
Pursuant to Article 3, paragraph 2, of the Charter, the Federal Republic of Germany shall apply the following
additional selected provisions to the minority languages listed below with reference to Article 2, paragraph 2,
of the Charter:
North Frisian in the North Frisian language area in Schleswig-Holstein Land:
Article 10, paragraph 2 (g)
Saterland Frisian in the Sater Frisian language area in Lower Saxony Land:
Article 10, paragraph 2 (g)
Romany for the territory of Hesse Land:
Article 8, paragraph 1 (a) iii/iv; (b) iv; (c) iv; (d) iv; (e) iii; (i); paragraph 2
Article 10, paragraph 2 (e); (f); paragraph 3 (c); paragraph 4 (c)
Article 11, paragraph 1 (b) ii; (c) ii; (e) i
Article 12, paragraph 1 (a); (d); (f); paragraph 2
in conjunction with the undertakings accepted for the entire territory of the Federal Republic of Germany:
Article
Article
Article
Article
Article
Article
Article

8, paragraph 1 (f) iii; (g); (h)
9, paragraph 1 (b) iii; (c) iii; paragraph 2 (a)
10, paragraph 5
11, paragraph 1 (d); (e) ii; (f) ii; (g); paragraph 2
12, paragraph 1 (g); paragraph 3
13, paragraph 1 (a); (c); (d)
14 (a)

10

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

European Charter
for Regional or Minority Languages

Preamble
THE MEMBER STATES of the Council of Europe signatory hereto,
CONSIDERING that the aim of the Council of Europe is to achieve a greater
unity between its members, particularly for the purpose of safeguarding and
realising the ideals and principles which are their common heritage;
CONSIDERING that the protection of the historical regional or minority
languages of Europe, some of which are in danger of eventual extinction,
contributes to the maintenance and development of Europe's cultural wealth
and traditions;
CONSIDERING that the right to use a regional or minority language in private and public life is an inalienable right conforming to the principles embodied in the United Nations International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, and according to the spirit of the Council of Europe Convention for
the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms;
HAVING REGARD to the work carried out within the CSCE and in particular to the Helsinki Final Act of 1975 and the document of the Copenhagen
Meeting of 1990;
STRESSING the value of interculturalism and multilingualism and CONthat the protection and encouragement of regional or minority
languages should not be to the detriment of the official languages and the
need to learn them;
SIDERING

REALISING that the protection and promotion of regional or minority
languages in the different countries and regions of Europe represent an important contribution to the building of a Europe based on the principles of
democracy and cultural diversity within the framework of national sovereignty and territorial integrity;
TAKING INTO CONSIDERATION the specific conditions and historical traditions in the different regions of the European States,
HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS:

1

Annex 2

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part I
General provisions
Article 1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Charter:
(a) "regional or minority languages" means languages that are:
(i) traditionally used within a given territory of a State by nationals of
that State who form a group numerically smaller than the rest of the
State's population; and
(ii) different from the official language(s) of that State;
it does not include either dialects of the official language(s) of the State
or the languages of migrants;
(b) "territory in which the regional or minority language is used" means the
geographical area in which the said language is the mode of expression
of a number of people justifying the adoption of the various protective
and promotional measures provided for in this Charter;
(c) "non-territorial languages" means languages used by nationals of the
State which differ from the language or languages used by the rest of
the State's population but which, although traditionally used within the
territory of the State, cannot be identified with a particular area thereof.
Article 2
Undertakings
(1) Each Party undertakes to apply the provisions of Part II to all the
regional or minority languages spoken within its territory which comply
with the definition in Article 1.
(2) In respect of each language specified at the time of ratification, acceptance or approval, in accordance with Article 3, each Party undertakes to
apply a minimum of thirty-five paragraphs or sub-paragraphs chosen from
among the provisions of Part III of the Charter, including at least three
chosen from each of the Articles 8 and 12 and one from each of the Articles
9, 10, 11 and 13.
Article 3
Practical Arrangements
(1) Each contracting State shall specify in its instrument of ratification,
acceptance or approval, each regional or minority language, or official
language which is less widely used on the whole or part of its territory, to
which the paragraphs chosen in accordance with Article 2, paragraph 2,
2

Annex 2

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

shall apply.

3

Annex 2

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

(2) Any Party may, at any subsequent time, notify the Secretary General
that it accepts the obligations arising out of the provisions of any other paragraph of the Charter not already specified in its instrument of ratification,
acceptance or approval, or that it will apply paragraph 1 of the present Article to other regional or minority languages, or to other official languages
which are less widely used on the whole or part of its territory.
(3) The undertakings referred to in the foregoing paragraph shall be
deemed to form an integral part of the ratification, acceptance or approval
and will have the same effect as from their date of notification.
Article 4
Existing regimes of protection
(1) Nothing in this Charter shall be construed as limiting or derogating
from any of the rights guaranteed by the European Convention on Human
Rights.
(2) The provisions of this Charter shall not affect more favourable provisions concerning the status of regional or minority languages or the legal
regime of persons belonging to minorities which may exist in a Party or are
provided for by relevant international bilateral or multilateral international
agreements.
Article 5
Existing obligations
Nothing in this Charter may be interpreted as implying any right to engage in any activity or perform any action in contravention of the purposes
of the Charter of the United Nations or other obligations under international
law, including the principle of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
States.
Article 6
Information
The Parties undertake to see to it that the authorities, organisations and
persons concerned are informed of the rights and duties established by this
Charter.

4

Annex 2

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part II
Objectives and principles
pursued in accordance with Article 2, paragraph 1
Article 7
Objectives and principles
(1) In respect of regional or minority languages, within the territories in
which such languages are used and according to the situation of each language, the Parties shall base their policies, legislation and practice on the
following objectives and principles:
(a) the recognition of the regional or minority languages as an expression of
cultural wealth;
(b) the respect for the geographical area of each regional or minority language in order to ensure that existing or new administrative divisions do
not constitute an obstacle to the promotion of the regional or minority
language in question;
(c) the need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages
in order to safeguard them;
(d) the facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of regional or minority
languages, in speech and writing, in public and private life;
(e) the maintenance and development of links, in the fields covered by this
Charter, between groups using a regional or minority language or other
groups in the State employing a language used in identical or similar
form, as well as the establishment of cultural relations with other groups
in the State using different languages;
(f) the provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study
of regional or minority languages at all appropriate stages;
(g) the provision of facilities enabling non-speakers of a regional or minority language living in the area where it is used to learn it if they so
desire;
(h) the promotion of study and research on regional or minority languages
at universities or equivalent institutions;
(i) the promotion of appropriate types of transnational exchanges, in the
fields covered by this Charter, for regional or minority languages used
in identical or similar form in two or more States.
(2) The Parties undertake to eliminate, if they have not yet done so, any
unjustified distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference relating to the use
of a regional or minority language and intended to discourage or endanger
the maintenance or development of it. The adoption of special measures in
5

Annex 2

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

favour of regional or minority languages aimed at promoting equality between the users of these languages and the rest of the population or which
take due account of their specific conditions is not considered to be an act of
discrimination against the users of more widely-used languages.
(3) The Parties undertake to promote, by appropriate measures, mutual
understanding between all the linguistic groups of the country and in particular the inclusion of respect, understanding and tolerance in relation to
regional or minority languages among the objectives of education and training provided within their countries and encouragement of the mass media to
pursue the same objective.
(4) In determining their policy with regard to regional or minority languages, the Parties shall take into consideration the needs and wishes expressed by the groups which use such languages. They are encouraged to
establish bodies, if necessary, for the purpose of advising the authorities on
all matters pertaining to regional or minority languages.
(5) The Parties undertake to apply, mutatis mutandis, the principles listed in paragraphs 1 to 4 above to non-territorial languages. However, as far
as these languages are concerned, the nature and scope of the measures to be
taken to give effect to this Charter shall be determined in a flexible manner,
bearing in mind the needs and wishes, and respecting the traditions and
characteristics, of the groups which use the languages concerned.

Part III
Measures to promote the use of regional or minority languages
in public life in accordance with the undertakings entered into
under Article 2, paragraph 2
Article 8
Education
(1) With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory
in which such languages are used, according to the situation of each of these
languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s)
of the State:
(a) (i)

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or
minority languages; or

(ii) to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the
relevant regional or minority languages; or
(iii) to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at
least to those pupils whose families so request and whose number
is considered sufficient; or

6

Annex 2

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

(iv) if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of
pre-school education, to favour and/or encourage
the application of the measures referred to under i to iii above;
(b) (i)

to make available primary education in the relevant regional or
minority languages; or

(ii) to make available a substantial part of primary education in the
relevant regional or minority languages; or

(iii) to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
(iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at
least to those pupils whose families so request and whose number
is considered sufficient;
(c) (i)

to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or
minority languages; or

(ii) to make available a substantial part of secondary education in the
relevant regional or minority languages; or
(iii) to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the
relevant regional or minority languages as an integral part of the
curriculum; or
(iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at
least to those pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so
wish in a number considered sufficient;
(d) (i)

to make available technical and vocational education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

(ii) to make available a substantial part of technical and vocational
education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or
(iii) to provide, within technical and vocational education, for the
teaching of the relevant regional or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
(iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at
least to those pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so
wish in a number considered sufficient;
(e) (i)

to make available university and other higher education in regional
or minority languages; or

(ii) to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university
and higher education subjects; or
(iii) if, by reason of the role of the State in relation to higher education
institutions, sub-paragraphs i and ii cannot be applied, to encour-

7

Annex 2

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

age and/or allow the provision of university or other forms of higher education in regional or minority languages or of facilities for
the study of these languages as university or higher education subjects;
(f) (i)

to arrange for the provision of adult and continuing education
courses which are taught mainly or wholly in the regional or
minority languages; or

(ii) to offer such languages as subjects of adult and continuing education; or
(iii) if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of
adult education, to favour and/or encourage the offering of such
languages as subjects of adult and continuing education;
(g) to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected by the regional or minority language;
(h) to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;
(i) to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the
measures taken and progress achieved in establishing or developing the
teaching of regional or minority languages and for drawing up periodic
reports of their findings which will be made public.
(2) With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those
in which the regional or minority languages are traditionally used, the
Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language
justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the regional or
minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.
Article 9
Judicial authorities
(1) The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which
the number of residents using the regional or minority languages justifies
the measures specified below, according to the situation of each of these
languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the
present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of justice:
(a) in criminal proceedings:
(i) to provide that courts, at the request of one of the parties, shall conduct the proceedings in the regional or minority languages; and/or
(ii) to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or minority
language; and/or
(iii) to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall
not be considered inadmissible solely because they are formulated
in a regional or minority language; and/or
8

Annex 2

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

(iv) to produce, on request, documents connected with legal proceedings
in the relevant regional or minority language,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations involving no
extra expense for the person concerned;
(b) in civil proceedings:
(i) to provide that the courts, at the request of one of the parties, shall
conduct the proceedings in the regional or minority languages;
and/or
(ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court,
that he or she may use his or her regional or minority language
without thereby incurring additional expense; and/or
(iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or
minority languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

(c) in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
(i) to provide that the courts, at the request of one of the parties, shall
conduct the proceedings in the regional or minority languages;
and/or
(ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court,
that he or she may use his or her regional or minority language
without thereby incurring additional expense; and/or
(iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or
minority languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;
(d) to take steps to ensure that the application of sub-paragraphs i and iii of
paragraphs b and c above and any necessary use of interpreters and
translations does not involve extra expense for the persons concerned.
(2) The Parties undertake:
(a) not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State
solely because they are drafted in a regional or minority language; or
(b) not to deny the validity, as between the parties, of legal documents
drawn up within the country solely because they are drafted in a regional or minority language, and to provide that they can be invoked against
interested third parties who are not users of these languages on condition that the contents of the document are made known to them by the
person(s) who invoke(s) it; or
(c) not to deny the validity, as between the parties, of legal documents
drawn up within the country solely because they are drafted in a

9

Annex 2

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

regional or minority language.
(3) The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or minority
languages the most important national statutory texts and those relating particularly to users of these languages, unless they are otherwise provided.
Article 10
Administrative authorities and public services
(1) Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number
of residents who are users of regional or minority languages justifies the
measures specified below and according to the situation of each language,
the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
(a) (i)

to ensure that the administrative authorities use the regional or
minority languages; or

(ii) to ensure that such of their officers as are in contact with the public
use the regional or minority languages in their relations with
persons applying to them in these languages; or
(iii) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit
oral or written applications and receive a reply in these languages;
or

(iv) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit
oral or written applications in these languages; or
(v) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly
submit a document in these languages;
(b) to make available widely-used administrative texts and forms for the
population in the regional or minority languages or in bilingual versions;
(c) to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in a regional
or minority language.
(2) In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the
number of residents who are users of regional or minority languages is such
as to justify the measures specified below, the Parties undertake to allow
and/or encourage:
(a) the use of regional or minority languages within the framework of the
regional or local authority;
(b) the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral
or written applications in these languages;
(c) the publication by regional authorities of their official documents also in
the relevant regional or minority languages;
(d) the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in

10

Annex 2

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

the relevant regional or minority languages;
(e) the use by regional authorities of regional or minority languages in
debates in their assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the
official language(s) of the State;
(f) the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates
in their assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official
language(s) of the State;
(g) the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the
official language(s), of traditional and correct forms of place-names in
regional or minority languages.
(3) With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within
the territory in which regional or minority languages are used, in accordance
with the situation of each language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
(a) to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in the provision of the service; or
(b) to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request and
receive a reply in these languages; or
(c) to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request in
these languages.
(4) With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2
and 3 accepted by them, the Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
(a) translation or interpretation as may be required;
(b) recruitment and, where necessary, training of the officials and other
public service employees required;
(c) compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a knowledge of a regional or minority language to be
appointed in the territory in which that language is used.
(5) The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names
in the regional or minority languages, at the request of those concerned.
Article 11
Media
(1) The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in which those languages are spoken, according
to the situation of each language, to the extent that the public authorities,
directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this field,
and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the
media:

11

Annex 2

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

(a) to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:
(i) to ensure the creation of at least one radio station and one television
channel in the regional or minority languages; or
(ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one radio
station and one television channel in the regional or minority languages; or
(iii) to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer programmes
in the regional or minority languages;
(b) (i)

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one radio
station in the regional or minority languages; or

(ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes
in the regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
(c) (i)

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one television
channel in the regional or minority languages; or

(ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
(d) to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio
and audiovisual works in the regional or minority languages;
(e) (i)

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at
least one newspaper in the regional or minority languages; or

(ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the publication of newspaper articles
in the regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
(f) (i)

to cover the additional costs of those media which use regional or
minority languages, wherever the law provides for financial assistance in general for the media; or

(ii) to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions in the regional or minority languages;

(g) to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using
regional or minority languages.
(2) The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of
radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language
used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language, and not
to oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure that
no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of information in the written press in a language used in identical or
similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of the abovementioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may
be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are
prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests

12

Annex 2

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention
of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection
of the reputation or rights of others, for preventing disclosure of information
received in confidence, or for maintaining the authority and impartiality of
the judiciary.
(3) The Parties undertake to ensure that the interests of the users of
regional or minority languages are represented or taken into account within
such bodies as may be established in accordance with the law with responsibility for guaranteeing the freedom and pluralism of the media.
Article 12
Cultural activities and facilities
(1) With regard to cultural activities and facilities - especially libraries,
video libraries, cultural centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and
cinemas, as well as literary work and film production, vernacular forms of
cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries, including inter alia
the use of new technologies - the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities
are competent, have power or play a role in this field:
(a) to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or
minority languages and foster the different means of access to works
produced in these languages;
(b) to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in regional or minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;
(c) to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in
other languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, postsynchronisation and subtitling activities;
(d) to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of regional or minority languages and
cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for which they provide backing;

(e) to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising
or supporting cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a
full command of the regional or minority language concerned, as well
as of the language(s) of the rest of the population;
(f) to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a
given regional or minority language in providing facilities and planning
cultural activities;
(g) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies respons-

13

Annex 2

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

ible for collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing
works produced in the regional or minority languages;
(h) if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and terminological research services, particularly with a view to maintaining and
developing appropriate administrative, commercial, economic, social,
technical or legal terminology in each regional or minority language.
(2) In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or
minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the
number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in accordance with the preceding paragraph.
(3) The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing
their cultural policy abroad, for regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.
Article 13
Economic and social life
(1) With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake
within the whole country:
(a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting
without justifiable reasons the use of regional or minority languages in
documents relating to economic or social life, particularly contracts of
employment, and in technical documents such as instructions for the use
of products or installations;
(b) to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of companies and private
documents of any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or
minority languages, at least between users of the same language;
(c) to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority languages in connection with economic or social activities;
(d) to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages
by means other than those specified in the above sub-paragraphs.
(2) With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake,
in so far as the public authorities are competent, within the territory in
which the regional or minority languages are used, and as far as this is
reasonably possible:

(a) to include in their financial and banking regulations provisions which
allow, by means of procedures compatible with commercial practice,
the use of regional or minority languages in drawing up payment orders
(cheques, drafts, etc.) or other financial documents, or where appro-

14

Annex 2

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

priate, to ensure the implementation of such provisions;
(b) in the economic and social sectors directly under their control (public
sector), to organise activities to promote the use of regional or minority
languages;
(c) to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes
and hostels offer the possibility of receiving and treating in their own
language persons using a regional or minority language who are in need
of care on grounds of ill-health, old age or for other reasons;
(d) to ensure by appropriate means that safety instructions are also drawn
up in regional or minority languages;
(e) to arrange for information provided by the competent public authorities
concerning the rights of consumers to be made available in regional or
minority languages.
Article 14
Transfrontier exchanges
The Parties undertake:
(a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them
with the States in which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if necessary to seek to conclude such agreements, in such a
way as to foster contacts between the users of the same language in the
States concerned in the fields of culture, education, information, vocational training and permanent education;
(b) for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or
promote co-operation across borders, in particular between regional or
local authorities in whose territory the same language is used in identical or similar form.

Part IV
Application of the Charter
Article 15
Periodical reports
(1) The Parties shall present periodically to the Secretary General of the
Council of Europe, in a form to be prescribed by the Committee of Ministers, a report on their policy pursued in accordance with Part II of this
Charter and on the measures taken in application of those provisions of Part
III which they have accepted. The first report shall be presented within the
year following the entry into force of the Charter with respect to the Party
concerned, the other reports at three-yearly intervals after the first report.
(2) The Parties shall make their reports public.

15

Annex 2

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Article 16
Examination of the reports
(1) The reports presented to the Secretary General of the Council of
Europe under Article 15 shall be examined by a committee of experts constituted in accordance with Article 17.
(2) Bodies or associations legally established in a Party may draw the
attention of the committee of experts to matters relating to the undertakings
entered into by that Party under Part III of this Charter. After consulting the
Party concerned, the committee of experts may take account of this information in the preparation of the report specified in paragraph 3 below. These
bodies or associations can furthermore submit statements concerning the
policy pursued by a Party in accordance with Part II.
(3) On the basis of the reports specified in paragraph 1 and the information mentioned in paragraph 2, the committee of experts shall prepare a report for the Committee of Ministers. This report shall be accompanied by
the comments which the Parties have been requested to make and may be
made public by the Committee of Ministers.
(4) The report specified in paragraph 3 shall contain in particular the
proposals of the committee of experts to the Committee of Ministers for the
preparation of such recommendations of the latter body to one or more of
the Parties as may be required.
(5) The Secretary General of the Council of Europe shall make a twoyearly detailed report to the Parliamentary Assembly on the application of
the Charter.
Article 17
Committee of experts
(1) The committee of experts shall be composed of one member per
Party, appointed by the Committee of Ministers from a list of individuals of
the highest integrity and recognised competence in the matters dealt with in
the Charter, who shall be nominated by the Party concerned.
(2) Members of the committee shall be appointed for a period of six
years and shall be eligible for reappointment. A member who is unable to
complete a term of office shall be replaced in accordance with the procedure
laid down in paragraph 1, and the replacing member shall complete his predecessor's term of office.
(3) The committee of experts shall adopt rules of procedure. Its secretarial services shall be provided by the Secretary General of the Council of
Europe.

16

Annex 2

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Part V
Final provisions
Article 18
This Charter shall be open for signature by the member States of the
Council of Europe. It is subject to ratification, acceptance or approval. Instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval shall be deposited with the
Secretary General of the Council of Europe.
Article 19
(1) This Charter shall enter into force on the first day of the month
following the expiration of a period of three months after the date on which
five member States of the Council of Europe have expressed their consent to
be bound by the Charter in accordance with the provisions of Article 18.
(2) In respect of any member State which subsequently expresses its
consent to be bound by it, the Charter shall enter into force on the first day
of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the
date of the deposit of the instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval.
Article 20
(1) After the entry into force of this Charter, the Committee of Ministers
of the Council of Europe may invite any State not a member of the Council
of Europe to accede to this Charter.
(2) In respect of any acceding State, the Charter shall enter into force on
the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three
months after the date of deposit of the instrument of accession with the
Secretary General of the Council of Europe.
Article 21
(1) Any State may, at the time of signature or when depositing its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, make one or more
reservations to paragraphs 2 to 5 of Article 7 of this Charter. No other
reservation may be made.
(2) Any Contracting State which has made a reservation under the preceding paragraph may wholly or partly withdraw it by means of a notification addressed to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe. The withdrawal shall take effect on the date of receipt of such notification by the
Secretary General.
Article 22

17

Annex 2

2nd State Report Germany: European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

(1) Any Party may at any time denounce this Charter by means of a notification addressed to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe.

(2) Such denunciation shall become effective on the first day of the
month following the expiration of a period of six months after the date of
receipt of the notification by the Secretary General.
Article 23
The Secretary General of the Council of Europe shall notify the member
States of the Council and any State which has acceded to this Charter of:
(a) any signature;
(b) the deposit of any instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession;
(c) any date of entry into force of this Charter in accordance with Articles
19 and 20;
(d) any notification received in application of the provisions of Article 3,
paragraph 2;
(e) any other act, notification or communication relating to this Charter.

In witness whereof the undersigned, being duly authorised thereto, have
signed this Charter.
Done at Strasbourg, this 5th day of November 1992, in English and
French, both texts being equally authentic, in a single copy which shall be
deposited in the archives of the Council of Europe. The Secretary General of
the Council of Europe shall transmit certified copies to each member State
of the Council of Europe and to any State invited to accede to this Charter.

18

Annex 2

Annexes

List of Minority/Language Group Organizations

Danish
South Schleswig Association:

Sydslesvigsk Forening/Südschleswigscher Verein (SSV)
Herr Dieter Küssner
Norderstraße 76
D-24939 Flensburg
South Schleswig Association of Voters:

Sydslesvigsk Vælgerforening/Südschleswigscher Wählerverband (SSW)
Frau Gerda Eichhorn
Schiffbrücke 42
D-24939 Flensburg
Sorbian
Federation of Lusatian Sorbs:

DOMOWINA – Zwajsk £uźiskich Serbow/Bund Lausitzer Sorben
Herr Jan Nuck
Postplatz 2
D-02625 Bautzen
Frisian
Frisian Council (Section North):

Friesenrat/Frasche Rädj - Sektion Nord e.V.

Herr Ingwer Nommensen
Türkeiswäi 1
D-25920 Risum-Lindholm
Frisian Council (Section East):

Friesenrat/Freeske Raad - Sektion Ost e.V.
Herr Dieter Baumann
Friedrich-Ebert-Straße 28
D-26802 Moormerland

1

Annexes
Romany
Central Council of German Sinti and Roma:

Zentralrat Deutscher Sinti und Roma
Herr Romani Rose
Bremeneckgasse 2
D-69117 Heidelberg
Sinti Alliance Germany:

Sinti Allianz Deutschland
Frau Natascha Winter
Postfach 103224
D-50472 Köln
Low German
Federal Council for Low German

Bundesrat für Niederdeutsch - Bundesraat för Nedderdüütsch
Herr Dr. Reinhard Goltz
Katrepeler Landstrasse 36
D-28357 Bremen

2

