Strasbourg, 28 May 2014

ECRML (2014) 6

EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES

APPLICATION OF THE CHARTER IN GERMANY

5th monitoring cycle

A.

Report of the Committee of Experts on the Charter

B.
Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers of the
Council of Europe on the application of the Charter by Germany

1

The European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages provides for a control
mechanism to evaluate how the Charter is applied in a State Party with a view to,
where necessary, making recommendations for improving its legislation, policy
and practices. The central element of this procedure is the Committee of Experts,
set up under Article 17 of the Charter. Its principal purpose is to report to the
Committee of Ministers on its evaluation of compliance by a Party with its
undertakings, to examine the real situation of regional or minority languages in the
State and, where appropriate, to encourage the Party to gradually reach a higher
level of commitment.
To facilitate this task, the Committee of Ministers adopted, in accordance with
Article 15, paragraph 1, an outline for periodical reports that a Party is required to
submit to the Secretary General. The report should be made public by the State.
This outline requires the State to give an account of the concrete application of
the Charter, the general policy for the languages protected under Part II and, in
more precise terms, all measures that have been taken in application of the
provisions chosen for each language protected under Part III of the Charter. The
Committee of Experts’ first task is therefore to examine the information contained
in the periodical report for all the relevant regional or minority languages on the
territory of the State concerned.
The Committee of Experts’ role is to evaluate the existing legal acts, regulations
and real practice applied in each State for its regional or minority languages. It
has established its working methods accordingly. The Committee of Experts
gathers information from the respective authorities and from independent sources
within the State, so as to attempt to obtain a fair and just overview of the real
language situation. After a preliminary examination of an initial periodical report,
the Committee of Experts submits, if necessary, a number of questions to each
Party to obtain supplementary information from the authorities on matters it
considers insufficiently developed in the report itself. This written procedure is
usually followed up by an on-the-spot visit by a delegation of the Committee of
Experts to the State in question. During this visit the delegation meets bodies and
associations whose work is closely related to the use of the relevant languages,
and consults the authorities on matters that have been brought to its attention.
This information-gathering process is designed to enable the Committee of
Experts to evaluate more effectively the application of the Charter in the State
concerned.
Having concluded this process of collecting information, the Committee of
Experts adopts its own report. This report is submitted to the Committee of
Ministers, together with suggestions for recommendations that the latter may
decide to address to the State Party.

2

CONTENTS

A. Report of the Committee of Experts on the application of the Charter in Germany ..................... 4
Chapter 1 Background Information ................................................................................................ 4
1.1. The ratification of the Charter by Germany............................................................................. 4
1.2. The work of the Committee of Experts ................................................................................... 4
1.3. General issues arising in the evaluation of the application of the Charter in Germany .......... 4

Chapter 2 Conclusions of the Committee of Experts on how the German authorities reacted to the
recommendations of the Committee of Ministers .......................................................... 6
Chapter 3 The Committee of Experts’ evaluation in respect of Part II and Part III of the Charter ... 8
3.1. Evaluation in respect of Part II of the Charter ......................................................................... 8
3.2. Evaluation in respect of Part III of the Charter ......................................................................13
3.2.1.
Danish in the Land of Schleswig-Holstein .............................................................13
3.2.2.
Upper Sorbian in the Free State of Saxony ...........................................................17
3.2.3.
Lower Sorbian in the Land of Brandenburg ...........................................................26
3.2.4.
North Frisian in the Land of Schleswig-Holstein....................................................34
3.2.5.
Sater Frisian in the Land of Lower Saxony ...........................................................40
3.2.6.a. Low German in the Free Hanseatic City of Bremen .............................................46
3.2.6.b. Low German in the Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg ...................................54
2.2.6.c. Low German in the Land of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania ...........................61
3.2.6.d. Low German in the Land of Lower Saxony ..........................................................67
3.2.6.e. Low German in the Land of Schleswig-Holstein....................................................73
3.2.7.
Romani in the Land of Hesse ...............................................................................80

Chapter 4 Findings of the Committee of Experts in the fifth monitoring round ............................. 88
Appendix: Instrument of ratification ..............................................................................................91

B.

Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on the
application of the Charter by Germany ........................................................................ 95

3

A. Report of the Committee of Experts on the application of the Charter in Germany
adopted by the Committee of Experts on 14 November 2013
and presented to the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
in accordance with Article 16 of the Charter

Chapter 1
1.1.

Background Information

The ratification of the Charter by Germany

1.
The Federal Republic of Germany signed the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
(hereafter referred to as “the Charter”) on 5 November 1992 and ratified it on 16 September 1998. The
Charter entered into force in Germany on 1 January 1999.
2.
The instrument of ratification of Germany is set out in the Appendix to this report. Germany declared
at the time of ratification the regional or minority languages protected under the Charter were Danish, Upper
Sorbian, Lower Sorbian, North Frisian, Sater Frisian, Low German and Romani.
3.
Article 15, paragraph 1 of the Charter requires States Parties to submit three-yearly reports in a form
prescribed by the Committee of Ministers. The German authorities presented their fifth periodical report to
the Secretary General of the Council of Europe on 8 April 2013.
1.2.

The work of the Committee of Experts

4.
This fifth evaluation report is based on the information obtained by the Committee of Experts from the
fifth periodical report of Germany as well as through interviews held with representatives of the regional or
minority languages in Germany and the German authorities during the on-the-spot visit, which took place
from 20–23 August 2013. The Committee of Experts received comments from bodies and associations
legally established in Germany, submitted pursuant to Article 16, paragraph 2 of the Charter.
5.
In the present fifth evaluation report the Committee of Experts will focus on the provisions and issues
under both Part II and Part III which were singled out in the fourth evaluation report as raising particular
problems. It will evaluate in particular how the German authorities have reacted to the issues detected by the
Committee of Experts and, where relevant, to the recommendations made by the Committee of Ministers.
The report will firstly recall the key elements of each issue. The Committee of Experts will also look at the
new issues detected during the fifth monitoring round.
6.
The present report contains detailed observations that the German authorities are urged to take into
account when developing their policy on regional or minority languages. On the basis of these detailed
observations, the Committee of Experts has also established a list of general proposals for the preparation of
a fifth set of recommendations to be addressed to Germany by the Committee of Ministers, as provided in
Article 16, paragraph 4 of the Charter.
7.
This report is based on the political and legal situation prevailing at the time of the Committee of
Experts’ on-the-spot visit to Germany (August 2013).
8.

The present report was adopted by the Committee of Experts on 14 November 2013.

1.3.

General issues arising in the evaluation of the application of the Charter in Germany

9.
The German authorities have continued to inform the public at large about the Charter and the
regional or minority languages used in Germany. A new brochure on minorities and regional or minority
1
languages was published in 2012 by the Federal Ministry of the Interior . In addition, the Ministry organised
an implementation conference on the Charter and the Framework Convention for the Protection of National
Minorities. The Committee of Experts considers these measures as exemplary and shares the view of the

1

http://www.bmi.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/DE/Broschueren/2013/Minderheiten_Minderheitensprachen.pdf?__blob=publicationFil
e

4

Advisory Committee on the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities that this
2
constitutes best practice to be followed by other states .
10.
In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts encouraged the authorities to give a
presentation of the cooperation between Länder authorities with regard to the protection and promotion of
Low German in the next periodical report.
11.
According to the fifth periodical report, federal and state officials of the eight Länder where Low
German is spoken have been meeting annually, since 2007. According to the information provided, the
meetings repeatedly focused on education, but the role of Low German in the media, administration and
justice was also discussed. The latest meeting took place in May 2013 (see also under Part II).
th

12.
On the occasion of the 20 anniversary of the signing of the Charter by Germany, in November 2012,
the German Bundestag discussed language protection in Germany and adopted a list of requirements to the
federal and Land authorities. Among others, it invited the authorities to develop, in co-operation with the
speakers, a global strategy promoting regional and minority languages, and to ensure a greater impact of
these languages in education, administration and media, in line with the Charter.
13.
One general problem which persists in the education field is that there seems to be a lack of
supervision of minority language education in line with the Charter. According to the German authorities, the
existing structures, such as the education ministries and school authorities, monitor the measures to develop
regional or minority language education. The German authorities maintain that no further reporting or new
mechanism at central level is necessary for fulfilling the undertaking, as it would only increase bureaucracy
and costs.
14.
The Committee of Experts would like to underline that the purpose of monitoring minority language
education is to identify satisfactory measures and methods which work well, as well as areas where
additional efforts or other measures are needed. Monitoring reports are therefore very important in the
development of minority language education. Regular reports provide the opportunity to assess minority
language education over time, thereby making it possible to adjust methods and measures according to the
experiences acquired through the reports. Publication of the reports makes the monitoring system
transparent. It creates opportunities for representatives of regional or minority language speakers and civil
society to take part in a public discussion on the development of minority language education, based on
measures taken and progress achieved.

2

Third Opinion on Germany of the Advisory Committee on the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities,
paragraph 6, ACFC/OP/III(2010)003

5

Chapter 2

Conclusions of the Committee of Experts on how the German
authorities reacted to the recommendations of the Committee of
Ministers

Recommendation no. 1:
“adopt specific legal provisions, where their absence hinders practical implementation of the undertakings
which Germany has entered into under the Charter”
15.
No further legal provisions to implement the Charter have been adopted. The German authorities
maintain that the Charter is directly applicable and no further legal provisions are needed.
Recommendation no. 2:
“ensure that the reduction of subsidies for private schools and cuts of the transport allowances will not
jeopardize the continued functioning of the Danish-language education at the current level”
16.
The German authorities made up, by federal funding, for the reduction of subsidies to the Danish
Schools Association by Schleswig-Holstein in 2011 and 2012. In 2013, an agreement was reached to take
back the reductions and to put the financing of Danish schools on a suitable long-term basis. As regards the
transport allowances, in 2009-2011, Schleswig-Holstein reimbursed half of the costs that the districts of
Schleswig-Flensburg, Nordfriesland and Rendsburg-Eckernförde had voluntarily paid in transport allowances
for 2008, 2009 and 2010. In the meantime, an amendment to the Schools Act has been adopted in order to
cover allowances for the transport of pupils to schools of the Danish minority.
Recommendation no. 3:
“adopt and implement a structured policy for the promotion and preservation of North Frisian, Sater Frisian
and Lower Sorbian, including in particular measures which ensure as a matter of urgency that primary and
secondary education is available in these languages”
17.
North Frisian education still meets with difficulties, as teaching generally takes place outside regular
hours, due to a lack of teachers and since there are no binding curricula. In addition there is a lack of
continuity between school levels and programmes. The new Land Government of Schleswig-Holstein has
decided to take up these problems and to develop a structured policy for North Frisian language education.
18.
In August 2011, Lower Saxony adopted the decree on The Region and its Languages in Education
(Die Region und ihre Sprachen im Unterricht). On the basis of this decree, mandatory subjects in primary
education may be taught in Sater Frisian. In practice, subjects are taught bilingually or using the immersion
method. The rules in the decree also apply to lower secondary and to optional compulsory subjects, except
foreign languages. Advice and support is offered to schools for implementing their activities related to Sater
Frisian. Knowledge of Sater Frisian may be added as an additional qualification required by schools when
recruiting teachers. Various research and education-related projects are conducted in cooperation with the
University of Oldenburg and civil society.
19.
In practice, compared to the situation in the last monitoring cycle, two additional kindergartens use
Lower Sorbian and one additional primary school teaches the language. However, there have been no
structured measures on behalf of the authorities to strengthen Lower Sorbian education. Bilingual education
remains rare, the existing offer does not cover all the territory where Lower Sorbian is spoken, the
educational models vary, and there is a lack of continuity between school levels. The current situation will, in
practice, not lead to a preservation of Lower Sorbian.
Recommendation no. 4:
“ensure that the provision of education in Upper Sorbian is not jeopardized by the changes in the educational
system concerning this language”
20.
The “2plus” model, introduced in the 2002-2003 school year and consisting of bilingual GermanUpper Sorbian education to all pupils, irrespective of their linguistic background, was examined in a scientific
study which found the results positive. It seems that the model has strengthened language learning in the
mixed areas; however, the effects on the language competence of native Upper Sorbian speaking children
still need to be assessed.
Recommendation no. 5:
“upgrade the teaching of Low German to the status of a regular school subject being taught as an integral
part of the curriculum and increase the number of hours devoted to Low German, in the Länder concerned”
6

21.
Hamburg remains the only Land where Low German is taught as a regular school subject, with
separate hours allocated to it. In Lower Saxony, on the basis of the decree on The Region and its
Languages in Education, in force since 1 August 2011, subjects may be taught in Low German. As a rule,
this means bilingual teaching. Lower Saxony wishes to assess the language learning possibilities offered by
the decree, before deciding on introducing Low German as a regular subject. In all the other Länder, Low
German is taught as part of the German classes, or in working groups outside regular school hours.
Recommendation no. 6:
“ensure that an effective monitoring mechanism in the sense of the Charter exists in the field of education for
all regional or minority languages covered under Part III”
22.
No measures have been taken to ensure an effective monitoring mechanism in the field of education
for regional or minority languages. The German authorities maintain that no further reporting or mechanisms
are necessary to fulfil this undertaking. Any such measures would merely increase bureaucracy and costs.
23.
However, Lower Saxony set up a supervisory body composed of representatives of the authorities
and of the minority associations, monitoring how the Charter provisions in the field of education are
implemented. The monitoring is based on Lower Saxony’s school authority report, which provides
information on how Sater Frisian and Low German is promoted, how the allotted teaching hours are used
and on the activities of the advisers for Sater Frisian and Low German.
Recommendation no. 7:
“take resolute action to establish a structured policy for making it possible in practice to use regional or
minority languages in dealings with the administration and, where relevant, in the courts”
24.
A structured policy for the use of regional and minority languages in dealings with the administration
or, where relevant, in courts continues to be lacking. The authorities maintain the view that, as long as the
possibility exists de jure according to statutory law, no additional measures are necessary. Saxony adopted,
in 2012, a Plan of Measures to Encourage and Revive the Use of the Sorbian Language (hereinafter, the
Sorbian Language Plan), which contains measures relevant for the use of Sorbian in administration. Some
encouragement measures have been taken by Lower Saxony, concerning the use of Sater Frisian. The use
of regional and minority languages in these fields is still very limited in practice.
Recommendation no. 8:
“take measures so that adequate radio and television broadcasting is available in Danish, Low German,
Lower Sorbian, North Frisian, Romani, Sater Frisian”
25.
The presence of regional or minority languages in the media, in particular television, remains limited
and irregular. The German authorities continue to consider that their possibilities to intervene in this field are
limited, due to the independence of the media.
26.
There have been no developments concerning Danish and Lower Sorbian. Some progress was
made for North Frisian which is now used on private radio (Friiskfunk). In 2010, Lower Saxony amended the
Media Act, which now requires broadcasters to include the regional and minority languages spoken in their
coverage area (Sater Frisian and Low German) in an adequate manner in their programme. In addition, the
Federal Commissioner for Matters related to the Ethnic German Repatriates and National Minorities wrote to
the chair of the broadcasting board of Norddeutscher Rundfunk (NDR), asking for further promotion of
television broadcasts in Sater Frisian. However, Sater Frisian is still not present on television. Bremen also
amended the Media Act in 2012, and this now requires broadcasters to provide an adequate share of
programmes in Low German. There is a presence of Low German on private television in Bremen. A
private TV channel in Hamburg occasionally includes Low German in its programme. Schleswig-Holstein
seconded the Commissioner for National Minorities and Ethnic Groups to the Broadcasting Board of the
Deutschlandfunk broadcasting station, hoping to improve the presence of minorities in public broadcasting.
DW broadcasts a 15-minute weekly programme in Romani. Moreover, in 2012, Bremen concluded an
agreement with the German Sinti and Roma Association, related also to presence in the media.

7

Chapter 3
3.1.

The Committee of Experts’ evaluation in respect of Part II and Part III of
the Charter

Evaluation in respect of Part II of the Charter

27.
The German authorities declared at the moment of ratification that, as a result of German law and
administrative practice, the requirements of a number of Part III provisions were met with regard to Romani
on the whole territory of the Federal Republic of Germany and with regard to Low German in the Länder of
Brandenburg, North Rhine-Westphalia and Saxony-Anhalt. The Committee of Experts decided that Part II
applied to these languages in these cases.
28.
The Committee of Experts will focus on the provisions of Part II which were singled out in the fourth
report as raising particular problems. It will therefore not comment in the present report on provisions where
no major issues were raised in the fourth evaluation report and for which the Committee of Experts did not
receive any new information requiring it to reassess their implementation. These provisions are as follows:
Article 7, paragraph 1.a;
Article 7, paragraph 1.e;
Article 7, paragraph 1.g;
Article 7, paragraph 1.i;
Article 7, paragraph 2;
Article 7, paragraph 3.

Article 7
Paragraph 1
In respect of regional or minority languages, within the territories in which such languages are used and according to the
situation of each language, the Parties shall base their policies, legislation and practice on the following objectives and
principles:
b

the respect of the geographical area of each regional or minority language in order to ensure that existing
or new administrative divisions do not constitute an obstacle to the promotion of the regional or minority
language in question;

Lignite mining and the Sorbian languages
29.
In the fourth monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts was informed of plans to expand the lignite
mining area in Brandenburg. The envisaged expansion would have resulted into the resettlement of the
population of a village belonging to the officially defined settlement area of the Sorbs, which could have had
negative repercussions on the promotion of Lower Sorbian. Therefore, the Committee of Experts
encouraged the authorities to continue their efforts to compensate the difficulties in the protection and
promotion of the Sorbian language caused by lignite mining.
30.

No new information is provided on the subject in the fifth periodical report.

31.
The Committee of Experts asks the German authorities to provide more specific information,
including the efforts to compensate the difficulties in the protection and promotion of the Sorbian language
caused by lignite mining in the next periodical report.
c

the need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in order to safeguard them;

Upper and Lower Sorbian
32.
In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts asked the authorities to provide more
information on the initiative to develop a strategy to encourage the use of Sorbian in public life in the
forthcoming periodical report.
33.
According to the fifth periodical report, the Sorbian Language Plan was adopted by Saxony in 2012.
This strategy was prepared in cooperation with the speakers. It is divided into three chapters: learning and
improving the knowledge of Sorbian, using Sorbian in public life, knowledge about the Sorbian language and
culture, each with its own set of measures. Such measures include, for example, improving the knowledge of
Sorbian in the public service, by training courses or possibly requiring knowledge of Sorbian for certain
posts, developing the offer of Sorbian at pre-school level, improving teacher training, offering opportunities to
8

learn Sorbian and obtain certificates in accordance with Common European Framework of Reference for
Languages, improving bilingual signage, including in the private sector, using Sorbian for announcements in
public transport, using Sorbian place names in mail addresses, encouraging the use of Sorbian in tourism,
providing interpreters and interpretation equipment for Sorbian-German simultaneous interpretation at events
or meetings, encourage the use of Sorbian in social care facilities, improving the information about Sorbian
language and culture in schools, training for civil servants about the Sorbian language and culture, as well as
minority rights, increasing the information about Sorbian language and culture in tourism. The Committee of
Experts commends the authorities for the Sorbian Language Plan, which it considers best practice.
34.
As far as Lower Sorbian is concerned, Brandenburg is currently revising the Law on the Rights of the
Sorbs. The representatives of the Lower Sorbian speakers have suggested that the law should be brought in
line with the Charter provisions. It seems, however, that the basic deficiency of the law in delimiting the
Sorbian speaking area is not likely to be corrected, due to strong resistance from local authorities. The
Committee of Experts would welcome more information in this respect in the next periodical report.
35.
The language contest between bilingual municipalities Serbska rěc jo žywa – Serbska rěč je žiwa –
Sprachenfreundliche Kommune took place for the second time in 2011-2012, under the auspices of the
parliament presidents of Saxony and Brandenburg, the two councils for Sorbian, and the Domowina. The
aim was to raise awareness among municipalities of the Sorbian language and to encourage their use. The
second European football championship of minorities also took place in Upper Lusatia, Saxony.
Low German
36.
In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts requested information on the concrete
measures that have been taken as a result of the consultation meetings of the federal and Länder authorities
with the umbrella association of the speakers. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts encouraged the
authorities of Schleswig-Holstein to review the plans for a complete discontinuation of the support provided
to the Institute for Low German (Institut für niederdeutsche Sprache) in order not to jeopardise the activities
of this institution.
37.
According to the fifth periodical report, the meeting of federal and state officials on Low German has
been held annually, since 2007, in one of the eight Länder where Low German is spoken. Meetings
repeatedly focused on education, but the role of Low German in the media, administration and justice was
also discussed. The latest meeting took place in May 2013. The Committee of Experts asks the authorities
again to inform on concrete measures that have been taken as a result of this meeting.
38.
As for the Institute for Low German, according to the fifth periodical report, the termination of the
agreement to provide funding was reversed and the subsidies for the institute have only been reduced from
2012 on. Schleswig-Holstein will continue to be a member of the Institute. Moreover, the government and the
Low German Council of the Schleswig-Holstein Parliament asked Brandenburg, Mecklenburg-Western
Pomerania, North Rhine-Westphalia and Saxony-Anhalt to provide financial support to the Institute for Low
German. The Committee of Experts requests the German authorities to provide further information on the
participation of the states of Brandenburg, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, North Rhine-Westphalia and
Saxony-Anhalt to the support of the Institute for Low German. Moreover, it encourages the German
authorities to ensure that the activities of the Institute for Low German will not be hindered because of the
financial cuts.
39.
A conference organised by the Federal Council for Low German (Bundesraat för Nedderdüütsch)
and the Institute for Low German, in November 2010 was also funded by the Federal Ministry of the Interior.
40.
In 2012 and 2013 Lower Saxony provided € 450 000 as financial support to promote Low German in
schools. The funding to the Landschaften and Landschaftsverbände (municipal associations) has been
increased by € 600 000 as targeted project support for Low German. € 1.15 million are earmarked for
research and education in Low German and Sater Frisian.
Romani
41.
According to the fifth periodical report, North Rhine-Westphalia continues to fund the Advisory Office
for Sinti and Roma, which mediates between the minority, majority and their institutions, and also promotes
school and extra-curricular education, among other things. The Sinti-Allianz in North Rhine-Westphalia has
not requested any financial support, so the authorities have not worked with them in recent years.
42.
Rhineland-Palatinate continues to provide funding to the Association of German Sinti and Roma in
Rhineland-Palatinate, and the Sinti Union of Rhineland-Palatinate. According to the comments made by
9

Roma and Sinti associations, more funding would be necessary. The Sinti radio programme Latscho Dibes is
not supported by public funding. The Hildesheim Sinti music festival funding is no longer secured either.
d

the facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of regional or minority languages, in speech and writing, in
public and private life;

Low German
43.
In 2012 the Parliament of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern submitted an interpellation in Low German to
the Land government.
44.
In Brandenburg, the Low German speakers expressed their wish for Low German to be present in
the media, in the areas where Low German is spoken. Low German could also be promoted in activities
related to tourism and culture.
45.
The Low German theatre company of Münster had its production of the Low German play Spiells van
Dr Faustus professionally recorded and produced a DVD thanks to the contribution of North RhineWestphalia. At the initiative of the Münster district authorities, all institutions working in the field of Low
German produced a cultural programme in autumn 2011, which was advertised throughout the Münsterland
region and attracted large audiences.
46.

Low German theatre competitions and workshops are organised throughout Saxony-Anhalt.

47.
Various authorities of Schleswig-Holstein have initiated a new prize to promote Low German in daycare centres, schools, higher education and youth groups - the Emmi för Plattdüütsch in Sleswig-Holsteen.
f

the provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of regional or minority languages
at all appropriate stages;

48.
The teaching and study of languages covered under Part III is examined in detail in the section
dealing with Part III undertakings.
Low German
49.
Part II only applies to Low German in the following Länder: Brandenburg, Saxony-Anhalt and North
Rhine-Westphalia. Low German is covered by Part III in Lower Saxony, but with regard to education the
essential components of primary and secondary education are missing in the Part III ratification for Low
German. The Committee of Experts underlines that there is a need for a structured policy to promote Low
German across all levels of education.
50.
In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts called upon the Lower Saxony authorities to
develop a structured policy intended to improve the state of Low German education in primary and
secondary schools and to grant a secure place for Low German in the educational system.
51.
According to the fifth periodical report, the decree on The Region and its Languages in Education
entered into force in Lower Saxony on 1 August 2011. On the basis of this decree, specific mandatory
subjects in primary education may be taught in the regional or minority language (bilingually, or using inter
alia the immersion method). These rules also apply to lower secondary schools and may also be applied to
optional compulsory courses or subjects. The Lower Saxony's school authority has recruited 20 teachers for
advisory work. Furthermore, schools may apply for the "Low German" label. Since 2009, further training
courses have been offered on the basis of the core curriculum, which take into account language learning
(an average of 35 participants for each course). Since 2012, the Low German position of chair of Germanic
linguistics at the University of Oldenburg has been permanent. During the past years, various types of Low
German courses were also tested at the University of Oldenburg. In 2012, Lower Saxony's State Ministry of
Education and the Ostfriesische Landschaft agreed to cooperate on an education project for the learning of
Low German and Sater Frisian as early second languages (Zweitsprache). The authorities finally report that
before taking a decision on introducing Low German as an additional subject, they wish to analyse the
language learning possibilities in regular classes offered under the decree. The Committee of Experts would
welcome further information on the results of this analysis. In order to continue and further develop the
positive steps towards the strengthening of Low German education, the earmarked funding for Low German
education programmes needs to be put on a stable basis and should be enlarged.
52.
Saxony-Anhalt has taken various measures concerning the teaching of Low German at preschools
and primary schools. At the beginning of the 2011-2012 school year, there were 26 Low German working
10

groups at 25 schools, attended by 221 pupils and the authorities are seeking to provide more offers and
attract more pupils. Moreover, it is possible to follow some teaching of Low German at different levels of
University, including training in Low German for teaching staff; a text book in Low German was revised and
delivered to 41 schools. Saxony-Anhalt is also funding a project of the Landesheimatbund (association of
regional culture) on early childhood education. A reading competition is also organised. It appears, however,
that there is no structured policy intended to improve the state of Low German education in primary and
secondary schools.
53.
Brandenburg has declared that it would not introduce Low German as a separate subject in primary
or secondary education, due to the low number of interested pupils. Low German is, however, offered in the
form of activity groups at some primary schools. It seems that there is practically no offer of Low German
classes in the ordinary school system. A structured and comprehensive offer in Low German is needed in
education, starting with pre-school and continuing to primary and secondary school.
54.
According to the fifth periodical report, the North Rhine-Westphalia’s Ministry for Schools and
Continuing Education is currently reviewing the possibility of conducting a school pilot project in Low
German. This project, initially limited to five years, would be carried out at six to ten primary schools, building
on the German core curriculum investigating language and language use as an integral part of the
curriculum. There is no offer at kindergarten level. The Committee of Experts asks the German authorities to
provide further information on this project. Low German competitions for primary school pupils continue to be
very important for the schools. In the Münsterland and in Münster, a new model for experienced teachers
and artists has been developed, with support from the district government, which enables the Low German
speakers to offer Low German activities for schools. In commemoration of the 150th birthday of Augustin
Wibbelt (well-known writer in Münsterland) in 2012, the University of Münster and the Augustin Wibbelt
Society planned a campaign for schools and cultural associations across Westphalia. These local efforts are
laudable, but they cannot replace a structured and comprehensive offer in Low German throughout the state
school system in the Low German speaking part of North Rhine-Westphalia.
55.
The Committee of Experts encourages the German authorities to continue their efforts to provide
education in Low German. It also maintains its position that the German authorities should develop a
structured policy to protect and promote Low German across all levels of education.
Sater Frisian
56.
In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts encouraged the German authorities to take
the necessary structural measures, in particular in the field of teacher training, to ensure the sustainability of
the initiative to teach Sater Frisian bilingually at kindergartens and in primary schools in Saterland.
57.
According to the fifth periodical report, one of the schools participating in the project on early
bilingualism is a primary school in Saterland; as a result, primary school children in Saterland have been
learning Sater Frisian since January 2012. The decree on The Region and its Languages in Education also
applies to Sater Frisian in Lower Saxony.
58.
During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts noted that there is still no structured teacher
training for Sater Frisian and encourages the German authorities to arrange such training so that teaching
operates on a continuing basis.
Romani
59.
The situation of Romani in Hesse is dealt with in Part III of this report.
60.
As far as the Committee of Experts is aware, almost no teaching of the language of the Sinti and
Roma is taking place in practice in the Länder, except in Hamburg. During the on-the-spot visit, the
Committee of Experts did not receive any information on this matter. It emphasises the need to promote
Romani in education and asks the German authorities to provide information on this issue in the next
periodical report.
h

the promotion of study and research on regional or minority languages at universities or equivalent
institutions;

Low German
61.
In the fifth periodical report, the German authorities state that various research projects on Low
German are carried out by the University of Oldenburg. In 2011, the University of Oldenburg submitted an
application to the German Research Foundation (DFG) for an initial project on language contact between
11

Sater Frisian, Low German and High German in Saterland; this application was approved in 2012. The
University of Oldenburg also serves as a partner for the various projects, in which aspects of language
promotion, language protection and cultural work predominate (Saterland as a model region for early
bilingualism; completion of the dictionary of Sater Frisian; Sater Frisian language course). A project, aiming
at collecting audio recordings in the region Bersenbrücker Land, is intended to serve as a model for other
projects in other Low German regions. Another project is dedicated to the Low German-High German online
dictionary for Ostfriesland.
Paragraph 4
In determining their policy with regard to regional or minority languages, the Parties shall take into consideration the needs
and wishes expressed by the groups which use such languages. They are encouraged to establish bodies, if necessary, for
the purpose of advising the authorities on all matters pertaining to regional or minority languages.

Low German
62.
In October 2012, the parliament of Bremen set up an Advisory Council on Low German (Beirat Platt),
to the president of the parliament. The Advisory Council is composed of representatives of the parliamentary
groups, of the Institute for Low German, the Low German umbrella NGOs from Bremen and Bremerhaven, of
the schools, academics, media, theatre, churches and administration. The Advisory Council provides a
framework for sharing information and ensures participation of the Low German speakers in all cultural
matters. During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts learnt that a similar consulting body exists
also in Hamburg, but its meetings are not held regularly.
63.
During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed by the authorities that the two
main Low German associations in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania went bankrupt, due to violations of the
budgetary regulations. These used to be subsidised on an institutional basis, not only project-based, but
these subsidies were discontinued due to the violation of budgetary regulations. At present, there are no Low
German associations in the Land with regional coverage, and only two remaining cultural institutions
promote Low German: the Fritz-Reuter-Bühne, in Schwerin, performing theatre plays in Low German and the
Literaturmuseum in Stavenhagen. The Committee of Experts encourages the authorities to facilitate the reemergence of a Low German civil society umbrella association, possibly on the basis of one of the existing
institutions.
Romani
64.
In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts encouraged the German authorities to take
into consideration, in the promotion of Romani, the needs and wishes expressed by all relevant groups which
use Romani in Germany.
65.
The German authorities continue to co-operate only with the Zentralrat deutscher Sinti und Roma,
and not with the Sinti-Allianz Deutschland, the other of the two umbrella NGOs of the German Sinti and
Roma. The Committee of Experts urges the German authorities to take into consideration, in the promotion
of Romani, the needs and wishes expressed by all relevant groups which use Romani in Germany.
66.
During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed that Hesse is negotiating a
framework agreement about the promotion of the group with Zentralrat deutscher Sinti und Roma.
67.
Schleswig-Holstein is in the process of amending its Constitution. The proposed new text, inter alia,
expressly provides for the protection and promotion of the German Sinti and Roma. A committee, including
representatives of the minority, will be established by the president of the parliament.

12

3.2. Evaluation in respect of Part III of the Charter

3.2.1.

Danish in the Land of Schleswig-Holstein

68.
For the purposes of the present report, the Committee of Experts will not comment on provisions in
relation to which no major issues were raised in the previous evaluation reports and for which it did not
receive any new elements requiring a revised assessment or a different presentation of their implementation.
In the case of Danish in Schleswig-Holstein, these provisions are the following:
Article 8, paragraph 1.a.iv; b.iv; c. iii/iv; d.iii; e.ii; f.ii/iii; g; h; paragraph 2;
Article 9, paragraph 1.b.iii; c.iii; paragraph 2.a;
Article 10, paragraph 4.c; paragraph 5;
Article 11, paragraph 1.e.ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1.c; d; e; f; g; paragraph 2;
Article 13, paragraph 1.a, c, d
Article 14.a; b.
69.
For these provisions, the Committee of Experts refers to the conclusions reached in its previous
reports but reserves the right to evaluate the situation again at a later stage.
Article 8 – Education
Subsidies to Danish schools and transport costs for pupils attending Danish schools
70.
In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Ministers recommended to the German authorities
“to ensure that the reduction of subsidies for private schools and cuts of the transport allowances
will not jeopardise the continued functioning of the Danish-language education at the current level”.
Furthermore, the Committee of Experts encouraged the German authorities to ensure that the foreseen
budgetary cuts of the Land of Schleswig-Holstein do not jeopardise the current level of provision of Danishlanguage education.
71.
According to the fifth periodical report, a federal grant largely made up for the cuts of funding
attributed to the Danish Schools Association by the Land of Schleswig-Holstein in 2011 and 2012. In 2013,
an agreement was reached to take back the reductions and to put the financing of Danish schools on a
suitable long-term basis. The Schools Act was amended accordingly.
72.
In addition, according to the fifth periodical report, in 2009-2011, Schleswig-Holstein reimbursed the
districts half of the costs that the districts of Schleswig-Flensburg, Nordfriesland and Rendsburg-Eckernförde
had voluntarily paid in transport allowances for 2008, 2009 and 2010. Moreover, in 2012, the governing
coalition parties stated in an agreement that the state government would make the necessary amendment to
the Schools Act in order to cover allowances for the transport of pupils to schools of the Danish minority, in
an effort to establish the equality of Danish minority schools and public schools.
73.
During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed that this amendment had been
adopted and implemented. The Committee of Experts commends the authorities for this step.
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used, according to the
situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken and progress
achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority languages and for drawing up
periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.

74.
In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking not fulfilled. The
Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “ensure that an effective monitoring
mechanism in the sense of the Charter exists in the field of education for all regional or minority
languages covered under Part III”.

13

75.
The Committee of Experts refers to its comments under General issues arising in the evaluation of
the application of the Charter in Germany (paragraphs 13-14). It reiterates that the current undertaking does
not necessarily require the setting up of a new body to carry out the monitoring envisaged under this
undertaking. It is, for example, possible for existing supervisory bodies to carry out these functions and
integrate them into existing administrative structures. The reports from the monitoring process should be
made public. The current reporting mechanism referred to by the German authorities does not fulfil the
requirements of this undertaking.
76.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled.

Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of regional or minority
languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as
far as this is reasonably possible:
a

v

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document in these
languages;

77.
In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking not fulfilled. The
Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take resolute action to establish a
structured policy for making it possible in practice to use regional or minority languages in dealings
with the administration […]”. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts strongly urged the German
authorities to ensure that documents in Danish can be submitted to administrative authorities in practice.
78.
According to the fifth periodical report, users of Danish may validly submit a document in Danish with
a German translation. Specific talks with respect to the validity of documents drafted in Danish were to be
held in the first six months of 2013, as requested by the Danish minority.
79.
During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed that the authorities are
implementing a model of submitting documents in Danish to the Land authorities in Kiel. As a rule, the
documents drafted in Danish are accepted in Schleswig-Holstein. However, users of Danish may be asked
to attach a German translation. In these cases, the costs of translation are borne by the Danish speakers.
The authorities are in a process of amending the legislation to make sure that the documents can be
submitted in Danish.
80.
The Committee of Experts welcomes the initiatives taken and asks for information on the new
legislation in the next periodical report.
Article 11 – Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in which those languages are
spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are
competent, have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the
media:
b

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the regional or minority
languages on a regular basis;

81.
In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking partly fulfilled.
The Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take measures so that adequate
radio […] broadcasting is available in Danish”. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts strongly urged the
German authorities to take measures to encourage and/or facilitate a sufficient level of broadcasting of radio
programmes in Danish on a regular basis.
82.
According to the fifth periodical report, Danish is sometimes used in interviews on the NDR 1 Welle
Nord. Moreover, journalists of the NDR 1 Welle Nord and the Danish Radio P4 Syd produced a one-hour
German-Danish radio feature which was broadcast on NDR 1 Welle Nord in August 2012. In addition, Radio
14

Schleswig-Holstein (R.SH) produces programmes and features in Danish in cooperation with the Danish
newspaper Flensborg Avis. There are broadcasts several times a day on weekdays. Furthermore, regional
windows are offered on special occasions, such as elections. The coalition agreement covering the period of
2012–2017 foresees discussion with the NDR to make sure that public service broadcasting reflects the
linguistic and cultural diversity prevailing in Schleswig-Holstein.
83.
During the on-the-spot visit, however, the Committee of Experts was informed that, regarding the
negotiation with NDR, no significant improvements have been made.
84.
The Committee of Experts notes that no significant developments have taken place and maintains its
previous conclusion that this undertaking is partly fulfilled.
The Committee of Experts strongly urges the authorities to take measures to encourage and/or
facilitate a sufficient level of broadcasting of radio programmes in Danish on a regular basis.
c

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the regional or minority
languages on a regular basis;

85.
In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking not fulfilled.
The Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take measures so that adequate
[…] television broadcasting is available in Danish”. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts strongly
urged the German authorities to take measures to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television
programmes in Danish on a regular basis.
86.
According to the fifth periodical report, the governing coalition was planning an agreement with the
NDR broadcasting station. However, pursuant to the information received during the on-the-spot visit, this
issue did not lead to further development (see also Article 11, paragraph 1.b.ii). At present, the Danish
language is used by the NDR broadcasting studio in Flensburg in only marginal instances, in interviews in
the SH-Magazin and SH 18:00 programmes (in subtitles or voice-over). The Flensburg branch of the Open
Channel (Offener Kanal) Schleswig-Holstein regularly produces and broadcasts Danish programmes, which
can be received in the area of Flensburg, Schleswig, Niebüll and Kappeln. The German authorities report
that the cooperation between the Open Channel Flensburg and AI-TV, a non-profit making television station
in Åbenrå, Denmark, plays an important role in this production and broadcasting. During the on-the-spot visit,
the Committee of Experts was informed by the Danish speakers that there is no involvement of the German
authorities in supporting the activities of Open Channel Flensburg.
87.
The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It encourages the authorities to
take measures to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in Danish on a
regular basis.
d

88.

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual works in the regional
or minority languages;

In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking not fulfilled.

89.
The fifth periodical report refers to the programmes of Open Channel Flensburg. However, the
Committee of Experts has not been informed of any measures taken by the authorities to encourage and/or
facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual works in Danish relevant under this
undertaking.
90.

In light of this information, the Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled.
f

ii

to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions in the regional or
minority languages;

91.
In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts requested the German authorities to provide
information about audiovisual productions in Danish that have been supported by the Filmförderung
Hamburg Schleswig-Holstein.
92.

No information is provided on this issue in the fifth periodical report.

93.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled.

15

Article 12 – Cultural Activities and Facilities
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for regional or minority
languages and the cultures they reflect.

94.
In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking not fulfilled at
federal level.
95.
The Federal Foreign Office and the Goethe-Institut do not take any measures to promote the regional
and minority languages and cultures in the framework of the cultural and educational policy abroad. The
German authorities do not consider such measures necessary for the implementation of this undertaking.
96.
The Committee of Experts underlines that this provision requires the German authorities to include
the Danish language and the culture it reflects when presenting Germany’s culture and heritage abroad. As a
first step, embassies and the Goethe-Institut could distribute the brochure National minorities, regional and
minority languages in Germany, issued by the Ministry of the Interior, at international events where Germany
promotes its culture abroad.
97.
The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled at federal level. It encourages the
authorities to make appropriate provision for the Danish language and the culture it reflects, when pursuing
their cultural policy abroad.
Article 13 - Economic and social life
Paragraph 2
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the public authorities are competent, within
the territory in which the regional or minority languages are used, and as far as this is reasonably possible:
c

to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and hostels offer the possibility of
receiving and treating in their own language persons using a regional or minority language who are in need
of care on grounds of ill-health, old age or for other reasons;

98.
In previous monitoring cycles, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking fulfilled, based
on the information received.
99.
In the fifth monitoring round, the Committee of Experts received complaints from the speakers about
the possibility to be received and treated in Danish in hospitals.
100. Based on this information, the Committee of Experts asks the authorities to provide detailed
information in this respect in the next periodical report.

16

3.2.2.

Upper Sorbian in the Free State of Saxony

101. In this section, the Committee of Experts will focus on problematic areas and new developments in
the protection and promotion of Upper Sorbian. It will therefore not assess the implementation of provisions
which were fulfilled in the previous monitoring cycles, apart from such undertakings where the Committee of
Experts has received new relevant information. The following provisions will not be commented upon:
Article 8, paragraph 1.e.ii; f.iii; g;
Article 9, paragraph 1 b iii, c iii, d; paragraph 2.a;
Article 10, paragraph 2.a; g; paragraph 5;
Article 11, paragraph 1.d; e.i; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1.b; c; d; e; f; g; h; paragraph 2;
Article 13, paragraph 1.a; d.
102. For these provisions, the Committee of Experts refers to the conclusions reached in its previous
reports, but reserves the right to evaluate the situation again at a later stage.
Article 8 – Education
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used, according to the
situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
a

i

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

iii

to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those pupils whose families so
request and whose number is considered sufficient;

103. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking fulfilled.
However, it encouraged the competent authorities to take measures to ensure that the demand for preschool education in Upper Sorbian is met with a sufficient number of adequately trained pre-school teachers.
104. The fifth periodical report does not contain specific information on this issue. However, the Sorbian
Language Plan mentions the training of Sorbian-speaking pre-school teachers as one of its objectives and
foresees the evaluation and improvement of the offer of the Sorbian College for Social Pedagogy in
Bautzen/Budyšin (Sorbische Fachschule für Sozialpädagogik).
105. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking is fulfilled, but
nevertheless asks the authorities to provide information on the implementation of the Sorbian Language Plan
in the next periodical report.
b

i

to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of primary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

iii

to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or minority languages as an
integral part of the curriculum; or

iv

to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils whose families so
request and whose number is considered sufficient;

106. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled.
The Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “ensure that the provision of
education in Upper Sorbian is not jeopardised by the changes in the educational system concerning
this language”. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts encouraged the authorities to take the necessary
measures so that the practical implementation of the “2plus” model ensures adequate language proficiency
of the Upper Sorbian-speaking pupils.
107. According to the fifth periodical report, the evaluation of the “2plus” model project has been finalised.
The results indicate that all pupils involved made progress in their language development. They had
17

improved access to Upper Sorbian and a better attitude towards the language. Pupils were also better able
to read and write in both German and Upper Sorbian and achieved functional bi- and multilingualism,
enabling them to use their language skills in various situations. The “2plus” model project was launched in
2002/2003, in all six Upper Sorbian primary schools and the primary school in Schleife/Slepo, as well as at
secondary level in a number of schools. Bilingual classes were set up, irrespective of the different linguistic
backgrounds of the pupils and all curricular and extracurricular activities were carried out bilingually.
108. According to the representatives of the Upper Sorbian speakers, the “2plus” model raises concerns
where the Sorbian mother-tongue pupils make up small proportions compared to the non-mother tongue
pupils. This situation is the result of earlier reforms, which have led to school closures and thus changed the
enrolment composition in the remaining schools. Although the “2plus” model is meant to remedy this, by
offering early bilingual education, the evaluation of the project shows that the conditions of and the results in
language learning differ significantly. In their view, if the “2plus” model is to be successful, clearer regulations
are needed for its implementation at the two former mother tongue education schools that have adopted it. In
addition, better resources, in particular qualified teachers for bilingual education, are required. To this end, a
binding ordinance of the Land Ministry of Education would be necessary.
109. The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking fulfilled. It nonetheless asks the authorities to
take care that the practical implementation of the “2plus” model ensures adequate language proficiency to
the Upper Sorbian mother tongue pupils.
c

i

to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of secondary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

iii

to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or minority languages as an
integral part of the curriculum; or

iv

to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils who, or where
appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered sufficient;

110. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking partly fulfilled.
The Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “ensure that the provision of
education in Upper Sorbian is not jeopardised by the changes in the educational system concerning
this language”. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts encouraged the authorities to take the necessary
measures so that the practical implementation of the 2 plus model ensures adequate language proficiency of
the Upper Sorbian-speaking pupils.
111. According to the fifth periodical report, the evaluation of the “2plus” model project has been finalised
and the results are positive (see Article 8.1. b.iv above). The “2plus” model project was launched in
2002/2003, in all four Upper Sorbian secondary schools (Mittelschulen), the Sorbian grammar school
(Gymnasium) and the secondary school in Schleife/Slepo. Bilingual classes were set up, irrespective of the
linguistic background of the pupils and all curricular and extracurricular activities were carried out bilingually.
However, the representatives of the speakers are still concerned about the effects of the “2plus” model on
the language competence of Upper Sorbian mother tongue students (see Article 8.1.b.iv).
112. The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking fulfilled. It nonetheless asks the authorities to
take care that the practical implementation of the “2plus” model ensures adequate language proficiency of
the Upper Sorbian-speaking pupils.
d

i

to make available technical and vocational education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of technical and vocational education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or

iii

to provide, within technical and vocational education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or minority
languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

iv

to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils who, or where
appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered sufficient;

113. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled. It
urged the competent authorities to take proactive measures to identify areas where vocational training in
Upper Sorbian might be offered.

18

114. According to the fifth periodical report, Upper Sorbian is still only offered at the Sorbian College for
Social Pedagogy in Bautzen/Budyšin. The Committee of Experts has not been informed of any measures to
identify other areas where vocational training in Upper Sorbian might be offered.
115. According to the representatives of the speakers, Upper Sorbian could also be taught in the
vocational training for tourism. The Committee of Experts also notes that the Sorbian Language Plan
foresees the encouragement of the use of Upper Sorbian in the tourism industry.
116. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking is partly fulfilled. It
strongly urges the competent authorities to identify, in cooperation with the speakers, other areas of
technical or vocational education where teaching in or of Upper Sorbian could be offered.
h

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of paragraphs a to g
accepted by the Party;

117. In the fourth monitoring cycle report, the Committee of Experts asked for more information on the
implementation of the recruitment agreement between the Ministry of Education and the Sorbian-speaking
students, guaranteeing them a teaching position, as it had been informed of difficulties in finding vacancies
for the practical phase of the teacher training.
118. According to the fifth periodical report, the students of the Sorbian grammar school (Gymnasium) are
regularly informed about the possibility to conclude the recruitment agreement, in case they wish to follow
teacher training. Such students are guaranteed places for practical training. In addition, the Coordinator for
Sorbian Affairs at the Bautzen Regional Office of the Saxon Education Agency has established the practice
of having the Sorbian-speaking teacher training students reporting annually on their progress, in order to
minimise any possible problems. The Committee of Experts welcomes this information.
119. The representatives of the speakers have drawn the attention of the Committee of Experts to the fact
that an increased number of qualified teachers for bilingual education are necessary for the adequate
implementation of the “2plus” model (see under Article 8.1.b.iv above). Furthermore, the Committee of
Experts is aware that the Sorbian Language Plan foresees a reinforcement of the training for Sorbianspeaking teachers, including for pre-school teachers.
120. While considering the undertaking fulfilled, the Committee of Experts would welcome more
information on the developments in teacher training, once the Sorbian Language Plan is implemented.
i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken and progress
achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority languages and for drawing up
periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.

121. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. The
Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “ensure that an effective monitoring
mechanism in the sense of the Charter exists in the field of education for all regional or minority
languages covered under Part III.”
122. The Committee of Experts refers to its comments under General issues arising in the evaluation of
the application of the Charter in Germany (paragraphs 13-14). It reiterates that the current undertaking does
not necessarily require the setting up of a new body to carry out the monitoring envisaged under this
undertaking. It is for example possible for existing supervisory bodies to carry out these functions and
integrate them into existing administrative structures. The reports from the monitoring process should be
made public. The current reporting mechanism referred to by the German authorities does not fulfil the
requirements of this undertaking
123.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled.

Paragraph 2
With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are
traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow,
encourage or provide teaching in or of the regional or minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.

19

124. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. It
urged the authorities to take measures to make available Upper Sorbian education in a pro-active manner in
those places where the number of users would justify such an offer.
125. According to the fifth periodical report, educational offers are provided or can be provided if and
when actual demand exists. As a result, no further measures are necessary. The Committee of Experts
received no information about measures taken by the authorities to inform about the possibility of teaching in
or of Upper Sorbian, outside the Upper Sorbian traditional language area, nor about any such teaching
actually taking place.
126. The Committee of Experts thus considers the undertaking not fulfilled. It strongly urges the
authorities to make available Upper Sorbian education, outside the Sorbian traditional language area, in
3
those places where the number of users would justify such an offer, most likely Dresden and Leipzig .
Article 9 – Judicial authorities
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents using the regional or minority
languages justifies the measures specified below, according to the situation of each of these languages and on condition that
the use of the facilities afforded by the present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration
of justice:
a

in criminal proceedings:
ii to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or minority language; and/or
iii to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not be considered inadmissible solely
because they are formulated in a regional or minority language; and/or
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations involving no extra expense for the persons
concerned;

b

in civil proceedings:
ii

c

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she may use his or her
regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional expense; and/or
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
ii

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she may use his or her
regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional expense; and/or
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

127. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered these undertakings partly
fulfilled. The Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take resolute action to
establish a structured policy for making it possible in practice to use regional or minority languages
[…] in the courts”. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts encouraged the authorities to take measures to
improve the implementation of these undertakings in practice.
128. In the fifth periodical report, the authorities state that the right to use Sorbian before courts is
implemented in practice. According to the periodical report, the Upper Sorbian speakers are aware of this
right, as are the legal professionals. Courts have Upper Sorbian-speaking staff. In addition, the authorities
state that they raise awareness on the possibilities to use Upper Sorbian before courts at public events or
during law courses at grammar school.
129.

However, Upper Sorbian is practically not used before courts.

130. The Committee of Experts was informed by the representatives of the Sorbian speakers, that during
the monitoring cycle, the regional court was relocated from Bautzen/Budyšin to Görlitz, which is situated
outside the Sorbian settlement area. The relocation caused some concerns to the Sorbian-speakers, but the
application of Section 9 of the Act on the Sorbs’ Rights in the Free State of Saxony, dealing with the use of
Sorbian before courts, has been extended. However, the consequences in practice are not yet known.
3

Third Opinion on Germany of the Advisory Committee on the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities,
paragraphs 11-12, ACFC/OP/III(2010)003

20

131. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertakings are partly fulfilled.
It asks the authorities to provide information about the implementation of these undertakings in practice,
including about the use of Sorbian before the regional court in Görlitz, in the next periodical report.
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of regional or minority
languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as
far as this is reasonably possible:
a

iv

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written applications in these
languages;

132. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities
“take resolute action to establish a structured policy for making it possible in practice to use
regional or minority languages in dealings with the administration […]”. Furthermore, the Committee of
Experts encouraged the authorities to provide specific information with respect to the Land administrative
bodies physically situated outside the Upper Sorbian language areas and which had responsibilities within
those areas.
133. According to the fifth periodical report, the Land administrative bodies physically situated outside the
Upper Sorbian settlement area where the Act on the Sorbs’ Rights in the Free State of Saxony applies, have
no obligation to accept applications in Upper Sorbian.
134. The Committee of Experts underlines that, under the Charter, the Upper Sorbian speakers must be
able to submit oral and written applications in Upper Sorbian to all Land administrative bodies which have
responsibilities within the Upper Sorbian language area, as well as to those situated outside this area. The
Committee of Experts asks the authorities to provide information on any cases where Land authorities
situated outside the Sorbian language area deal directly with citizens in the language area.
Paragraph 2
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who are users of regional or
minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below, the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
b

the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written applications in these
languages;

135. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking fulfilled in the
core area, and only formally fulfilled in other parts of the Upper Sorbian language area. The Committee of
Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take resolute action to establish a structured
policy for making it possible in practice to use regional or minority languages in dealings with the
administration […]”. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts encouraged the German authorities to take
measures in order to encourage the practical use of the possibility to submit applications in Upper Sorbian to
local and regional authorities in other parts of the Upper Sorbian language area outside the core area.
136. According to the fifth periodical report, commissioners for Sorbian affairs and Upper Sorbian
speaking staff are present within the administrative bodies. In the rural district of Görlitz, 27 out of 2000 civil
servants speak Upper Sorbian. Applications are received in Upper Sorbian, and the reply is drawn up in
German, or Upper Sorbian, if the applicant so requested. The authorities received no complaints concerning
the way applications in Upper Sorbian are dealt with. Furthermore, one of the objectives of the Sorbian
Language Plan is to increase the Sorbian language skills in the public service, by considering them an asset
in job applications and by offering Sorbian language courses to civil servants.
137.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking fulfilled.

21

Paragraph 3
With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting on their behalf, the Parties
undertake, within the territory in which regional or minority languages are used, in accordance with the situation of each
language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
b

to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request and receive a reply in these languages;

138. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled.
The Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take resolute action to establish a
structured policy for making it possible in practice to use regional or minority languages in dealings
with the administration […]”. The Committee of Experts urged the authorities to take measures in order to
ensure that replies from public bodies are given in Upper Sorbian.
139. According to the fifth periodical report, the administrative authorities are allowed to reply in Upper
Sorbian to requests, but have no obligation in this sense. However, as a rule, replies are given in Upper
Sorbian if the applicant so requests. It is not clear to the Committee of Experts whether this applies also to
public services provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting on their behalf (i.e.
hospitals, public transport). The Committee of Experts asks the authorities to clarify this issue in the next
periodical report.
Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the Parties undertake to take
one or more of the following measures:
c

compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a knowledge of a
regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that language is used.

140. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. The
Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take resolute action to establish a
structured policy for making it possible in practice to use regional or minority languages in dealings
with the administration […]”. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts urged the authorities to take
measures to ensure compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees with
knowledge of Upper Sorbian to be appointed in the territory in which that language is used.
141. According to the fifth periodical report, no information is available on the number of requests from
public service employees with knowledge of Upper Sorbian to be appointed in the territory in which the
language is used. The report further refers to the measures provided for by the Sorbian Language Plan: to
consider Sorbian language skills as an asset in job applications and to offer Sorbian language courses to
civil servants. The Committee of Experts welcomes the information on the measures contained in the
Sorbian Language Plan, but it lacks information about how the authorities comply with requests from public
service employees with knowledge of Upper Sorbian to be appointed in the territory in which the language is
used.
Article 11 – Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in which those languages are
spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are
competent, have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the
media:
b

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the regional or minority
languages on a regular basis;

142. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking fulfilled, in light
4
of the existing offer on public service broadcasting . It nevertheless encouraged the authorities to promote
the broadcasting of Upper Sorbian programmes by private radio broadcasters.

4

Paragraph 17, 3rd Report of the Committee of Experts on the application of the Charter in Germany, ECRML (2008) 4

22

143. According to the fifth periodical report, the Act on Private Broadcasting provides that the private
broadcasters should take into consideration the views of the minorities. The Sorbian associations have one
representative in the assembly of the Saxony’s media authority (Sächsische Landesmedienanstalt, SLM).
The Saxonian Training and Testing Channel (Sächsischer Ausbildungs- und Erprobungskanal, SAEK)
launched by Saxony’s media authority broadcasts in Sorbian.
144. According to the representatives of the speakers, no private radio stations broadcast programmes in
Upper Sorbian, mainly because of a lack of resources. However, they commend the training of young Upper
Sorbian speakers by the SAEK, as they gain the necessary skills to produce radio or TV programmes.
145. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking is fulfilled. It
nevertheless encourages the authorities to further promote the broadcasting of Upper Sorbian programmes
also by private radio broadcasters.
c

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the regional or minority
languages on a regular basis;

146. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled, in
5
light of the existing offer on public service broadcasting . It encouraged the authorities to promote the
broadcasting of Upper Sorbian television programmes on a regular basis.
147. According to the fifth periodical report, the public broadcaster MDR continues to broadcast the
monthly programme in Upper Sorbian Wuhladko. There are no private TV channels broadcasting
programmes in Upper Sorbian.
148. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking remains partly
fulfilled. It encourages the authorities to promote the broadcasting of Upper Sorbian television programmes
on a regular basis.
f

ii

to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions in the regional or
minority languages;

149. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. It
encouraged the authorities to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual
productions in Upper Sorbian and to inform the Committee of Experts in the next periodical report.
150. According to the fifth periodical report, the authorities focus on film projects for children and young
people in Upper and Lower Sorbian. In 2009-2011 eight projects co-funded by the Land authorities were
th
finalised. In 2012, the production of one film by Domowina, in preparation of the 10 International Folklore
Festival in Lusatia received financial support from the Federal Ministry of the Interior.
151. It is not clear to the Committee of Experts whether the audiovisual projects mentioned above were
supported by applying the general existing measures for financial assistance to audiovisual productions in
Upper Sorbian, to which Article 11.1.f.ii refers, or they were part of a scheme specifically targeting
audiovisual productions in minority languages, which is covered by Article 11.1.d, already fulfilled. The
Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of the undertaking and asks the
authorities to clarify these aspects in the next periodical report.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural centres, museums, archives,
academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression,
festivals and the culture industries, including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory
in which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this
field:
a

5

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority languages and foster the
different means of access to works produced in these languages;

Ibid.

23

152. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking still fulfilled at
the time of the report. The Committee of Experts had been informed by the representatives of Domowina
that the available resources were not enough to ensure the future of institutional structures and the financial
situation remained precarious.
153. According to the information received during the on-the-spot visit, the German authorities (the federal
level, the Länder Brandenburg and Saxony) have continued to finance the Foundation for the Sorbian
People with considerable budgetary means. In 2012 the contribution even increased by € 1 000 000. The
Committee of Experts commends the authorities for these measures.
154.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking fulfilled.

Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for regional or minority
languages and the cultures they reflect.

155. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled at
federal level.
156. The Federal Foreign Office and the Goethe-Institut do not take any measures to promote the regional
and minority languages and cultures in the framework of the cultural and educational policy abroad. The
German authorities do not consider such measures necessary for the implementation of this undertaking.
157. The Committee of Experts underlines that this provision requires the German authorities to include
the Upper Sorbian language and the culture it reflects when presenting Germany’s culture and heritage
abroad. As a first step, embassies and the Goethe-Institut could distribute the brochure National minorities,
regional and minority languages in Germany, issued by the Ministry of the Interior, at international events
where Germany promotes its culture abroad.
158. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled at federal level. It encourages the
authorities to make appropriate provision for the Upper Sorbian language and the culture it reflects, when
pursuing their cultural policy abroad.
Article 13 – Economic and social life
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole country:
c

to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority languages in connection with
economic or social activities;

159. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking only partly
fulfilled. It encouraged the authorities to strengthen their efforts to oppose practices designed to discourage
the use of Upper Sorbian in connection with economic or social activities.
160. According to the information received, the Sorbian Language Plan envisages taking focused
measures in that regard.
161. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking remains partly
fulfilled at present.
Paragraph 2
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the public authorities are competent, within
the territory in which the regional or minority languages are used, and as far as this is reasonably possible:
c

to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and hostels offer the possibility of
receiving and treating in their own language persons using a regional or minority language who are in need
of care on grounds of ill-health, old age or for other reasons;

24

162. In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled. It
strongly urged the authorities to take measures to ensure that social care facilities can receive and treat the
persons concerned in Upper Sorbian.
163. According to the fifth periodical report, the Sorbian Language Plan provides for intensified contacts
with social care providers, in order to raise awareness about the benefits of using Upper Sorbian in social
care facilities and convince them to offer this possibility. Otherwise, the authorities maintain that they are not
competent in this area and that privately-run social facilities are free to select their own staff, the only legal
requirements being those concerning professional skills. Although subject to supervision, these facilities
could not be obliged to employ Sorbian-speaking staff.
164. While welcoming the information about the Sorbian Language Plan, the Committee of Experts
6
reiterates that the current undertaking requires authorities to ensure that Upper Sorbian is used in these
establishments, which can only be achieved by a bilingual human resources policy. It reiterates its view that
it is possible for the authorities to take measures such as regulations governing the relevant qualifications
which take account of a person’s knowledge of Upper Sorbian, or facilities and incentives for the existing
7
social care personnel to improve their Upper Sorbian skills .
165. The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking partly fulfilled. It encourages the authorities to
take measures to ensure that social care facilities can receive and treat the persons concerned in Upper
Sorbian.

6
7

Paragraph 184, 3rd Report of the Committee of Experts on the application of the Charter in Germany, ECRML (2008) 4
Paragraph 465, 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts on the application of the Charter in Germany, ECRML (2006) 1

25

3.2.3.

Lower Sorbian in the Land of Brandenburg

166. In this section, the Committee of Experts will focus on problematic areas and new developments in
the protection and promotion of Lower Sorbian. It will therefore not assess the implementation of provisions
which were fulfilled in the previous monitoring cycles, apart from such undertakings where the Committee of
Experts has received new relevant information. The following provisions will not be commented upon:
Article 8, paragraph 1 f.iii;
Article 9, paragraph 1 b iii, c iii; paragraph 2.a;
Article 10, paragraph 2.g; paragraph 4.a;
Article 11, paragraph 1d; e i; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1.b; c; d; e; f; g; h; paragraph 2;
Article 13, paragraph 1.a; c.
167. For these provisions, the Committee of Experts refers to the conclusions reached in previous reports,
but reserves the right to evaluate the situation again at a later stage.
Article 8 – Education
168. There is a need for decided efforts by the Land of Brandenburg to strengthen the presence of Lower
Sorbian in education. Language acquisition in families has practically broken down. Accordingly, the
maintenance of Lower Sorbian is largely dependent on language learning in the school system. However,
the current presence of Lower Sorbian in the educational system is too marginal to deliver a real contribution
towards language maintenance and revitalisation.
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used, according to the
situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
a

169.

i

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

iii

to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those pupils whose families so request
and whose number is considered sufficient; or

iv

if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school education, to favour and/or
encourage the application of the measures referred to under i to iii above;

In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled.

170. According to the fifth evaluation report, ten nursery schools are using Lower Sorbian. However, the
Committee of Experts was informed by the Lower Sorbian speakers that five different models are applied by
the ten nursery schools and no reliable studies on their effectiveness exist. In the long-term, it would not be
possible to maintain many of these offers, due to a lack of qualified pre-school teachers. In addition, in large
parts of the Sorbian settlement area there is no offer of Lower Sorbian at pre-school level.
171. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking is only partly
fulfilled. It encourages the authorities to extend the Lower Sorbian pre-school offer and to ensure that a
sufficient number of adequately trained pre-school teachers is available.
b

i

to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of primary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

iii

to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or minority languages as an
integral part of the curriculum; or

iv

to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils whose families so
request and whose number is considered sufficient;

172. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled.
The Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “adopt and implement a structured
26

policy for the promotion and preservation of […] Lower Sorbian, including in particular measures
which ensure as a matter of urgency that primary […] education is systematically available in [this
language]”.
173. According to the fifth periodical report, in the Cottbus/Chóśebuz school district, 20 public schools and
one church school offer Lower Sorbian in primary education. In addition, the primary school in Drebkau
offered Lower Sorbian for the first time in the sixth grade in the 2011/2012 school year. The Witaj project
(bilingual teaching in Lower Sorbian) is carried out in five additional schools. In the Wünsdorf school district,
two schools teach Lower Sorbian, and one of these also participates in the Witaj project. On the whole, in the
2011/2012 school year, 959 pupils attended Lower Sorbian classes and 284 participated in the Witaj project.
174. The Lower Sorbian-speakers informed the Committee of Experts about several concerns related to
Lower Sorbian education. Teaching of Lower Sorbian takes place in mixed age groups, which makes these
optional classes less attractive for pupils and diminishes the quality of teaching. In addition, Lower Sorbian is
not offered in all schools in the Sorbian settlement area and not every year. In the six schools offering
bilingual education, four different models are applied. The subjects offered in bilingual education differ,
depending on the available teachers, who do not have proper training to teach in Lower Sorbian. Bilingual
classes are also not systematically available throughout the Sorbian settlement area. The current system
also raises continuity problems from pre-school to primary level. On the whole, there is no appropriate
strategy for bilingual education and the current offer does not ensure a sustainable language revitalisation. A
new legal basis is necessary, as the current ordinance of 2000 was issued before the setting up of bilingual
education and is in conflict with other subsequent regulations.
175. In light of this information the Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the
undertaking is only partly fulfilled.
c

i

to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of secondary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

iii

to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or minority languages as an
integral part of the curriculum; or

iv

to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils who, or where
appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered sufficient;

176. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking partly fulfilled.
The Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “adopt and implement a structured
policy for the promotion and preservation of […] Lower Sorbian, including in particular measures
which ensure as a matter of urgency that […] secondary education is systematically available in [this
language]”.
177. According to the fifth periodical report, the Lower Sorbian Grammar School, the Oberstufenzentrum
in Cottbus/Chóśebuz and three Oberschulen offer Lower Sorbian classes. Lower Sorbian is taught as an
optional subject, except at the Lower Sorbian Grammar School, where it is compulsorily taught as a second
foreign language. Bilingual forms of teaching are still rather underdeveloped.
178. According to the Lower Sorbian speakers, the current offer is not enough to ensure continuity from
primary to secondary education. Many students choosing different specialisations from those offered by the
above-mentioned schools have no possibility to continue their Lower Sorbian studies. Although the Lower
Sorbian Grammar School developed a strategy for bilingual education in 2008, it has not received the
allocation of hours and is therefore not in a position to extend its offer. The number of students leaving
secondary education with sufficient knowledge of Lower Sorbian is therefore insufficient. As in the case of
primary education, a new legal basis and structured measures are necessary.
179.

The Committee of Experts maintains that the undertaking is only partly fulfilled.

The Committee of Experts encourages the authorities to take immediate measures strengthening the
offer of Lower Sorbian primary and secondary education, in particular as far as bilingual teaching is
concerned.
e

i

to make available university and other higher education in regional or minority languages; or

ii

to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher education subjects; or

27

iii
if, by reason of the role of the State in relation to higher education institutions, sub-paragraphs i
and ii cannot be applied, to encourage and/or allow the provision of university or other forms of higher
education in regional or minority languages or of facilities for the study of these languages as
university or higher education subjects;

180.

In the previous evaluation reports, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking fulfilled.

181. According to the representatives of the Lower Sorbian speakers, the University of Leipzig, where
Lower Sorbian was studied on the basis of an agreement with Brandenburg, is considering reorganising the
Institute for Sorbian Studies. The Committee of Experts asks the authorities to inform about further
developments on this issue and on how Brandenburg is encouraging the provision of university or other
forms of higher education in Lower Sorbian or of facilities for the study of Lower Sorbian at this level in the
next periodical report.
g

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected by the
regional or minority language.

182. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking fulfilled. It
nevertheless asked for more information about the teaching of the history and culture of the Sorbs at
university level.
183. According to the fifth periodical report, the University of Potsdam has been offering since 2007/2008
a seminar on national minorities/regional and minority languages in Germany/Sorbs in Brandenburg, as a
compulsory optional subject in social sciences, for students training to be teachers. To this day eleven
seminars have been offered and 210 students have attended. The Lower Sorbian speakers, however, have
informed the Committee of Experts that these seminars are not included in the plan of studies and they do
not reach all teacher training students. In addition to the seminars, individual classes are offered in the
German Department, at the instructor’s initiative.
184. The Lower Sorbian speakers also informed the Committee of Experts that teaching of the history and
culture of the Sorbs in schools is not subject to any monitoring and depends on the initiative of the teacher.
As a result, such teaching seems to be missing in most schools.
185. The Committee of Experts must therefore revise its previous conclusion and consider the
undertaking only partly fulfilled.
h

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of paragraphs a to g
accepted by the Party;

186. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled. It
strongly urged the German authorities to adopt a more structured policy with regard to teacher training, in
close cooperation with the speakers.
187. According to the fifth periodical report, the Office for the Development of Sorbian Education in
Cottbus/Chóśebuz offers a two-year further teacher training programme, under the supervision of the
University of Potsdam and of the Association for Further Qualification in Education, leading to an additional
qualification in Sorbian as a working language in primary education and secondary subject instruction. 33
teachers have completed this course. At present, no teachers are undergoing this training, but the offer has
been maintained. The University of Leipzig continues to offer a master programme in Lower Sorbian and five
students graduated during the reporting period. Other opportunities are offered by the adult education
centres. In addition, the University of Potsdam has published four pedagogical guides on Lower Sorbian,
available for free on the internet.
188. The Lower Sorbian speakers however, are concerned that the half-time post for a lecturer, which
Brandenburg funds at the University of Leipzig is insufficient for adequate teacher training. In addition,
teacher training in the two Länder is different, which makes it less attractive for students from Brandenburg
to study in Leipzig. Furthermore, the University of Leipzig is considering reorganising its Institute for Sorbian,
and it is not clear what impact this will have on teacher training. Additional concerns have been expressed
with regard to the pre-school teachers (see also under Article 8.1.a.iv above).

28

189. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking is only partly
fulfilled. It again strongly urges the German authorities to adopt a more structured policy with regard to
teacher training, in close cooperation with the speakers.
i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken and progress
achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority languages and for drawing up
periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.

190. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. The
Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “ensure that an effective monitoring
mechanism in the sense of the Charter exists in the field of education for all regional or minority
languages covered under Part III”.
191. The Committee of Experts refers to its comments under General issues arising in the evaluation of
the application of the Charter in Germany (paragraphs 13-14). It reiterates that the current undertaking does
not necessarily require the setting up of a new body to carry out the monitoring envisaged under this
undertaking. It is for example possible for existing supervisory bodies to carry out these functions and
integrate them into existing administrative structures. The reports from the monitoring process should be
made public. The current reporting mechanism referred to by the German authorities does not fulfil the
requirements of this undertaking.
192.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled.

Article 9 – Judicial authorities
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents using the regional or minority
languages justifies the measures specified below, according to the situation of each of these languages and on condition that
the use of the facilities afforded by the present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration
of justice:
a

in criminal proceedings:
ii

to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or minority language; and/or

iii

to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not be considered inadmissible
solely because they are formulated in a regional or minority language; and/or

if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations involving no extra expense for the persons
concerned;

193. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking formally fulfilled.
The Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take resolute action to establish a
structured policy for making it possible in practice to use regional or minority languages […] in the
courts”.
194. According to the fifth periodical report, the authorities received no complaints concerning the use of
Lower Sorbian in criminal proceedings. However, the Lower Sorbian speakers have informed the Committee
of Experts about a statement of the Land government of October 2012, according to which using Lower
Sorbian would lengthen the court proceedings. Furthermore, the local court in Cottbus/ Chóśebuz allegedly
refused to accept documents in Lower Sorbian, asked the interested person for a legal clarification and
warned of the possibility to incur the translation expenses. The Committee of Experts asks the authorities to
comment on these allegations.
195. The Committee of Experts reminds the authorities that by ratifying the Charter they committed
themselves to promoting the use of minority languages in all spheres of public life. It reiterates that the
authorities should take positive measures to facilitate the use of Lower Sorbian in criminal proceedings.
196. The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking formally fulfilled, but in its opinion the practical
implementation of these undertakings is deficient. It encourages the authorities to take measures facilitating
the use of Lower Sorbian before courts in criminal proceedings.

29

Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
197. The Brandenburg authorities are in the process of revising the Law on the Rights of the Sorbs
(Sorben-Wenden-Gesetz). The most disputed issue in this legislative procedure is whether the traditional
mechanism of defining the Sorbian settlement area, and thus the territorial scope of application of the
statute’s provisions, is in conformity with the requirements of the Charter. At present, it is more or less left to
the discretion of the individual municipalities whether they want to belong to the settlement area or not. In
previous monitoring cycles, the Committee of Experts has criticised that arrangement because it does not
ensure that all the places where Lower Sorbian is traditionally used really fall under the protective
mechanisms of this statute. The associations of the speakers claim that a number of municipalities where
Lower Sorbian is traditionally used are left out from the scope of application. The Committee of Experts
urges the authorities to look into that matter and to take care that the territorial coverage of the provisions on
administrative use of Lower Sorbian really conforms to the requirements of the Charter.
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of regional or minority
languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as
far as this is reasonably possible:
a

iv

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written applications in these
languages;

198. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking formally fulfilled.
The Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take resolute action to establish a
structured policy for making it possible in practice to use regional or minority languages in dealings
with the administration […]”. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts strongly urged the authorities to take
the necessary steps to ensure that the possibility to submit oral and written applications in Lower Sorbian is
guaranteed in practice.
199.

The fifth periodical report contains no information on the practical implementation of this undertaking.

200. The Lower Sorbian speakers, however, informed the Committee of Experts that, according to an
October 2012 statement of the Land Government, using Lower Sorbian in administration would be an
unreasonable burden in technical and organisational terms. Moreover, the public service employees are not
aware about the right to use Lower Sorbian in relations with the administration. In several cases applicants
were asked not to use Lower Sorbian or had to inform the authorities on the relevant legal framework. The
tax office in Cottbus, for example, refused to accept documents in Lower Sorbian, asked the applicant for
legal clarifications and warned of the possibility to incur the costs of translation. In addition, it was stated that
the correct use of Lower Sorbian in the electronic data processing system is very difficult, due to the lack of
special characters. The Committee of Experts asks the authorities to comment on these allegations.
The Committee of Experts again strongly urges the authorities to ensure in practice the possibility of
submitting oral and written applications in Lower Sorbian.
Paragraph 2
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who are users of regional or
minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below, the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
b

the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written applications in these
languages;

201. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled.
The Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take resolute action to establish a
structured policy for making it possible in practice to use regional or minority languages in dealings
with the administration […]”. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts encouraged the authorities to take
measures to improve the practical implementation of this undertaking in practice.
202. According to the fifth periodical report, oral and written applications are only rarely submitted in
Lower Sorbian, although conditions are in place to process and reply to such requests. The municipalities in
the Sorbian language area have Lower Sorbian commissioners, serving as contact point and as translators
in case of need. Furthermore, in the Sorbian settlement area bilingual signs and bilingual letterheads are
used. Publications are printed as well bilingually. However, the Lower Sorbian speakers have informed the
30

Committee of Experts that practical problems still exist when using Lower Sorbian (see under Article
10.1.a.iv).
203. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking is partly fulfilled. It
encourages the authorities to continue their efforts to improve the implementation of this undertaking in
practice.
Paragraph 3
With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting on their behalf, the Parties
undertake, within the territory in which regional or minority languages are used, in accordance with the situation of each
language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
b

to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request and receive a reply in these languages;

204. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. The
Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take resolute action to establish a
structured policy for making it possible in practice to use regional or minority languages in dealings
with the administration […]”. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts encouraged the authorities to provide
further detailed information with regard to the possibility to submit a request and receive a reply in Lower
Sorbian in the case of public services provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting on
their behalf (i.e. postal services, hospitals, public transport).
205. According to the fifth periodical report, the Brandenburg Administrative Procedure Act provides that
minority language speakers may submit oral and written application in Sorbian to administrative authorities
and public services. No information is provided about the practical implementation of this undertaking.
206. In view of its question for additional information under Article 10.1. a.iv, the Committee of Experts will
not conclude on this undertaking at present. It asks the authorities to provide information about its
implementation in practice.
Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the Parties undertake to take
one or more of the following measures:
c

compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a knowledge of a
regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that language is used.

207. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. It
urged the authorities to take measures to ensure compliance as far as possible with requests from public
service employees having knowledge of Lower Sorbian to be appointed in the territory in which that
language is used.
208. The fifth periodical report reiterates that the Brandenburg Minister of the Interior had consultations
with other ministries and with the municipalities in the Sorbian settlement area and recommended that Lower
Sorbian knowledge should be considered an advantage, when this language skill might be useful for
performing for the respective job. However, Lower Sorbian knowledge as criterion for employment in the
public authorities cannot be envisaged.
209. The Committee of Experts asks the authorities to provide examples of the practical implementation of
this undertaking in the next periodical report.

Paragraph 5
The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or minority languages, at the request of
those concerned.

210.

The Committee of Experts considered this undertaking fulfilled in the previous monitoring cycles.

211. In the fifth monitoring cycle, the representatives of the speakers have informed the Committee of
Experts that there is no legal guarantee of the possibility to use the masculine and feminine forms of the

31

names in Sorbian. In addition, problems relating to the correct spelling of family names in Lower Sorbian
were reported (see paragraph 200).
212. The Committee of Experts asks the authorities to provide specific information in this respect in the
next periodical report.
Article 11 – Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in which those languages are
spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are
competent, have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the
media:
b

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the regional or minority
languages on a regular basis;

213. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking fulfilled, in light
8
of existing offer on public service broadcasting . The Committee of Ministers recommended that the German
authorities “take measures so that adequate radio […] broadcasting is available in […] Lower Sorbian
[…]”. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts encouraged the authorities to promote the broadcasting of
Lower Sorbian programmes by private radio broadcasters.
214.
There is a continuous offer of Lower Sorbian by the regional public broadcaster Radio BerlinBrandenburg (RBB). According to the information received by the Committee of Experts during the on-thespot visit, no private radio stations broadcast programmes in Lower Sorbian.
215. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking is fulfilled.
Nevertheless, it encourages the authorities to promote the broadcasting of Lower Sorbian programmes also
by private radio broadcasters.
c

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the regional or minority
languages on a regular basis;

216. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. The
Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take measures so that adequate […]
television broadcasting is available in […] Lower Sorbian […]”. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts
encouraged the authorities to take measures to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television
programmes in Lower Sorbian on a regular basis.
217. The fifth periodical report reiterates that any measures encouraging and/or facilitating the
broadcasting of programmes in minority languages are incompatible with the independence of the media.
However, the representatives of the speakers informed the Committee of Experts that the Act on the Rights
of the Sorbs in Brandenburg already provides that the authorities will ensure that the Sorbian culture and
language are taken into account by private media. There is a 30-minute monthly TV programme in public
broadcasting. No private TV channels broadcast programmes in Lower Sorbian.
218. In light of the existing offer on the public service broadcasting, the Committee of Experts considers
the undertaking partly fulfilled. It urges the authorities to extend the current offer and to encourage the
broadcasting of television programmes in Lower Sorbian by private broadcasters.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural centres, museums, archives,
academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression,
festivals and the culture industries, including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory
in which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this
field:
8

Paragraph 17, 3rd Report of the Committee of Experts on the application of the Charter in Germany, ECRML (2008) 4

32

a

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority languages and foster the
different means of access to works produced in these languages;

219. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking fulfilled at the
time of the report. The Committee of Experts had been informed by the representatives of Domowina that
the available resources were not enough to ensure the future of institutional structures, in particular the
Sorbian National Ensemble, and the financial situation remained precarious.
220. According to the information received during the on-the-spot visit, the German authorities (the federal
level, the Länder Brandenburg and Saxony) have continued to finance the Foundation for the Sorbian
People with considerable budgetary means. In 2012 the contribution even increased by € 1 000 000. The
Committee of Experts commends the authorities for these measures.
221.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking fulfilled.

Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for regional or minority
languages and the cultures they reflect.

222. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled at
federal level.
223. The Federal Foreign Office and the Goethe-Institut do not take any measures to promote the regional
and minority languages and cultures in the framework of the cultural and educational policy abroad. The
German authorities do not consider such measures necessary for the implementation of this undertaking.
224. The Committee of Experts underlines that this provision requires the German authorities to include
the Lower Sorbian language and the culture it reflects when presenting Germany’s culture and heritage
abroad. As a first step, embassies and the Goethe-Institut could distribute the brochure National minorities,
regional and minority languages in Germany, issued by the Ministry of the Interior, at international events
where Germany promotes its culture abroad.
225. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled at federal level. It encourages the
authorities to make appropriate provision for the Lower Sorbian language and the culture it reflects, when
pursuing their cultural policy abroad.
Article 13 – Economic and social life
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole country:
d

to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by means other than those
specified in the above sub-paragraphs.

226. In its fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts requested the authorities to provide more
information on the measures taken to encourage and/or facilitate the use of Lower Sorbian in economic and
social activities.
227. The fifth periodical report contains no specific information in this respect. According to the information
received by the Committee of Experts during the on-the-spot visit, no activities encouraging the use of Lower
Sorbian in economic and social life have taken place.
228. The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled. It urges the German authorities to
encourage and/or facilitate the use of Lower Sorbian in economic and social life.

33

3.2.4.

North Frisian in the Land of Schleswig-Holstein

229. In this section, the Committee of Experts will focus on problematic areas and new developments in
the protection and promotion of North Frisian. It will therefore not assess the implementation of provisions
which were fulfilled in the previous monitoring cycles, apart from such undertakings where the Committee of
Experts has received new relevant information. The following provisions will not be commented upon:
Article 8, paragraph 1 e ii, f.iii; g; paragraph 2;
Article 9, paragraph 1.b.iii; c.iii;paragraph 2.a;
Article 10 paragraph 2.g; paragraph 4.c; paragraph 5;
Article 11, paragraph 1.d; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1.a; b; c; d; f; g; h;paragraph 2;
Article 13, paragraph 1.a; c; d.
230. For these provisions, the Committee of Experts refers to the conclusions reached in its previous
reports, but reserves the right to evaluate the situation again at a later stage.
Article 8 – Education
231. During the on-the-spot visit, the authorities of Schleswig-Holstein informed the Committee of Experts
of their plans to set up two schools with a specific profile in North Frisian language education, one in Niebüll
and a second school on one of the North Frisian Islands. The Committee of Experts considers that the
establishment of such schools could contribute to making the teaching of North Frisian more systematic and
effective. Consequently, the Committee of Experts welcomes these plans as a step towards a structured
offer of North Frisian language education and asks the German authorities to provide additional information
on the further development in the next periodical report.
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used, according to the
situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
a

i
ii
iii
iv

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or
to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or
to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those pupils whose families so
request and whose number is considered sufficient; or
if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school education, to favour and/or
encourage the application of the measures referred to under i to iii above;

232. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking partly fulfilled. It
strongly urged the authorities to make available, systematically and through adequate institutional and
financial support, at least a substantial part of pre-school education in North Frisian to those pupils whose
families so request.
233. According to the fifth periodical report, North Frisian is used in 17 kindergartens. It is not clear how
many children are enrolled in these pre-schools. In addition, the periodical report states that the extent to
which North Frisian is used differs from pre-school to pre-school and depends on whether North Frisianspeaking teachers are employed. Some pre-schools use North Frisian 30 minutes per week, others provide
pre-school education entirely in this language. The Committee of Experts understands from this information
that there is a lack of trained pre-school teachers for North Frisian. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts
notes that using North Frisian for only 30 minutes per week does not correspond to the requirement of
making available at least a substantial part of pre-school education in this language, i.e. to provide for
bilingual education. Moreover, a stable framework for financial support does not seem to exist. While the
financial support for pre-school education in North Frisian is currently provided by the Kreise, the Land
authorities consider making supplementary means available. In a statement appended to the periodical
report, the Friesenrat umbrella association points out that a stable financial framework for pre-school
education in North Frisian should be created. In addition, a systematic training of pre-school teachers for
North Frisian is needed.
234.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled.

34

The Committee of Experts again strongly urges the German authorities to make available,
systematically and through adequate institutional and financial support, at least a substantial part of
pre-school education in North Frisian to those pupils whose families so request.
b

i
ii
iii
iv

to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or
to make available a substantial part of primary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or
to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or minority languages as an
integral part of the curriculum; or
to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils whose families so
request and whose number is considered sufficient;

235. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking not fulfilled. The
Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “adopt and implement a structured
policy for the promotion and preservation of North Frisian […] including in particular measures
which ensure as a matter of urgency that primary […] education is systematically available in [this
language]”. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts strongly urged the authorities to make available North
Frisian teaching as an integral part of the curriculum within primary education.
236. The fifth periodical report states that the Land of Schleswig-Holstein is not planning to offer North
Frisian teaching as an integral part of the curriculum within primary education, despite a clear wish
expressed by the Friesenrat umbrella association. 802 pupils currently learn Frisian as a subject, but it is not
clear whether the figure of 802 concerns only primary education. Also, the number of hours during which
North Frisian is taught is not clear. In one primary school, North Frisian is, as of the third grade, also used in
regional and social studies (Heimat- und Sachkunde).
237.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled.

The Committee of Experts again strongly urges the German authorities to make systematically
available teaching in or of North Frisian as an integral part of the curriculum within primary
education.
c

i
ii
iii
iv

to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or
to make available a substantial part of secondary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or
to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or minority languages as an
integral part of the curriculum; or
to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils who, or where
appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered sufficient;

238. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking partly fulfilled.
The Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “adopt and implement a structured
policy for the promotion and preservation of North Frisian […] including in particular measures
which ensure as a matter of urgency that […] secondary education is systematically available in [this
language]”. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts strongly urged the authorities to make available North
Frisian teaching as an integral part of the curriculum within secondary education.
239. According to the fifth periodical report, North Frisian is taught at six secondary schools, including one
Gymnasium. The number of students and the number of hours are unclear.
240. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It asks the German authorities to
provide comprehensive information about the implementation of this undertaking in the next periodical report.
The Committee of Experts again strongly urges the German authorities to make systematically
available teaching in or of North Frisian as an integral part of the curriculum within secondary
education.
h

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of paragraphs a to g
accepted by the Party;

241. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking partly fulfilled. It
strongly urged the authorities to ensure that appropriate facilities for teacher training are in place to meet the
needs for education in North Frisian in a short and long term perspective and to provide incentives aimed at
increasing the number of North Frisian teachers at all levels of education.
242. The fifth periodical report states that the training of North Frisian teachers meets the demand for
learning North Frisian, which is low according to the authorities. North Frisian can be studied as a
35

complementary subject at the universities of Kiel and Flensburg. Until 2012, eleven students had completed
masters studies at the Flensburg University enabling them to teach North Frisian. Currently, three students
follow these studies. During the on-the-spot, the Committee of Experts was made aware of a lack of teacher
training offer for pre-school teachers.
243. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It again strongly urges the
German authorities to ensure that appropriate facilities for teacher training are in place to meet the needs for
education in North Frisian in a short and long term perspective and to provide incentives aimed at increasing
the number of North Frisian teachers at all levels of education.
i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken and progress
achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority languages and for drawing up
periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.

244. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking not fulfilled. The
Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “ensure that an effective monitoring
mechanism in the sense of the Charter exists in the field of education for all regional or minority
languages covered under Part III”.
245. The Committee of Experts refers to its comments under General issues arising in the evaluation of
the application of the Charter in Germany (paragraphs 13-14). It reiterates that the current undertaking does
not necessarily require the setting up of a new body to carry out the monitoring envisaged under this
undertaking. It is for example possible for existing supervisory bodies to carry out these functions and
integrate them into existing administrative structures. The reports from the monitoring process should be
made public. The current reporting mechanism referred to by the German authorities does not fulfil the
requirements of this undertaking.
246.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled.

Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of regional or minority
languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as
far as this is reasonably possible:
a

v

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document in these
languages;

247. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking formally
fulfilled. The Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take resolute action to
establish a structured policy for making it possible in practice to use regional or minority languages
in dealings with the administration […]”. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts encouraged the
authorities to provide specific information on measures taken to ensure that it is possible in practice to validly
submit documents in North Frisian.
248.

According to the fifth periodical report, no new measures have been taken.

249. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It urges the German
authorities to take necessary measures to ensure that it is possible in practice to validly submit documents in
North Frisian.
Article 11 – Media
250. According to the Friesenrat umbrella association and information received during the on-the-spot
visit, North Frisian organisations consider applying for a seat on the board of public broadcaster
Norddeutscher Rundfunk. If the application is successful, they could more directly influence the presence of
the North Frisian language on public radio and television.

36

Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in which those languages are
spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are
competent, have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the
media:
b

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the regional or minority
languages on a regular basis;

251. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking partly fulfilled.
The Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take measures so that adequate
radio […] broadcasting is available in […] North Frisian […].” Furthermore, the Committee of Experts
encouraged the German authorities to continue to take measures that encourage and/or facilitate a sufficient
level of broadcasting of radio programmes in North Frisian on a regular basis.
252. The fifth periodical report states that a private radio programme in North Frisian (Friiskfunk) is
broadcast in the mornings from Monday to Saturday for one hour. The programme is also available on the
internet and receives financial support from the federal authorities. Representatives of the North Frisian
speakers have welcomed the launch of Friiskfunk. In addition, Radio Schleswig-Holstein “occasionally
considers the regional or minority languages” in the framework of news, event announcements and
entertainment. However, there is no precise information about the use of North Frisian on Radio SchleswigHolstein.
253. The Committee of Experts notes that, according to the fifth periodical report, the public
Norddeutscher Rundfunk broadcasts some radio programmes in North Frisian.
254.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
c

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the regional or minority
languages on a regular basis;

255. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking not fulfilled. The
Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take measures so that adequate […]
television broadcasting is available in […] North Frisian.” Furthermore, the Committee of Experts
strongly urged the authorities to take measures to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television
programmes in North Frisian on a regular basis.
256. The fifth periodical report does not contain any information about private television programmes in
North Frisian. The Committee of Experts notes that, according to the fifth periodical report, the public
Norddeutscher Rundfunk broadcasts television programmes in North Frisian. According to the information
received, however, these broadcasts are quite infrequent. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts considers
this undertaking not fulfilled. It again strongly urges the German authorities to take measures to encourage
and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in North Frisian on a regular basis.
e

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the publication of newspaper articles in the regional or minority
languages on a regular basis;

257. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking not fulfilled. It
urged the authorities to take measures to encourage and/or facilitate the publication of newspaper articles in
North Frisian on a regular basis.
258. The fifth periodical report refers to the independence of the media which in view of the authorities
limit the possibilities of the State to implement this undertaking. During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee
of Experts was informed that articles in North Frisian are published in local newspapers at irregular intervals.
It is not clear in which newspapers such articles appear and what content they cover. Besides, the
publication of articles in North Frisian is not the outcome of an encouragement by the authorities.
259.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled.

The Committee of Experts strongly urges the German authorities to take measures to encourage
and/or facilitate the publication of newspaper articles in North Frisian on a regular basis.
f

ii

to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions in the regional or
minority languages;

37

260. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts asked the German authorities to provide, in
the next periodical report, information about support by the Filmförderung Hamburg Schleswig-Holstein to
audiovisual productions in North Frisian.
261. According to the fifth periodical report, no audiovisual productions in North Frisian were supported
during the reporting period because no applications were received. In addition, it is stated that the only
criterion for granting support is the quality of the proposed project. The intended use of North Frisian in an
audiovisual production therefore does not constitute an advantage in the application procedure. The
Committee of Experts notes that in order to fulfil this undertaking some practical implementation is needed.
The German authorities should therefore specifically inform the North Frisian speakers of this undertaking
and encourage them to submit applications.
262. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It urges the German authorities to
apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions in North Frisian.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural centres, museums, archives,
academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression,
festivals and the culture industries, including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory
in which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this
field:
e

to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities
have at their disposal staff who have a full command of the regional or minority language concerned, as
well as of the language(s) of the rest of the population;

263. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking partly fulfilled. It
encouraged the German authorities to provide specific information on measures taken to ensure that the
bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities other than the Frisian organisations have at
their disposal staff who have a full command of North Frisian.
264. According to the fifth periodical report, no new measures have been taken to implement this
undertaking.
265. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It urges the German authorities
to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities
have at their disposal staff who have a full command of North Frisian.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for regional or minority
languages and the cultures they reflect.

266. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking not fulfilled at
federal level.
267. The Federal Foreign Office and the Goethe-Institut do not take any measures to promote the regional
and minority languages and cultures in the framework of the cultural and educational policy abroad. The
German authorities do not consider such measures necessary for the implementation of this undertaking.
268. The Committee of Experts underlines that this provision requires the German authorities to include
the North Frisian language and the culture it reflects when presenting Germany’s culture and heritage
abroad. As a first step, embassies and the Goethe-Institut could distribute the brochure National minorities,
regional and minority languages in Germany, issued by the Ministry of the Interior, at international events
where Germany promotes its culture abroad.
269. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled at federal level. It encourages the
authorities to make appropriate provision for the North Frisian language and the culture it reflects, when
pursuing their cultural policy abroad.

38

Article 14 – Transfrontier exchanges
The Parties undertake:
a

to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the States in which the same
language is used in identical or similar form, or if necessary to seek to conclude such agreements, in such
a way as to foster contacts between the users of the same language in the States concerned in the fields of
culture, education, information, vocational training and permanent education;

270.

In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking not fulfilled.

271.

According to the fifth periodical report, no measures have been taken to implement this undertaking.

272. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It urges the German authorities to
apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the Netherlands, or if necessary to
seek to conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster contacts between the users of North Frisian
and Frisian in the fields of culture, education, information, vocational training and permanent education.

39

3.2.5.

Sater Frisian in the Land of Lower Saxony

273. In this section, the Committee of Experts will focus on problematic areas and new developments in
the protection and promotion of Sater Frisian. It will therefore not assess the implementation of provisions
which were fulfilled in the previous monitoring cycles, apart from such undertakings where the Committee of
Experts has received new relevant information. The following provisions will not be commented upon:
Article 9, paragraph 1.b.iii; c.iii; paragraph 2.a;
Article 10, paragraph 2.a; g; paragraph 4.a;paragraph 5;
Article 11, paragraph 1.e ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1.a; b; c; e; f; g;paragraph 2;
Article 13, paragraph 1.a; c; d.

274. For these provisions, the Committee of Experts refers to the conclusions reached in its previous
reports, but reserves the right to evaluate the situation again at a later stage.
Article 8 – Education
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used, according to the
situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
a

i

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

iii

to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those pupils whose families so request
and whose number is considered sufficient; or

iv

if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school education, to favour and/or
encourage the application of the measures referred to under i to iii above;

275. In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. It
looked forward to learning more about the results of the initiative to teach Sater Frisian bilingually in
kindergartens and primary schools in Saterland and to offer financial support to activities in the educational
field of the Seelter Bund.
276. The fifth periodical report does not contain specific information in this respect. According to the
report, the Land authorities do not require Sater Frisian to be taught at kindergartens. The Orientation Plan
for Language and Speaking only provides that “in the areas where a regional language is spoken,
multilingualism is a good way to enhance language comprehension and speaking skills”. The decision to
offer Sater Frisian at pre-school belongs to the providers, whether public or private. They must decide at
local level and in consultation with the parents if and how Sater Frisian is to be part of pre-school education.
277. The Committee of Experts was informed during the on-the-spot visit that, although to a very limited
degree, Sater Frisian is used in some of the kindergartens in the Saterland.
278. The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking partly fulfilled. It asks the authorities to provide
more detailed information in the next periodical report.
e

ii

to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher education subjects;

279. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking fulfilled. It
looked forward to receiving information on the further developments and sustainability of the Sater Frisian
offer in higher education.
280. According to the fifth periodical report, Sater Frisian is, along with Low German, a priority at the chair
of German philology at the University of Oldenburg. A course of Sater Frisian has been offered annually
since 2009. Since 2011, the chair has taken part in a joint teacher training programme, which aims to extend
the current offer of immersion language teaching in pre-schools and primary schools in Saterland. There are
also plans to transfer parts of the pre-school teacher training to the University of Oldenburg. In 2011, the
40

chair contributed to the publication of the textbook Friesischer Sprachkurs: Seeltersk. The Sater Frisian
dictionary is still under preparation.
281.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking fulfilled.
f

iii

if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult education, to favour and/or
encourage the offering of such languages as subjects of adult and continuing education;

282. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. It
urged the authorities to take measures to re-establish an offer of adult education in Sater Frisian.
283. According to the fifth periodical report, publicly funded adult education institutions offer courses of
Sater Frisian. Funding for workshops and similar events, in order to extend the current Sater Frisian offer, is
under consideration by the authorities.
284.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking fulfilled.
g

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected by the
regional or minority language;

285. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled. It
requested the German authorities to provide more specific information on the extent to which the teaching of
the history and the culture which is reflected by Sater Frisian is ensured in practice, not only in the education
of Sater Frisians, but also in mainstream education in the region.
286. According to the fifth periodical report, in line with the decree on “The Region and its Languages in
Education” (Die Region und ihre Sprachen im Unterricht), which entered into force on 1 August 2011,
information has to be provided about the languages in the region when teaching about the regional context.
This is compulsory for all types of classes (teaching compulsory subjects, teaching optional compulsory
subjects, activity groups, and all-day school offers). The core curriculum for all schools covers teaching about
the regional context and this information must be included in subjects such as German, history, geography,
political science, music and art, in particular.
287.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking fulfilled.
i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken and progress
achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority languages and for drawing up
periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.

288. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. The
Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “ensure that an effective monitoring
mechanism in the sense of the Charter exists in the field of education for all regional or minority
languages covered under Part III”. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts asked the authorities to provide
information about the outcome of the revision of a decree dealing, inter alia, with supervisory bodies.
289. According to the fifth periodical report, a supervisory body composed of representatives of the
authorities, of the regional associations and of the Niedersächsischer Heimatbund, monitors how the Charter
provisions in the field of education are implemented. The monitoring is based on the report of the Lower
Saxony school authority, which provides information on the how Sater Frisian is promoted, how the allotted
teaching hours are used and on the activities of the advisers for Sater Frisian.
290. The Committee of Experts asks the authorities to inform it whether the report of this supervisory body
is made public and what the results of monitoring are.
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of regional or minority
languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as
far as this is reasonably possible:

41

a

c

v

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document in these
languages;

to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in a regional or minority language.

291. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered these undertakings not fulfilled.
The Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take resolute action to establish a
structured policy for making it possible in practice to use regional or minority languages in dealings
with the administration […]”. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts strongly urged the authorities to take
the necessary steps to ensure that the users of Sater Frisian may validly submit a document in Sater Frisian
and to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in Sater Frisian.
292. In the fifth periodical report, the German authorities repeat their view that the Charter is directly
applicable law and no further legislation is needed in order for the Sater Frisian-speakers to validly submit a
document in Sater Frisian and for the administrative authorities to draft documents in Sater Frisian. During
the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed by the representatives of the speakers that
documents in Sater Frisian were submitted to and accepted by the tax authorities. The Committee of Experts
has not been informed on any documents drafted in Sater Frisian by the authorities.
293. The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking under Article 10.1.a.v partly fulfilled and the
undertaking under Article 10.1.c not fulfilled. It encourages the authorities to ensure their implementation in
practice.
Paragraph 2
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who are users of regional or
minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below, the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
b

the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written applications in these
languages;

294. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled.
The Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take resolute action to establish a
structured policy for making it possible in practice to use regional or minority languages in dealings
with the administration […]”. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts encouraged the German authorities
to take positive measures to improve the implementation of this undertaking in practice.
295. According to the fifth periodical report, due to the competence of the local self-government, the Land
authorities may not set rules concerning the use of Sater Frisian in local administration. According to the
authorities, the Charter is also binding for the local authorities and these are aware of the need to make the
use of Sater Frisian in dealings with the administration possible. During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee
of Experts was informed that the town hall of Saterland has a sign encouraging the use of Sater Frisian.
296. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking is partly fulfilled. It
asks the authorities to provide information on the implementation of this undertaking in practice.
c

297.

the publication by regional authorities of their official documents also in the relevant regional or minority
languages;

In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled.

298. In the fifth periodical report, the authorities reiterate that the Charter is directly applicable law and no
further legislation is needed in order for regional authorities to publish their official documents also in Sater
Frisian. During the on-the-spot visit the representatives of the Sater Frisian speakers informed the
Committee of Experts that no documents are issued or published in Sater Frisian.
299.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled.
d

the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in the relevant regional or minority
languages;

300.
In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. It
urged the authorities to take measures to encourage the local publication of official documents also in Sater
Frisian.
42

301. In the fifth periodical report, the authorities reiterate that the Charter is directly applicable law and no
further legislation is needed in order for the local authorities to publish their official documents also in Sater
Frisian. During the on-the-spot visit the Sater Frisian speakers informed the Committee of Experts that no
documents are published in Sater Frisian.
302.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled.
e

303.

the use by regional authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their assemblies, without
excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled.

304. The fifth periodical report states that the regional authorities are aware of the need to use Sater
Frisian as far as possible in their assemblies. The Committee of Experts received no information about how
the undertaking is implemented in practice.
305.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled.
f

306.

the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their assemblies, without
excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled.

307. The fifth periodical report states that the local authorities are aware of the need to use Sater Frisian
as far as possible in their assemblies. During the on-the-spot visit, the representatives of the Sater Frisian
speakers informed the Committee of Experts that Sater Frisian may only be used when all the members
present are Sater Frisian speakers. It seems that this practically never happens.
308.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled.

Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the Parties undertake to take
one or more of the following measures:
c

309.

compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a knowledge of a
regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that language is used.

In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled.

310. According to the fifth periodical report, due to the competence of the local-self-government, local
authorities are entitled to decide where they assign their staff. The periodical report further states that it can
be however assumed that language skills are taken into account when such decisions are made.
311. The Committee of Experts received no information on examples reflecting the practical
implementation of this undertaking. It asks the authorities to provide such information in the next periodical
report. The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled.
Article 11 – Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in which those languages are
spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are
competent, have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the
media:
b

312.

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the regional or minority
languages on a regular basis;

In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking fulfilled.

43

313. According to the fifth periodical report, in 2010 the authorities amended the Lower Saxony Media Act.
The law now requires broadcasters to include in an adequate manner in their programme the regional and
minority languages spoken in their coverage area. In addition, as a result of the meeting of the Consultative
Committee on Issues Concerning the Frisian Ethnic Group, the Federal Commissioner for Matters related to
the Ethnic German Repatriates and National Minorities wrote to the chair of the broadcasting board of NDR,
asking for further promotion of radio broadcasts in Frisian. The public-access radio Ems-Vechte-Welle
broadcasts the two-hour programme Middeeges in Sater Frisian every second Sunday. The Committee of
Experts welcomes these developments.
314.

The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking is fulfilled.
c

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the regional or minority
languages on a regular basis;

315. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. The
Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take measures so that adequate […]
television broadcasting is available in […] Sater Frisian.” Furthermore, the Committee of Experts
strongly urged the authorities to adopt positive measures aimed at encouraging and/ or facilitating the
broadcasting of television programmes in Sater Frisian on a regular basis.
316. According to the fifth periodical report, in 2010 the authorities amended the Lower Saxony Media Act.
The law now requires broadcasters to include the regional and minority languages spoken in their coverage
area in an adequate manner in their programme. In addition, as a result of the meeting of the Consultative
Committee on Issues Concerning the Frisian Ethnic Group, the Federal Commissioner for Matters related to
the Ethnic German Repatriates and National Minorities wrote to the chair of the broadcasting board of NDR,
asking for further promotion of television broadcasts in Sater Frisian. The Committee of Experts welcomes
these developments. However, it has not been informed on any television programmes in Sater Frisian
broadcast by private channels.
317. The Committee of Experts reserves its conclusion until the next monitoring cycle when the law has
been in force for some time and invites the authorities to provide information on television programmes in
Sater Frisian.
d

318.

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual works in the regional
or minority languages;

In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled.

319. The fifth periodical report contains no information in respect of this undertaking. During the on-thespot visit, the Sater Frisian speakers informed the Committee of Experts that no audiovisual works have
been produced or distributed in Sater Frisian.
320. The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the authorities to
encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual works in Sater Frisian.
f

321.

ii

to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions in the regional or
minority languages;

In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled.

322. The fifth periodical report contains no information in respect of this undertaking. During the on-thespot visit, the representatives of the speakers informed the Committee of Experts that no audiovisual works
in Sater Frisian have been financed.
323. The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the authorities to
also apply existing measures of financial assistance to audiovisual works in Sater Frisian.

44

Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural centres, museums, archives,
academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression,
festivals and the culture industries, including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory
in which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this
field:
d

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of various kinds make
appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of regional or minority languages and
cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for which they provide backing;

324. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts asked the authorities to provide information
on the effect on Sater Frisian of the transfer of the task of promoting regional culture to the
Landschaftsverbände (regional local authority associations), which in the case of Sater Frisian means the
Oldenburgische Landschaft.
325. According to the fifth periodical report, a traineeship, turned into a permanent position in 2012, was
created at the Oldenburgische Landschaft, to cater, inter alia, for the interests of the Sater Frisian speakers.
This permanent position will be financed by the Land authorities until 2014, and starting in 2014 by the
Oldenburgische Landschaft. Several projects related to Sater Frisian have been implemented since the
creation of this post.
326.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking fulfilled.

Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for regional or minority
languages and the cultures they reflect.

327. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled
for Lower Saxony and not fulfilled for federal authorities.
328. According to the fifth periodical report, Deutsche Welle provides information about Sater Frisian on
its website. The Federal Foreign Office and the Goethe-Institut do not take any measures to promote the
regional and minority languages and cultures in the framework of the cultural and educational policy abroad.
The German authorities do not consider such measures as necessary for the implementation of this
undertaking.
329. The Committee of Experts underlines that this provision requires the German authorities to include
the Sater Frisian language and the culture it reflects when presenting Germany’s culture and heritage
abroad. As a first step, embassies and the Goethe-Institut could distribute the brochure National minorities,
regional and minority languages in Germany, issued by the Ministry of the Interior, at international events
where Germany promotes its culture abroad.
330. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled at federal level. It encourages the
authorities to make appropriate provision for the Sater Frisian language and the culture it reflects, when
pursuing their cultural policy abroad.

45

3.2.6. Low German in the Länder of Bremen, Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Lower Saxony
and Schleswig-Holstein
3.2.6.a. Low German in the Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
331. In this section, the Committee of Experts will focus on problematic areas and new developments in
the protection and promotion of Low German in Bremen. It will therefore not assess the implementation of
provisions which were fulfilled in the previous monitoring cycles, apart from such undertakings where the
Committee of Experts has received new relevant information. The following provisions will not be commented
upon:
Article 8, paragraph 1 e ii; f.i;
Article 9, paragraph 1.b.iii; c.iii; paragraph 2.a;
Article 10, paragraph 2.e; f;
Article 11, paragraph 1. b ii, f.ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1.a; b; e; g;
Article 13, paragraph 1.a; c.

332. For these provisions, the Committee of Experts refers to the conclusions reached in its previous
reports but reserves the right to evaluate the situation again at a later stage.
Article 8 – Education
333. In the fourth monitoring cycle the Committee of Experts was informed that the Bremen authorities
were considering adopting the Low German education model of Hamburg, and a set of measures with a view
to implementing the provisions chosen under the Charter by 2016. The Committee of Experts encouraged
the authorities to continue the steps towards establishing a systematic approach to Low German education.
334. Low German continues to be taught in Bremen only as part of the curricula for the subject of
German, in primary and secondary education. How this is implemented in practice lies within the
competence of the schools.
335. According to information received from the Low German speakers, the Parliament of Bremen
announced in a 2011 report dedicated to Low German its intention to monitor the developments in Hamburg,
where Low German is being taught as a separate subject, and to assess the efficiency of this approach. The
report further stated that teaching materials would be drafted in cooperation with the Institute for Low
German and other Länder, and that Low German as an option for language learning would be more clearly
defined. However, no concrete measures have been taken, as a result of these statements. Low German is
still not taught as a separate subject and teaching materials have not been developed.
336. The Committee of Experts urges the authorities to continue the steps towards establishing a
systematic approach to Low German education.

Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used, according to the
situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
a

i

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

iii

to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those pupils whose families so request
and whose number is considered sufficient; or

iv

if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school education, to favour and/or
encourage the application of the measures referred to under i to iii above;

337. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled, in
the absence of information about the extent to which Low German was used in pre-school education and of
steps towards a systematic approach in this field.
46

338. According to the fifth periodical report, Low German is used in kindergartens in the regions bordering
Lower Saxony. Children are taught songs and poems in Low German. According to the authorities, there is
no demand for using Low German in pre-school education beyond the existing offer.
339. The Committee of Experts is of the view that the current offer, composed of songs and poems, does
not amount to at least a substantial part of pre-school education in Low German, as required by the
undertaking. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts considers that the authorities should promote the
9
virtues of, and opportunities for Low German education among the parents.
340. The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the authorities to
adopt a systematic approach promoting the substantial use of Low German in pre-school education.
b

iii

to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or minority languages as
an integral part of the curriculum;

341. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled.
The Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “upgrade the teaching of Low
German to the status of a regular school subject being taught as an integral part of the curriculum
and increase the number of hours devoted to Low German, in the Länder concerned”. Furthermore,
the Committee of Experts strongly urged the authorities of the Free Hanseatic City of Bremen to adopt a
structured approach with a view to ensuring that Low German is systematically taught within primary
education with regular school hours allocated to it.
342. According to the fifth periodical report, Low German continues to be offered as part of the German
classes and across subject areas. At primary level pupils usually learn poems and songs in Low German.
Seven schools in Bremen and four in Bremerhaven offer also Low German working groups (afternoon
optional classes). In addition, Bremen organises an annual Low German reading competition.
343. According to the information received from the Low German speakers, the curriculum still does not
contain a systematic requirement to use Low German in the classroom. In practice, this does not lead to the
teaching of Low German, but, at most, to an occasional use in the classroom.
344. The Committee of Experts notes that the current offer does not amount to teaching Low German as a
separate subject and an integral part of the curriculum. It therefore considers the undertaking not fulfilled.
The Committee of Experts again strongly urges the authorities to provide for the systematic teaching
of Low German in primary education, with regular school hours allocated to it.
c

iii

to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or minority languages
as an integral part of the curriculum;

345. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled.
The Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “upgrade the teaching of Low
German to the status of a regular school subject being taught as an integral part of the curriculum
and increase the number of hours devoted to Low German, in the Länder concerned”. Furthermore,
the Committee of Experts strongly urged the authorities to take the necessary measures to make the
teaching of Low German within secondary education more systematic with regular school hours allocated to
it.
346. According to the fifth periodical report, at secondary level Low German is taught across subject
areas, for example in music classes. The curriculum for German aims at developing the students’ cultural
identity through the teaching of Low German. This involves identifying expressions and regional variants, as
well as addressing similarities between Low German and other languages. Each school decides to what
extent it wishes to teach Low German as part of the general curriculum. Two secondary schools in Bremen
offer Low German working groups (afternoon optional classes). In 2012 two secondary schools in Bremen
and Bremerhaven took part in the Low German reading competition.
347. The Committee of Experts notes that at present Low German is not taught in secondary education as
a separate subject and an integral part of the curriculum. It therefore considers the undertaking not fulfilled.
9

See paragraph 66, 4th Report of the Committee of Experts on the application of the Charter in Hungary, ECRML (2010) 2

47

The Committee of Experts again strongly urges the authorities to provide for the systematic teaching
of Low German in secondary education, with regular school hours allocated to it.
g

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected by the
regional or minority language;

348. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. It
encouraged the German authorities to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and culture
which is reflected by Low German.
349. According to the fifth periodical report, teaching Low German across subject areas is intended to
ensure also the teaching of the history and culture reflected by Low German.
350. The Committee of Experts notes that it remains unclear how the teaching of the history and culture
reflected by Low German is ensured in practice, whether this depends on the teacher or there are
compulsory provisions in this respect in the curricula.
351.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled.
h

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of paragraphs a to g
accepted by the Party;

352. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. It
urged the authorities to provide the basic and further training of teachers of Low German needed to fulfil the
undertakings under Article 8.
353. According to the fifth periodical report, Low German is part of the regular university teacher training,
which lasts for five years. For the second phase, the practical training, which lasts for 18 months, the Land
Institute for Schools offered Low German as an optional compulsory course. However, due to an insufficient
number of interested students, the course was cancelled. The Low German speakers, however, are of the
view that students are not motivated to attend such courses, as long as Low German is not a regular school
subject or becomes part of the programme or profile of some schools.
354. The Committee of Experts received no information about the further training of teachers. Moreover,
in light of the information above, the basic training is not fully provided.
355.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled.

The Committee of Experts strongly urges the authorities to provide the basic and further training of
teachers of Low German needed to fulfil the undertakings under Article 8.
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of regional or minority
languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as
far as this is reasonably possible:
a

v

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document in these
languages;

356. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. The
Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take resolute action to establish a
structured policy for making it possible in practice to use regional or minority languages in dealings
with the administration […]”.
357. According to the fifth evaluation report, in April 2011 the Senator for the Interior and Sport of Bremen
sent a letter to the authorities and the staff under his supervision about the Charter and the
recommendations in the fourth evaluation report of the Committee of Experts. The letter, inter alia, asked the
managers to consider appointing a Low German contact person. The Bremen authorities further reiterate
that no specific administrative regulations are necessary for the implementation of the Charter, as the treaty
48

is directly applicable in Germany. They also do not see the need for a structured policy, as recommended,
since they are not aware of any practical obstacles to using Low German in administration.
358. The Committee of Experts welcomes the information about the steps taken by the authorities.
However, it points out that the undertaking requires, on the one hand, for the law to allow the submission of
documents in minority languages and, on the other hand, for practical arrangements to be in place, such as
staff able to deal with such requests. To this end, a structured policy is necessary.
359. The Committee of Experts received no information on documents in Low German being submitted to
the authorities in practice. It encourages the authorities to continue efforts to ensure that documents may be
validly submitted in Low German and asks them to provide specific information on the practical
implementation of this undertaking in the next periodical report.
c

360.

to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in a regional or minority language.

In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled.

361. According to the fifth evaluation report, in the letter of April 2011 (see under Article 10.1.a.v above),
the Senator for the Interior and Sport of Bremen inter alia invited staff to suggest publications or other
documents to be issued also in Low German. The Bremen authorities further reiterate that no specific
administrative regulations are necessary for the implementation of the Charter, as the treaty is directly
applicable in Germany. The Charter would also not require positive action, but only an absence of the
prohibition the use of a regional or minority language.
362. The Committee of Experts welcomes the information about the steps taken by the authorities and
encourages them to pursue these measures further. However, it has not received any information on
documents drafted in Low German by administrative authorities. The Committee of Experts asks the
authorities to provide specific information on the practical implementation of this undertaking in the next
periodical report.
Paragraph 2
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who are users of regional or
minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below, the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
a

363.

the use of regional or minority languages within the framework of the regional or local authority;

In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled.

364. According to the fifth evaluation report, the letter of the Senator for the Interior and Sport of Bremen
of April 2011 (see also under Article 10.1 above) encouraged the staff to use Low German in relations with
applicants and among them in the workplace and invited them to propose publications or other documents to
be also issued in Low German. In addition, the letter asked the managers to consider appointing a Low
German contact person.
365.
The Committee of Experts received no information on the use of Low German within the framework
of local authorities. It encourages the authorities to continue efforts to promote the use of Low German within
the framework of local authorities and asks them to provide specific information on the practical
implementation of this undertaking in the next periodical report.
b

the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written applications in these
languages;

366. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. The
Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take resolute action to establish a
structured policy for making it possible in practice to use regional or minority languages in dealings
with the administration […]”.
367. In the fifth evaluation report, the authorities state that in his letter of April 2011 (see also under Article
10.1 above), the Senator for the Interior and Sport of Bremen encouraged the staff to use Low German in
relations with applicants and among them in the workplace. Furthermore, the letter asked the managers to
consider appointing a Low German contact person. The Bremen authorities further reiterate that no specific
administrative regulations are necessary for the implementation of the Charter, as the treaty is directly
49

applicable in Germany. The Charter would also not require positive action, but only the absence of any
prohibition of the use of a regional or minority language.
368. The Committee of Experts welcomes the information about the steps taken by the authorities and
encourages them to pursue these measures further. The Committee of Experts asks the authorities to
provide specific information on the practical implementation of this undertaking in the next periodical report.

369.

c

the publication by regional authorities of their official documents also in the relevant regional or minority
languages;

d

the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in the relevant regional or minority
languages;

In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertakings not fulfilled.

370. According to the fifth periodical report, the letter sent by the Senator for the Interior and Sport of
Bremen in April 2011 invited staff to suggest publications or other documents that should be also issued in
Low German. The Bremen authorities further reiterate that no specific administrative regulations are
necessary for the implementation of the Charter, as the treaty is directly applicable in Germany. The Charter
would also not require positive action, but only the absence of any prohibition of the use of a regional or
minority language.
371. The Committee of Experts welcomes the steps taken by the authorities. However, it has received no
information on any official document published in Low German.
372. The Committee of Experts therefore considers the undertakings not fulfilled. It asks the authorities to
provide examples of official documents of local and regional authorities published in Low German in the next
periodical report.
Article 11 – Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in which those languages are
spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are
competent, have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the
media:
c

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the regional or minority
languages on a regular basis;

373. In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. The
Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take measures so that adequate […]
television broadcasting is available in […] Low German […]”. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts
urged the authorities to encourage the broadcasting of television programmes in Low German on a regular
basis.
374. In the fifth periodical report, the authorities reiterate their view on the independence of the media.
However, the Media Act was amended in 2012 and it now requires broadcasters to provide an adequate
share of programmes in Low German. According to the report, the private broadcasters SAT1regional and
RTLregional offer news and reports in Low German. Center.tv Bremen, a regional private broadcaster covers
topics about Low German and is preparing a series Traces of Low German. Learning the Language to be
broadcast by the daily regional magazine. The public-access TV Bürgerrundfunk Bremen (Radio Weser.TV)
is producing a television programme based on the radio programme “De Plattsnuten”. In addition, it
broadcasts theatre plays in Low German.
375. The Low German speakers commended the authorities for amending the legislation. However, they
informed the Committee of Experts that the Low German programmes remain irregular and that a structured
approach in this field is missing.
376. The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking partly fulfilled. It encourages the authorities to
take measures facilitating the broadcasting of television programmes in Low German on a regular basis.

50

d

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual works in the regional
or minority languages;

377. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. It
encouraged the German authorities to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio
and audiovisual works in Low German.
378. The fifth periodical report provides examples of programmes (e.g. news, reports, magazines) in Low
German produced by the public station Radio Bremen, by the private radio ENERGY Bremen, the public
access radio Bürgerrundfunk and by the public access television Radio Weser TV.
379. The Committee of Experts reminds the authorities that the undertaking requires them to provide for
specific assistance to audio and audiovisual productions in Low German. It asks the authorities to provide
specific information in the next periodical report.
e

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the publication of newspaper articles in the regional or minority
languages on a regular basis;

380. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. It
urged the authorities to encourage and/or facilitate the publication of newspaper articles in Low German on a
regular basis.
381. According to the fifth periodical report, the public radio station Radio Bremen posts daily on its
website news, contributions and interviews in Low German. The Institute for Low German, which is publicly
funded, runs ins-presse, a press service regularly issuing news about Low German. The Committee of
Experts notes, however, that this news is in standard German. During the on-the-spot visit, the Low German
speakers informed the Committee of Experts that the local newspaper publishes articles in Low German on a
regular basis. However, it is not clear to the Committee of Experts how this has been encouraged by the
authorities.
382. The Committee of Experts asks the authorities to inform it about the amount and regularity of Low
German articles in the local press and about the measures taken to encourage their publication.
g

to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using regional or minority languages.

383. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled. It
asked the authorities to provide more specific information on the support for the training of journalists and
other staff for media using Low German.
384. According to the fifth periodical report, most journalists in Bremen are trained by private schools and
by the media companies; in such cases, the authorities cannot influence the content of teaching. The
students in journalism of state universities may use the Low German offer of the University of Bremen, but
not as part of journalist training. According to the Low German speakers, sustainable measures in this field
need to be taken by the authorities.
385. The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the authorities to
support the training of journalists and other staff for media using Low German.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural centres, museums, archives,
academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression,
festivals and the culture industries, including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory
in which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this
field:
c

386.

to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages by aiding and
developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;

In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled.

51

387. The fifth periodical report refers only to the daily translation by Radio Bremen of the news and
weather report from standard German to Low German.
388. The Committee of Experts maintains that the undertaking is still only partly fulfilled. It encourages the
authorities to foster access in Low German to additional works produced in other languages.
d

389.

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of various kinds make
appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of regional or minority languages and
cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for which they provide backing;

In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled.

390. According to the fifth periodical report, the Parliament of Bremen set up in October 2012 an Advisory
Council on Low German (Beirat Platt), to the president of the Parliament. The Advisory Council is composed
of representatives of the parliamentary groups, of the Institute for Low German, the Low German umbrella
NGOs from Bremen and Bremerhaven, of the schools, academics, media, theatre, and church
administrations. The Advisory Council provides a framework for sharing information and ensures
participation of the Low German speakers in all cultural matters.
391.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking fulfilled.
f

392.

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or minority language in
providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled.

393. According to the fifth periodical report, the Bremen authorities implement this undertaking by
supporting the Institute for Low German.
394. In light of the information above about the Advisory Council, the Committee of Experts considers the
undertaking fulfilled.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for regional or minority
languages and the cultures they reflect.

395. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled as
regards the federal level.
396. According to the fifth periodical report, Deutsche Welle provides information about Low German on
its website. The Federal Foreign Office and the Goethe-Institut do not take any measures to promote the
regional and minority languages and cultures in the framework of the cultural and educational policy abroad.
The German authorities do not consider such measures necessary for the implementation of this
undertaking.
397. The Committee of Experts underlines that this provision requires the German authorities to include
Low German and the culture it reflects when presenting Germany’s culture and heritage abroad. As a first
step, embassies and the Goethe-Institut could distribute the brochure National minorities, regional and
minority languages in Germany, issued by the Ministry of the Interior, at international events where Germany
promotes its culture abroad.
398. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled at federal level. It encourages the
authorities to make appropriate provision for Low German and the culture it reflects, when pursuing their
cultural policy abroad.
Article 13 – Economic and social life
Paragraph 2
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the public authorities are competent, within
the territory in which the regional or minority languages are used, and as far as this is reasonably possible:

52

c

to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and hostels offer the possibility of
receiving and treating in their own language persons using a regional or minority language who are in need
of care on grounds of ill-health, old age or for other reasons;

399. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled. It
strongly urged the authorities to adopt a structured policy with a view to making more systematic the
possibility to be received and treated in Low German in social care facilities.
400. According to the fifth periodical report, many social care facilities in Bremen employ Low German
speaking staff, and therefore receiving and treating persons in Low German is generally ensured. However,
the authorities state that they cannot impose requirements concerning the recruitment of staff, as most of
these facilities are privately run. In addition, in the long term, they foresee difficulties in finding staff for the
social care facilities.
10

401. The Committee of Experts reiterates that the undertaking requires the authorities to ensure that the
possibility of receiving and treating persons in Low German is offered, which implies structural measures with
a view to guaranteeing a systematic provision. Such measures could include regulations on the relevant
qualifications which take account of a person’s knowledge of Low German or facilities and incentives for the
existing social care personnel to improve their Low German skills. Without such measures, the chances of
being treated in Low German will continue to be patchy and there is nothing to prevent the situation from
deteriorating in the future. However, at present there seem to be services in Low German available in
several social care facilities.
402. The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking partly fulfilled at present. The Committee of
Experts again strongly urges the authorities to adopt a structured policy with a view to making more
systematic the possibility to be received and treated in Low German in social care facilities.

10

Paragraph 465, 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts on the application of the Charter in Germany, ECRML (2006) 1; paragraph
441, 4th Report of the Committee of Experts on the application of the Charter in Germany, ECRML (2011) 2

53

3.2.6.b. Low German in the Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
403. In this section, the Committee of Experts will focus on problematic areas and new developments in
the protection and promotion of Low German in Hamburg. It will therefore not assess the implementation of
provisions which were fulfilled in the previous monitoring cycles, apart from such undertakings where the
Committee of Experts has received new relevant information. The following provisions will not be commented
upon:
Article 8, paragraph 1.e ii; f.ii; g
Article 9, paragraph 1.b.iii; c.iii; paragraph 2.a;
Article 10, paragraph 2 e; f;
Article 11, paragraph 1; bii, e.ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1.a;g;
Article 13, paragraph 1.a; c;
404. For these provisions, the Committee of Experts refers to the conclusions reached in its previous
reports but reserves the right to evaluate the situation again at a later stage.
Article 8 – Education
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used, according to the
situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
a

i

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

iii

to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those pupils whose families so request
and whose number is considered sufficient; or

iv

if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school education, to favour and/or
encourage the application of the measures referred to under i to iii above;

405. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled. It
asked the authorities for clarification concerning the extent to which Low German is taught at pre-schools,
according to the directive on pre-school classes and for further information on the practical implementation of
this new directive.
406. In the fifth periodical report, the authorities reiterate that the directive requires the creation of a “great
variety of learning situations enabling children to acquire basic interaction means and skills”. The time
dedicated in practice to Low German depends on the group and its language skills. Children who do not
speak Low German are familiarised with it, in particular through poems and songs. During the on-the-spot
visit, the authorities confirmed that in practice this does not amount to bilingual pre-school education. The
periodical report further states that in 2010, the Low German association Plattdüütsch in Hamborg, in cooperation with the authorities, established the Hamborger Plattdüütsch Pries, awarded to pre-schools and
nursery schools on the basis of a competition. This has had a positive effect on teaching Low German.
407. The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking partly fulfilled. It encourages the authorities to
strengthen the use of Low German in pre-school education.
b

408.

iii

to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or minority languages as
an integral part of the curriculum;

In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking fulfilled.

409. According to the information received during the current monitoring cycle, Low German continues to
be taught at primary level as a subject in its own right, for two hours/week. A textbook and a teacher’s
manual for Low German have been developed, which are the only professionally developed teaching
materials for Low German in Germany. A curriculum for Low German is also in place. The Low German
speakers have also acknowledged the progress made in primary education.

54

410. The Committee of Experts commends the authorities and maintains its conclusion that the
undertaking is fulfilled.
c

411.

iii

to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or minority languages
as an integral part of the curriculum;

In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled.

412. According to the fifth periodical report, Low German is offered in Hamburg schools as an optional
subject. Schools may also set priority areas and teach Low German in particular. However, the Low German
speakers have expressed their concern about the continuity of Low German education from primary to
secondary level. During the on-the-spot visit the Committee of Experts was informed that the Hamburg
school authority is in the process of developing a curriculum for Low German in lower secondary education.
The authorities also signalled a clear commitment to ensure continuity in Low German teaching in the areas
where Low German is offered as a regular part of the curriculum in primary schools.
413. The report further informs on the publicly funded association Plattolio, founded in 2011, and its
website, www.plattolio.de, which provides teaching materials for Low German, for the grades 1-12.
414. The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking partly fulfilled. It looks forward to the
implementation of the planned measures intended to ensure a systematic offering of Low German in
secondary education.
d

415.

iii

to provide, within technical and vocational education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum;

In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled.

416. According to the fifth periodical report, some vocational schools use or present elements related to
the Low German language and culture. There are no plans to include the teaching of Low German in the
curriculum of these schools on a large scale, since it does not match the main objectives of vocational
education. According to the Low German speakers, teaching of Low German in the health care vocational
schools could be considered by the authorities.
417. The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the authorities to
provide, in consultation with the speakers, for the teaching of Low German in technical and vocational
education, with regular school hours allocated to it.
h

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of paragraphs a to g
accepted by the Party;

418. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking fulfilled and
looked forward to receiving more information on the Low German teacher training reform.
419. The fifth periodical report provides additional information about further training. The Land Institute for
Teacher Training and School Development (Landesinstitut für Lehrerbildung und Schulentwickung) offers
further training for primary school teachers. Since 2010 it also organises every two years a Low German
forum, which is attended by teachers, school administrators, students, volunteers, representatives of the
media, artists, advocacy groups. The aim of the forum is to promote exchanges and create a network
supporting Low German education. The Low German speakers welcomed the setting up of this forum.
420.

The Committee of Experts maintains its conclusion that the undertaking is fulfilled.
i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken and progress
achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority languages and for drawing up
periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.

421. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled.
Furthermore the Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “ensure that an
effective monitoring mechanism in the sense of the Charter exists in the field of education for all
regional or minority languages covered under Part III”.

55

422. The Committee of Experts refers to its comments under General issues arising in the evaluation of
the application of the Charter in Germany (paragraphs 13-14). It reiterates that the current undertaking does
not necessarily require the setting up of a new body to carry out the monitoring envisaged under this
undertaking. It is for example possible for existing supervisory bodies to carry out these functions and
integrate them into existing administrative structures. The reports from the monitoring process should be
made public. The current reporting mechanism referred to by the German authorities does not fulfil the
requirements of this undertaking
423.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled.

Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of regional or minority
languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as
far as this is reasonably possible:
a

v

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document in these
languages;

424. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. The
Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take resolute action to establish a
structured policy for making it possible in practice to use regional or minority languages in dealings
with the administration […]”.
425. According to the fifth periodical report, the authorities are not aware of any documents being
submitted in Low German or of an interest expressed in this respect. Therefore, they do not see the need for
proactive measures, also taking into consideration the costs that these would entail.
426. The Committee of Experts underlines that the undertaking goes beyond passive permission to submit
documents in Low German. It requires a proactive and structured approach by the authorities to ensure that
this can be done. Consequently, proactive measures need to be taken by the authorities, aimed at
encouraging the Low German-speakers to avail themselves of the opportunity of submitting documents in
Low German, starting from the human resources policy, information campaigns and measures to inform the
11
relevant authorities of their obligations .
427.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled.
c

428.

to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in a regional or minority language.

In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled.

429. According to the fifth periodical report, the authorities do not see the need for proactive measures,
also taking into consideration the costs that these would entail.
430. The Committee of Experts reiterates that a certain degree of implementation must follow the mere
allowing of documents to be drafted in Low German. The Committee of Experts has not been made aware of
any document drafted in Low German by the administrative authorities. It therefore maintains its previous
conclusion that the undertaking is not fulfilled.
Paragraph 2
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who are users of regional or
minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below, the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
a

431.

11

the use of regional or minority languages within the framework of the regional or local authority;

In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled.

Paragraph 497, 3rd Report of the Committee of Experts on the application of the Charter in Germany, ECRML (2008) 4

56

432. According to the fifth periodical report, the authorities do not see the need for any additional
measures, taking also into consideration the costs these would entail.
433. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking is only partly
fulfilled. It encourages the authorities to promote the use of Low German within the regional or local
authority.
b

the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written applications in these
languages;

434. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. The
Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take resolute action to establish a
structured policy for making it possible in practice to use regional or minority languages in dealings
with the administration […]”.
435. According to the fifth periodical report, individual departments offer the possibility to submit oral or
written applications in Low German. For documentation purposes, the applications have to be translated into
standard German. The authorities do not see the need for any additional measures, also taking into
consideration the costs that these would entail.
477.
Since there seems to be at least an oral use of Low German, the Committee of Experts considers
the undertaking partly fulfilled.
Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the Parties undertake to take
one or more of the following measures:
c

compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a knowledge of a
regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that language is used.

436. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. The
Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take resolute action to establish a
structured policy for making it possible in practice to use regional or minority languages in dealings
with the administration […]”.
437. According to the fifth periodical report, the authorities are not aware of any such request being made
by public service employees. However, the Committee of Experts is not aware of any measures taken to
inform the public service employees of the possibility envisaged by the undertaking.
438.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled.

Article 11 – Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in which those languages are
spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are
competent, have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the
media:
c

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the regional or minority
languages on a regular basis;

439. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. The
Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take measures so that adequate […]
television broadcasting is available in […] Low German […]”. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts
urged the authorities to encourage the broadcasting of television programmes in Low German on a regular
basis.
440. According to the fifth periodical report, the public broadcaster NDR broadcasts news and reports in
Low German and, in addition, programmes such as Plattdüütsch, Die Welt op Platt and Neues aus

57

Büttenwarder op Platt. All the broadcasts in Low German are also available on the website of NDR. The
private TV channel Hamburg 1 occasionally includes Low German broadcasts in its programme.
441. In light of the existing offer on public service broadcasting, the Committee of Experts considers the
undertaking fulfilled.
d

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual works in the regional
or minority languages;

442. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. It
encouraged the German authorities to take measures to encourage and/or facilitate the production and
distribution of audio and audiovisual works in Low German.
443. According to the fifth periodical report, Filmförderung Hamburg Schleswig-Holstein does not grant
specific support for audio and audiovisual works in Low German. As any other works, they are eligible for
funding if they meet the quality and content criteria.
444. The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled. It urges the authorities to take
measures to specifically encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in Low German
f

ii

to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions in the regional or
minority languages;

445. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking formally fulfilled.
It encouraged the authorities to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual
productions in Low German.
446. According to the fifth periodical report, audio and audiovisual works in Low German are eligible for
funding under the general support scheme of Filmförderung Hamburg Schleswig-Holstein, if they meet the
quality and content criteria.
447. However, the Committee of Experts has not been informed of any audiovisual production in Low
German supported under this scheme. It therefore maintains that the undertaking is only formally fulfilled.
g

to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using regional or minority languages.

448. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. It
encouraged the authorities to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using Low German.
449. According to the fifth periodical report, the University of Hamburg does not have a specific training
offer for media using Low German, within journalism studies. The students at the Institute for Journalism and
Communication may choose Low German as an optional subject offered by other departments, or attend
Low German courses at the interdisciplinary language centre. The public broadcaster NDR offers
internships, which include assignment to regional studios where Low German is used, but a specific training
focused on Low German media does not exist. The NDR’s central office for Low German broadcasting has
an exchange programme with the University of Hamburg and in the winter semester of 2012-2013 a
journalist held a course on Low German radio features.
450. The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking partly fulfilled. It encourages the authorities to
take structured measures to support the training of journalists and other media staff using Low German.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural centres, museums, archives,
academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression,
festivals and the culture industries, including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory
in which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this
field:

58

d

451.

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of various kinds make
appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of regional or minority languages and
cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for which they provide backing;

In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled.

452. In the fifth periodical report the authorities refer to the activities of Ohnsorg-Theater, which is funded
annually with € 1.8 million. In the recent season, 400 theatre performances in Low German were presented
on its stage. Starting with the 2012-2013 season, the theatre has also offered plays for children, in Low
German or bilingually. The organisation Die Wendeltreppe, which receives a small financial support from the
authorities, performs in Low German as well. The Hamburger Engelsaal, a private theatre supported by the
authorities, offers occasionally performances in Low German. Other amateur theatre companies also offer
plays in Low German.
453. The Committee of Experts commends the authorities for contributing to the presence of Low German
in the field of theatre. However, there is a lack of a focused cultural policy in favour of Low German in other
fields of culture. The Committee of Experts has not been informed of any effort to ensure that the bodies
responsible for supporting cultural activities (except for the theatre) make appropriate allowance for
incorporating the knowledge and use of Low German.
454.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking partly fulfilled.
f

455.

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or minority language in
providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled.

456. According to the fifth periodical report, the authorities and the Low German speakers are in regular
contact regarding the cultural activities and facilities.
457. The Committee of Experts asks the authorities to provide more specific information in the next
periodical report.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for regional or minority
languages and the cultures they reflect.

458. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled as
regards the federal level.
459. According to the fifth periodical report, Deutsche Welle provides information about Low German on
its website. The Federal Foreign Office and the Goethe-Institut do not take any measures to promote the
regional and minority languages and cultures in the framework of the cultural and educational policy abroad.
The German authorities do not consider such measures necessary for the implementation of this
undertaking.
460. The Committee of Experts underlines that this provision requires the German authorities to include
Low German and the culture it reflects when presenting Germany’s culture and heritage abroad. As a first
step, embassies and the Goethe-Institut could distribute the brochure National minorities, regional and
minority languages in Germany, issued by the Ministry of the Interior, at international events where Germany
promotes its culture abroad.
461. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled at federal level. It encourages the
authorities to make appropriate provision for Low German and the culture it reflects, when pursuing their
cultural policy abroad.
Article 13 – Economic and social life
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole country:

59

d

to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by means other than those
specified in the above sub-paragraphs.

462. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. It
asked the German authorities to provide specific information on other measures taken to facilitate and/or
encourage the use of Low German in economic and social life.
463. According to the fifth periodical report, in 2012 the Hamburg public transport network launched an
advertising campaign in Low German, on posters, buses and in newspapers.
464. The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking fulfilled and encourages the authorities to
continue with similar initiatives.
Paragraph 2
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the public authorities are competent, within
the territory in which the regional or minority languages are used, and as far as this is reasonably possible:
c

to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and hostels offer the possibility of
receiving and treating in their own language persons using a regional or minority language who are in need
of care on grounds of ill-health, old age or for other reasons;

465. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled. It
strongly urged the authorities to adopt a structured policy with a view to making more systematic the
possibility to be received and treated in Low German in social care facilities.
466. According to the fifth periodical report, no structured policy has been adopted in this respect and Low
German is rarely used in social care facilities.
467. The Committee of Experts reiterates that the undertaking requires the authorities to ensure that the
possibility of receiving and treating persons in Low German is offered, which implies structural measures with
a view to guaranteeing a systematic provision. Such measures could include regulations on the relevant
qualifications which take account of a person’s knowledge of Low German or facilities and incentives for the
existing social care personnel to improve their Low German skills. Without such measures, the chances of
being treated in Low German will continue to be patchy and there is nothing to prevent the situation from
deteriorating in the future. However, at present there seem to be services in Low German available in
several social care facilities.
468. The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking partly fulfilled at present. The Committee of
Experts again strongly urges the authorities to adopt a structured policy with a view to making the possibility
to be received and treated in Low German in social care facilities more systematic.

60

2.2.6.c. Low German in the Land of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania

469. In this section, the Committee of Experts will focus on problematic areas and new developments in
the protection and promotion of Low German in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania. It will therefore not assess
the implementation of provisions which were fulfilled in the previous monitoring cycles, apart from such
undertakings where the Committee of Experts has received new relevant information. The following
provisions will not be commented upon:

Article 8, paragraph 1 g;
Article 9, paragraph 1.b.iii; c.iii; paragraph 2.a;
Article 10, paragraph 2.a; b; f;
Article 11, paragraph 1b.ii, d, e. ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1.a; b; d; e; h;
Article 13, paragraph 1.a; c; d.

470. For these provisions, the Committee of Experts refers to the conclusions reached in its previous
reports but reserves the right to evaluate the situation again at a later stage.
Article 8 – Education
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used, according to the
situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
a

i

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

iii

to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those pupils whose families so request
and whose number is considered sufficient; or

iv

if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school education, to favour and/or
encourage the application of the measures referred to under i to iii above;

471. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled. It
asked the authorities for clarification and further information on the teaching of Low German in practice at
pre-schools.
472. According to the fifth periodical report, a model project has been developed, on the recommendation
of the Working group on Low German at school and early-childhood education, in order to ensure a more
systematic teaching of Low German at pre-school level. The project was financed by Stiftung Mecklenburg.
In its framework, in 2010 teaching materials were developed and distributed to all 20 participating preschools. In 2010-2011, workshops for teachers were organised, where they could provide feedback and
receive additional training. In 2011, an evaluation meeting was organised at Güstrow, where teachers
agreed that Low German should be more firmly anchored in education and become a regular subject. The
teaching materials developed in the framework of the project are at present being used for teaching Low
German in pre-school education. During the on-the-spot visit, the authorities informed the Committee of
Experts that the project will continue.
473. The Committee of Experts welcomes the development of this project. However, it remains unclear to
what extent Low German is used in pre-school education, and whether this amounts to at least a substantial
part of it.
474. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking is partly fulfilled. It
encourages the authorities to continue their efforts to strengthen Low German in pre-school education and
asks them to provide specific information about the teaching of Low German in practice at this level.

61

b

iii

to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or minority languages as
an integral part of the curriculum;

c

iii

to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or minority languages
as an integral part of the curriculum;

475. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertakings partly fulfilled.
The Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “upgrade the teaching of Low
German to the status of a regular school subject being taught as an integral part of the curriculum
and increase the number of hours devoted to Low German, in the Länder concerned”. Furthermore,
the Committee of Experts urged the authorities to pursue their efforts to ensure that Low German is
systematically taught as an integral part of the curriculum at primary and secondary schools in the territories
where Low German is used.
476. According to the fifth periodical report and the information received during the on-the-spot visit, Low
German is taught in 66 primary and secondary schools, within the German classes. Low German is not a
separate subject in schools and there are no plans of the authorities in this respect, although the teachers
would support this approach. The authorities also admit that no body supervises how the regulation on Low
German in the classroom is applied in schools. A survey on teaching Low German in primary and secondary
schools is planned in 2012-2013 as part of the model project Low German in early-education childhood and
transition to secondary school, financed by Stiftung Mecklenburg. According to the Low German speakers,
teaching Low German as part of the German classes is not effective as regards language learning.
477. In light of this information, the Committee of Experts must revise its conclusion and consider the
undertaking not fulfilled. It strongly urges the authorities to provide for the systematic teaching of Low
German as an integral part of the curriculum at primary and secondary schools in the territories where Low
German is used.
d

478.

iii

to provide, within technical and vocational education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum;

In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled.

479. According to the fifth periodical report, Low German is taught as part of the German classes, and
there are no plans to teach it as a separate subject. However, the Low German speakers are of the view that
teaching Low German in vocational schools in the health care field could be considered by the authorities.
480. The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the authorities, in cooperation with the speakers, to provide for the teaching of Low German as an integral part of the curriculum,
in technical and vocational education.
e

ii

to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher education subjects;

481. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking fulfilled. It asked
the authorities to provide more information about the decentralised Low German Master course and the Low
German certificate, both under consideration by the Universities of Greifswald, Rostock, Magdeburg,
Hamburg and Kiel.
482. According to the fifth periodical report, concrete proposals concerning the decentralised Low German
masters course and certificate discussed by the five universities were still to be presented in the course of
2013. Low German continues to be an option for specialised study within the teacher training course for
German at the University of Greifswald and 40 students were enrolled in the 2012-2013 winter trimester. Low
German is still offered as a module in the bachelor, master and teacher training studies at the University of
Rostock; a Low German introductory course is compulsory in teacher training, while for the other studies Low
German is an optional compulsory subject.
483. In addition, the regulation on the first state examination for teachers at general and vocational
schools, issued in July 2012, foresees that Low German may be a complementary subject in the teacher
training studies, as an exception from the general rules. The authorities expect that on the basis of this
provision both the University of Greifswald and the University of Rostock will offer Low German as a
subsidiary subject.

62

484. The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking fulfilled. Nevertheless, it asks the authorities to
provide information on further developments in this field.
h

485.

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of paragraphs a to g
accepted by the Party;

This undertaking was considered fulfilled in the previous evaluation reports.

486. According to the fifth periodical report, no further training for teachers and pre-school teachers
leading to a certificate for Low German as a complementary subject has taken place since 2009. The Low
German speakers have informed the Committee of Experts that no reason has been given for the
discontinuation of this training. The authorities further inform that 17 teachers and pre-school teachers have
completed a Low German course, at B2 level.
487. Since no further training of teachers is taking place and the undertakings concerning primary and
secondary education are not fulfilled, the Committee of Experts must revise its previous conclusion and
considered the undertaking only partly fulfilled. It asks the authorities to provide specific information about
further training of teachers in the next periodical report.
i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken and progress
achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority languages and for drawing up
periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.

488. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. The
Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “ensure that an effective monitoring
mechanism in the sense of the Charter exists in the field of education for all regional or minority
languages covered under Part III”.
489. The Committee of Experts refers to its comments under General issues arising in the evaluation of
the application of the Charter in Germany (paragraphs 13-14). It reiterates that the current undertaking does
not necessarily require the setting up of a new body to carry out the monitoring envisaged under this
undertaking. It is, for example, possible for existing supervisory bodies to carry out these functions and
integrate them into existing administrative structures. The reports from the monitoring process should be
made public. The current reporting mechanism referred to by the German authorities does not fulfil the
requirements of this undertaking
490.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled.

Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of regional or minority
languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as
far as this is reasonably possible:
a

v

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document in these
languages;

491. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. The
Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take resolute action to establish a
structured policy for making it possible in practice to use regional or minority languages in dealings
with the administration […]”.
492. According to the fifth periodical report, on the basis of the Charter, Low German is considered a
possible second language in administration. The authorities, however, are not aware of any official
correspondence drawn up in Low German, neither of documents being rejected because they were drafted
in Low German.
493. The Committee of Experts reiterates that proactive measures need to be taken by the authorities
aimed at encouraging the Low German-speakers to avail themselves of the opportunity of submitting
documents in Low German, starting from the human resources policy, information campaigns and measures
to make aware the relevant authorities of their obligations.
63

494.

The Committee of Experts considers that the undertaking is not fulfilled.
c

495.

to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in a regional or minority language.

In the fourth monitoring round, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled.

496. According to the fifth periodical report, no documents have been drafted in Low German during the
present monitoring cycle. The Committee of Experts therefore maintains its previous conclusion that the
undertaking is only partly fulfilled.
Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the Parties undertake to take
one or more of the following measures:
c

compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a knowledge of a
regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that language is used.

497. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking fulfilled.
However, it asked the authorities to provide specific information concerning compliance with requests for
appointment in the territory where Low German is used.
498. According to the fifth periodical report, the authorities are not aware of any such request being made
by public service employees. However, the Committee of Experts is not aware of any measures taken to
inform the public service employees of the possibility envisaged by the undertaking.
499. The Committee of Experts asks the authorities to provide specific information concerning compliance
with requests for appointment in the territory where Low German is used in the next periodical report.
Article 11 – Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in which those languages are
spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are
competent, have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the
media:
c

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the regional or minority
languages on a regular basis;

500. In its second evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled.
The Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take measures so that adequate
[…] television broadcasting is available in […] Low German”. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts
encouraged the authorities to promote the broadcasting of Low German programmes by private
broadcasters.
501. According to the fifth periodical report, there are no programmes in Low German offered by private
broadcasters, but only occasional programmes about Low German-related topics. The Committee of Experts
notes that there have been no developments in this respect. There exists a certain amount of Low German
programmes in the public service broadcasting of NDR and on the regional Open Channel.
502. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking is partly fulfilled. It
urges the authorities to promote the broadcasting of Low German programmes by private broadcasters.
f

ii

to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions in the regional or
minority languages;

503. In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts asked the German authorities to provide
specific information on whether general existing measures for financial assistance have been applied to
audiovisual productions in Low German.
504. According to the fifth periodical report, no applications for financial assistance for audiovisual
productions in Low German have been submitted under the general support scheme.
64

505. The Committee of Experts reiterates that, in line with the undertaking, existing measures for financial
assistance have to be designed in such a way that regional or minority language productions could qualify,
and to be made available to them in practice, to a certain extent. The regional or minority language
representatives need to be made aware of this possibility.
506. The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking formally fulfilled. It encourages, however, the
authorities to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions in Low
German.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural centres, museums, archives,
academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression,
festivals and the culture industries, including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory
in which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this
field:
c

to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages by aiding and
developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;

507. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking formally fulfilled.
It encouraged the authorities to take proactive measures to foster access in Low German to works produced
in other languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling
activities.
508. According to the fifth periodical report, no applications for funding the translation, dubbing, postsynchronisation or subtitling in Low German of works produced in other languages have been submitted.
However, such funding is in principle possible, under the existing legal framework.
509. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking is formally fulfilled,
but encourages the authorities to take a proactive approach in fostering access in Low German to works
produced in other languages.
f

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or minority language in
providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

510. The Committee of Experts considered the undertaking fulfilled in the previous monitoring rounds,
because the organisations providing facilities and planning cultural activities in Low German
(Landesheimatbund and Kulturbund) were ensuring direct participation of the Low German speakers. As
noted above under Article 7.4 (paragraph 63) both umbrella organisations do not receive financial support
from the authorities anymore and went into insolvency, and no new organisations have yet been established.
As a consequence, direct participation by representatives of Low German in providing facilities and planning
cultural activities in Low German no longer takes place. The Committee of Experts does not conclude at this
stage, but will return to this issue in the next monitoring round.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for regional or minority
languages and the cultures they reflect.

511. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled at
federal level.
512. According to the fifth periodical report, Deutsche Welle provides information about Low German on
its website. The Federal Foreign Office and the Goethe-Institut do not take any measures to promote the
regional and minority languages and cultures in the framework of the cultural and educational policy abroad.
The German authorities do not consider such measures necessary for the implementation of this
undertaking.

65

513. The Committee of Experts underlines that this provision requires the German authorities to include
Low German and the culture it reflects when presenting Germany’s culture and heritage abroad. As a first
step, embassies and the Goethe-Institut could distribute the brochure National minorities, regional and
minority languages in Germany, issued by the Ministry of the Interior, at international events where Germany
promotes its culture abroad.
514. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled at federal level. It encourages the
authorities to make appropriate provision for Low German and the culture it reflects, when pursuing their
cultural policy abroad.
Article 13 – Economic and social life
Paragraph 2
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the public authorities are competent, within
the territory in which the regional or minority languages are used, and as far as this is reasonably possible:
c

to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and hostels offer the possibility of
receiving and treating in their own language persons using a regional or minority language who are in need
of care on grounds of ill-health, old age or for other reasons;

515. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled. It
strongly urged the authorities to adopt a structured policy with a view to making it more systematically
possible for the persons concerned to be received and treated in Low German in social care facilities.
516.

The fifth periodical report contains no information in this respect.

517. The Committee of Experts reiterates that the undertaking requires the authorities to ensure that the
possibility of receiving and treating persons in Low German is offered, which implies structural measures with
a view to guaranteeing a systematic provision. Such measures could include regulations on the relevant
qualifications which take account of a person’s knowledge of Low German or facilities and incentives for the
existing social care personnel to improve their Low German skills. Without such measures, the chances of
being treated in Low German will continue to be patchy and there is nothing to prevent the situation from
deteriorating in the future. However, at present there seem to be services in Low German available in
several social care facilities.
518. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking is partly fulfilled.
The Committee of Experts again strongly urges the authorities to adopt a structured policy with a view to
making it more systematically possible for the persons concerned to be received and treated in Low German
in social care facilities.

66

3.2.6.d. Low German in the Land of Lower Saxony

519. In this section, the Committee of Experts will focus on problematic areas and new developments in
the protection and promotion of Low German in Lower Saxony. It will therefore not assess the
implementation of provisions which were fulfilled in the previous monitoring cycles, apart from such
undertakings where the Committee of Experts has received new relevant information. The following
provisions will not be commented upon:
Article 8, paragraph 1.f.iii;
Article 9, paragraph 1.b.iii; c.iii;paragraph 2.a;
Article 10, paragraph 2.f; paragraph 4.a, c;
Article 11, paragraph 1.b.ii, e.ii; f.ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1.a; d; e; f ; g; paragraph 2;
Article 13, paragraph 1.a; c; d;
Article 14.a; b.
520. For these provisions, the Committee of Experts refers to the conclusions reached in its previous
reports but reserves the right to evaluate the situation again at a later stage.
Article 8 – Education

Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used, according to the
situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
a

i

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

iii

to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those pupils whose families so request
and whose number is considered sufficient; or

iv

if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school education, to favour and/or
encourage the application of the measures referred to under i to iii above;

521. In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled. It
urged the authorities to systematically favour and/or encourage the provision of at least a substantial part of
pre-school education in Low German to at least those pupils whose families so request and whose number is
considered sufficient.
522. According to the fifth periodical report, the Land authorities do not require Low German to be taught
at kindergartens. The Orientation Plan for Language and Speaking only provides that “in the areas where a
regional language is spoken, multilingualism is a good way to enhance language comprehension and
speaking skills”. The decision to offer Low German at pre-school belongs to the providers, whether public or
private. They must decide at local level and in consultation with the parents if and how Low German is to be
part of pre-school education.
523. The Committee of Experts received no information on the extent to which Low German is taught in
practice, or to the number of children involved. It therefore maintains its previous conclusion that the
undertaking is only partly fulfilled.
524. The Committee of Experts strongly urges the authorities to systematically favour and/or encourage
the provision of at least a substantial part of pre-school education in Low German to at least those pupils
whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient.

67

e

525.

ii

to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher education subjects;

In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking fulfilled.

526. According to the fifth periodical report, the chair in Germanic linguistics: Linguistic pragmatics and
sociolinguistics/Low German became a permanent position in 2012. The same year funding from the Land to
the University of Oldenburg, aimed at strengthening Low German, increased by € 100 000; as of 2013, the
funding will increase yearly by € 150 000. This increase in funding enabled the University to set up new
research and teaching positions.
527.

The Committee of Experts welcomes these developments. It considers the undertaking fulfilled.
g

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected by the
regional or minority language;

528. In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts requested the German authorities to provide
more specific information in the next periodical report on the extent to which the teaching of the history and
the culture which is reflected by Low German is ensured in practice.
529. According to the fifth periodical report, in line with the decree on The Region and its Languages in
Education, which entered into force on 1 August 2011, when teaching about the regional context, information
has to be provided about the languages in the region. This is compulsory for all types of classes (teaching
compulsory subjects, teaching optional compulsory subject, activity groups, and all-day school offer). The
core curriculum for all schools covers teaching about the regional context and this information must be
included in subjects such as German, history, geography, political science, music and art, in particular.
530.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking fulfilled.
i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken and progress
achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority languages and for drawing up
periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.

531. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. The
Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “ensure that an effective monitoring
mechanism in the sense of the Charter exists in the field of education for all regional or minority
languages covered under Part III”. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts asked the authorities to provide
information about the outcome of the revision of a decree dealing, inter alia, with supervisory bodies.
532. According to the fifth periodical report, a supervisory body composed of representatives of the
authorities, of the regional associations and of the Niedersächsischer Heimatbund, monitors how the Charter
provisions in the field of education are implemented. The monitoring is based on the report of the Lower
Saxony school authority, which provides information on the how Low German is promoted, how the allotted
teaching hours are used and on the activities of the advisers for Low German.
533. The Committee of Experts asks the authorities to inform it whether the report of this supervisory body
is made public and what the results of monitoring are.
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of regional or minority
languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as
far as this is reasonably possible:
a

v

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document in these
languages;

534. In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. The
Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take resolute action to establish a
structured policy for making it possible in practice to use regional or minority languages in dealings
with the administration […]”. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts strongly urged the authorities of
Lower Saxony to ensure that users of Low German may validly submit documents in Low German within its
administrative districts to the administrative authorities of Lower Saxony. It also asked the German
68

authorities to provide information about the draft Low German bill, presented by the Niedersächsische
Heimatbund, in order to ensure a legal basis for the use of Low German in administration.
535. In the fifth periodical report the authorities reiterate that the Charter is directly applicable law and no
further legislative provisions are necessary in order to ensure that Low German-speakers may validly submit
a document in Low German. As to the practical aspects, the report states that Low German is mainly used in
oral communication. The draft law presented by the Niedersächsischer Heimatbund, aimed at ensuring a
legal basis for the use of Low German in administration, has been rejected. The Committee of Experts was
informed by representatives of the speakers that written documents in Low German are not recognised as
valid, for example, by the tax authorities.
536. In light of this information, the Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the
undertaking is not fulfilled.
c

537.

to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in a regional or minority language.

In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled.

538. In the fifth periodical report the authorities maintain that the Charter is directly applicable law and no
further legislative provisions are necessary to implement this undertaking. According to the report,
administrative authorities are allowed to draft documents in Low German.
539. The Committee of Experts reiterates that some degree of practical implementation has to follow the
mere “allowing” the documents to be drafted in Low German. The Committee of Experts received no
information of any documents drafted in Low German by administrative authorities.
540.

Therefore, it maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking is not fulfilled.

Paragraph 2
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who are users of regional or
minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below, the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
a

541.

the use of regional or minority languages within the framework of the regional or local authority;

In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled.

542. According to the fifth periodical report, Low German continues to be used in a number of local
authorities, although to a limited degree. These have Low German-speaking employees and some have
appointed commissioners for Low German. Some authorities conduct marriage and partnership ceremonies
in Low German. The Ostfriesische Landschaft is involved in promoting Low German in administration. There
is no legal provision allowing the written use of Low German in the framework of regional or local authorities.
543. The Committee of Experts notes that there have been no developments concerning the use of Low
German in regional or local authorities. Therefore, it maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking is
only partly fulfilled.
b

the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written applications in these
languages;

544. In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled.
The Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take resolute action to establish a
structured policy for making it possible in practice to use regional or minority languages in dealings
with the administration […].
545. According to the fifth periodical report, due to the competence of the local self-government, the Land
authorities may not set rules concerning the use of Low German in local administration. However, as the
Charter has the status of law, it is also binding for the local authorities and these are aware of the need to
enable the use of Low German in dealings with the administration. Local authorities have Low Germanspeaking employees, who are appointed in particular at the public information services. Some local
authorities also have appointed Commissioners for Low German.

69

546. However, the Committee of Experts was informed by the Low German speakers that written
documents may not be submitted in Low German, for example in case of child registration or land
consolidation procedure.
547. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking is only partly
fulfilled.

548.

c

the publication by regional authorities of their official documents also in the relevant regional or minority
languages;

d

the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in the relevant regional or minority
languages;

In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertakings partly fulfilled.

549. According to the fifth periodical report, due to the competence of the local self-government, the Land
authorities may not set rules concerning the use of Low German in local administration. However, as the
Charter has the status of law, it is also binding for the local authorities. The Committee of Experts was,
however, informed by Low German speakers that no official documents are also published in Low German.
550. The Committee of Experts must therefore revise its conclusion and consider the undertaking not
fulfilled. The Committee of Experts encourages the authorities to promote the publication by local and
regional authorities of their documents also in Low German.
e

551.

the use by regional authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their assemblies, without
excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled.

552. According to the fifth periodical report, due to the competence of the local self-government, the Land
authorities may not set rules concerning the use of Low German in local administration. However, as the
Charter has the status of law, it is also binding for the local authorities. The Committee of Experts received
no information on the practical implementation of this undertaking, or on the measures taken by the
authorities to encourage the use of Low German in the debates of regional assemblies.
553. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking is only partly
fulfilled.
Article 11 – Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in which those languages are
spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are
competent, have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the
media:
c

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the regional or minority
languages on a regular basis;

554. In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled.
The Committee of Ministers recommended that the German “take measures so that adequate radio and
television broadcasting is available in […] Low German […]”. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts
invited the authorities to look into how the existing Low German programmes could be offered on a regular
basis, so that the undertaking could be fulfilled.
555. According to the fifth periodical report, in 2010 the authorities amended the Lower Saxony Media Act.
The law now requires broadcasters to include in an adequate manner in their programme the regional and
minority languages spoken in their coverage area. The public broadcaster NDR regularly offers a variety of
programmes in Low German.
556.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking fulfilled.

70

d

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual works in the regional
or minority languages;

557. In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking fulfilled with
regard to audio works and not fulfilled with regard to audiovisual works.
558. According to the fifth periodical report, in 2010 nordmedia fonds GmbH provided funding for the
production of the NDR documentary in Low German Bingo-Toletzt entscheed jümmers das Glück.
559.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking fulfilled.

Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural centres, museums, archives,
academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression,
festivals and the culture industries, including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory
in which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this
field:
b

to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in regional or minority
languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;

560.

In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled.

561.

The fifth periodical report contains no relevant information in this respect.

562.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled.
c

563.

to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages by aiding and
developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;

In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled.

564. According to the fifth periodical report, theatre plays are often translated into Low German. The
authorities provide financial assistance to the Niederdeutscher Bühnenbund, in the framework of the
agreement with Niederdeutscher Heimatbund. They also support the music competition Platt-Sounds, where
songs are performed in Low German and, therefore all texts are translated with the assistance of the
organisers. In addition, the authorities contributed to financing the translation into Low German of an audio
guide for the picture gallery of the state museum in Hannover.
565.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking fulfilled.

Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for regional or minority
languages and the cultures they reflect.

566. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled at
federal level.
567. According to the fifth periodical report, Deutsche Welle provides information about Low German on
its website. The Federal Foreign Office and the Goethe-Institut do not take any measures to promote the
regional and minority languages and cultures in the framework of the cultural and educational policy abroad.
The German authorities do not consider such measures necessary for the implementation of this
undertaking.
568. The Committee of Experts underlines that this provision requires the German authorities to include
Low German and the culture it reflects when presenting Germany’s culture and heritage abroad. As a first
step, embassies and the Goethe-Institut could distribute the brochure National minorities, regional and
minority languages in Germany, issued by the Ministry of the Interior, at international events where Germany
promotes its culture abroad.
71

569. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled at federal level. It encourages the
authorities to make appropriate provision for Low German and the culture it reflects, when pursuing their
cultural policy abroad.

72

3.2.6.e. Low German in the Land of Schleswig-Holstein

570. In this section, the Committee of Experts will focus on problematic areas and new developments in
the protection and promotion of Low German in Schleswig-Holstein. It will therefore not assess the
implementation of provisions which were fulfilled in the previous monitoring cycles, apart from such
undertakings where the Committee of Experts has received new relevant information. The following
provisions will not be commented upon:

-

Article 8, paragraph 1.a.iv; f.iii; g;
Article 9, paragraph 1.b.iii; c.iii; paragraph 2.a;
Article 10, paragraph 2.a; f;
Article 11, paragraph 1.b.ii; e.ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1.a; d; f; g;
Article 13, paragraph 1.a; c.

571. For these provisions, the Committee of Experts refers to the conclusions reached in its previous
reports but reserves the right to evaluate the situation again at a later stage.
Article 8 – Education
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used, according to the
situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
b

c

iii

iii

to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or minority languages as
an integral part of the curriculum;
to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or minority languages as
an integral part of the curriculum;

572. In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered these undertakings partly
fulfilled. The Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “upgrade the teaching of
Low German to the status of a regular school subject being taught as an integral part of the
curriculum and increase the number of hours devoted to Low German, in the Länder concerned”.
573. According to the fifth periodical report, the authorities continue their efforts to strengthen Low
German in education. In August 2012 the school in Niebüll became the first model school for Low German in
Schleswig-Holstein. In this school, language learning is a priority and the school receives extra funding from
the Land authorities for developing courses, research and further training. The expertise developed in Niebüll
will be shared with other schools. According to the information received during the on-the-spot visit, the Land
is organising a pilot project where 27 schools in various parts of Schleswig-Holstein teach Low German as a
subject within the regular curriculum. This pilot project is intended to lead to a ministerial directive on Low
German regularising its teaching as an integral part of the curriculum throughout the Land. Furthermore, the
authorities, in cooperation with the Schleswig-Holstein Heimatbund have established a prize awarded to
education institutions which promote Low German.
574. The Committee of Experts welcomes these developments. However, as long as Low German is not
systematically taught throughout the Low German speaking territory as an integral part of the curriculum, the
Committee of Experts must maintain its previous conclusion that the undertaking is partly fulfilled. The
Committee of Experts looks forward to the successful implementation of the measures planned.
e

575.

ii

to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher education subjects;

In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking fulfilled.

576. According to the fifth periodical report, at the University of Flensburg, all students with German as a
“major” must take an introduction to Low German or Frisian in the first semester. In the third year, they may
choose to specialise in Low German and follow two Low German modules (six classes). A certificate is
awarded to those having successfully completed both modules. The modules are also open to students not
having chosen to specialise in Low German. At the University of Kiel, students with German as a “major”
73

may choose classes with an emphasis on Low German. They, as well as students with other subjects as
their “major”, may attend modules with Low German as a specialised subject. The masters in German is now
also offering the possibility to choose Low German as a specialised subject. In addition, a Low German
learning module, with a course for beginners and advanced learners is offered by the university. The Low
German sections at the universities in Kiel and Flensburg have concluded a cooperation agreement; they
exchange students and instructors, as well as coordinate their Low German semester offers.
577. The Committee of Experts welcomes this information. It maintains its previous conclusion that the
undertaking is fulfilled.
h
to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of paragraphs a to g
accepted by the Party;

578. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts asked the authorities to provide information
about the training of teachers for Low German at the University of Flensburg.
579. According to the fifth periodical report, the University of Flensburg is revising its teacher training
courses as of the winter semester 2013/2014 and extending its masters programme to four semesters. In
this framework, the university is examining whether to strengthen the Low German specialised subject area.
At the University of Kiel students training to be teachers may choose Low German as an additional subject.
580. The Institute for Advanced Teacher Training at Schleswig-Holstein Schools offers further training
courses for teachers for Low German. For this purpose, the institute has also hired new experts and
advisers. In the 2012/2013 school year a certificate course in Low German has been offered. In addition, the
Centres for Low German in Ratzenburg and Leck organise basic and further teacher training, in particular for
pre-school teachers. Since 2011 the centre in Leck has been offering a six-day qualification course Platt für
de Lütten, dedicated to pre-school teachers. Further training courses are organised by associations. The
Schleswig-Holstein Heimatbund contributes as well to the training of teachers and co-operates with the Low
German Working Group of the International Learning Centre Jugendhof Scheersberg. In addition, adult
education centres for pre-school staff (KiTA-Weiterbildungsprogramm) offer Low German. The Low German
speakers welcomed the positive developments in further training.
581. The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking fulfilled. However, it looks forward to receiving
further information about teacher training at the University of Flensburg and hopes that, in the framework of
the reform, Low German will be strengthened.
i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken and progress
achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority languages and for drawing up
periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.

582. In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. The
Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “ensure that an effective monitoring
mechanism in the sense of the Charter exists in the field of education for all regional or minority
languages covered under Part III.”
583. The Committee of Experts refers to its comments under General issues arising in the evaluation of
the application of the Charter in Germany (paragraphs 13-14). It reiterates that the current undertaking does
not necessarily require the setting up of a new body to carry out the monitoring envisaged under this
undertaking. It is for example possible for existing supervisory bodies to carry out these functions and
integrate them into existing administrative structures. The reports from the monitoring process should be
made public. The current reporting mechanism referred to by the German authorities does not fulfil the
requirements of this undertaking
584.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled.

Paragraph 2
With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are
traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow,
encourage or provide teaching in or of the regional or minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.

74

585. In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts looked forward to receiving more information
on the educational concepts and their practical implementation in environments where Low German was no
longer a spoken language.
586. According to the fifth periodical report, state funded adult education centres offer Low German
courses across the Land. On the whole, 30 such centres offer about 60 Low German courses, attended by
approximately 620 people.
587. The Committee of Experts asks the authorities to provide information about pre-school, primary and
secondary stages of education in environments where Low German is no longer a spoken language.
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of regional or minority
languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as
far as this is reasonably possible:
a

v

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document in these
languages;

588. In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking formally fulfilled.
The Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take resolute action to establish a
structured policy for making it possible in practice to use regional or minority languages in dealings
with the administration […]”.
589. According to the fifth periodical report, no measures have been taken. The authorities reiterate that
no administrative regulations are necessary, since the Charter is directly applicable in Germany. The Low
German speakers have informed the Committee of Experts of a case where an applicant was told by the
employment agency in Stormarn that the Charter did not apply because of the small number of speakers.
590. The Committee of Experts reiterates that the authorities should envisage other measures, for
example informing the administrative bodies of their duties, carrying out an awareness campaign and
identifying Low German speakers within the administration, in order to ensure that documents in Low
German may be validly submitted in practice.
591. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking is only formally
fulfilled.
c

592.

to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in a regional or minority language.

In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled.

593. In the fifth periodical report, the authorities reiterate that the provision only requires allowing
documents to be drafted in Low German and that no further measures are necessary.
12

594. The Committee of Experts reiterates that a certain degree of implementation must follow the mere
allowing of the documents to be drafted in Low German. In the light of the objectives of the Charter, states
need to take proactive measures that ensure a certain degree of practical use of the regional or minority
language in documents drafted by administrative authorities.
595.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled.

Paragraph 2
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who are users of regional or
minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below, the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
b

12

the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written applications in these
languages;

Paragraph 647, 4th Report of the Committee of Experts on the application of the Charter in Germany, ECRML (2011) 2

75

596. In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled.
The Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take resolute action to establish a
structured policy for making it possible in practice to use regional or minority languages in dealings
with the administration […]”.
597. In the fifth periodical report, the authorities reiterate that the undertaking only requires them to allow
the submission of oral and written applications in Low German, and not any measures encouraging speakers
to make use of this possibility.
13

598. The Committee of Experts reiterates that the undertaking is not restricted to a mere “allowing”, but
requires the state to “encourage” the speakers to make use of the language in communicating with the
regional and municipal authorities. Moreover, the spirit of the Charter requires the authorities to take
proactive measures encouraging the use of minority languages in various spheres of public life.
599. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking is only partly
fulfilled.
Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the Parties undertake to take
one or more of the following measures:
c

600.

compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a knowledge of a
regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that language is used.

In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled.

601. According to the fifth periodical report, the authorities are not aware of any such request being made
by public service employees. They further underline that Low German can only be a selection criterion for
specific vacancies, where knowledge of Low German is absolutely needed.
602. However, the Committee of Experts is not aware of any measures taken to inform the public service
employees of the possibility envisaged by the undertaking.
603.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled.

Article 11 – Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in which those languages are
spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are
competent, have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the
media:
c

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the regional or minority
languages on a regular basis;

604. In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled.
The Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take measures so that adequate
radio and television broadcasting is available in […] Low German […]”. Furthermore, the Committee of
Experts encouraged the authorities to promote the broadcasting of Low German programmes by private
television broadcasters.
605. According to the fifth periodical report, the public broadcaster NDR regularly offers a variety of
programmes in Low German. The Open Channel Schleswig-Holstein offers various programmes in Low
German. In addition, the Open Channel TV stations in Kiel and Flensburg regularly offer theatre plays in Low
German.
606.
13

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking fulfilled.

Paragraph 650, 4th Report of the Committee of Experts on the application of the Charter in Germany, ECRML (2011) 2

76

d

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual works in the regional
or minority languages;

607. In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. It
asked the authorities to provide specific information on how the production and distribution of audio and
audiovisual works in Low German has been encouraged and/or facilitated by public funds or comparable
measures.
608. According to the fifth periodical report, the Filmförderung Hamburg Schleswig-Holstein did not
receive any applications concerning audio or audiovisual works in Low German. However, this information is
relevant under Article 11.1.f ii, as it refers to the existing general financial assistance for all audiovisual
works. This undertaking requires specific assistance measures for audiovisual works in regional or minority
languages.
609. The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the authorities to
encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual works in Low German.
f

610.

ii

to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions in the regional or
minority languages;

In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking formally fulfilled.

611. According to the fifth periodical report, audio and audiovisual works in Low German are eligible for
funding under the general support scheme of Filmförderung Hamburg Schleswig-Holstein, if they meet the
quality and content criteria.
612. The Committee of Experts has not been informed of any audiovisual production in Low German
supported under this scheme. It therefore maintains that the undertaking is only formally fulfilled.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural centres, museums, archives,
academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression,
festivals and the culture industries, including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory
in which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this
field:
b

to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in regional or minority
languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;

c

to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages by aiding and
developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;

613. In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered these undertakings partly
fulfilled. It asked the authorities to elaborate more in detail on their role in the translation by publishers and
authors of theatre plays into Low German.
614. According to the fifth periodical report, the Land authorities provide funding to the Niederdeutschen
Bühnenbund Schleswig-Holstein and to the Landesverband der Amateurtheater Schleswig-Holstein. These
are two umbrella organisations supporting their member theatres in preparing theatre plays in Low German,
including the translation of such works.
615. While commending the authorities for their support to Low German theatre, the Committee of Experts
points out that a wider offer of works translated from or into Low German is needed.
616. Nevertheless, the Committee of Experts considers the undertakings fulfilled. It encourages the
authorities to support translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling of additional works, in addition
to theatre plays, into and from Low German.

77

Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for regional or minority
languages and the cultures they reflect.

617. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled at
the federal level.
618. According to the fifth periodical report, Deutsche Welle provides information about Low German on
its website. The Federal Foreign Office and the Goethe-Institut do not take any measures to promote the
regional and minority languages and cultures in the framework of the cultural and educational policy abroad.
The German authorities do not consider such measures necessary for the implementation of this
undertaking.
619. The Committee of Experts underlines that this provision requires the German authorities to include
Low German and the culture it reflects when presenting Germany’s culture and heritage abroad. As a first
step, embassies and the Goethe-Institut could distribute the brochure National minorities, regional and
minority languages in Germany, issued by the Ministry of the Interior, at international events where Germany
promotes its culture abroad.
620. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled at federal level. It encourages the
authorities to make appropriate provision for Low German and the culture it reflects, when pursuing their
cultural policy abroad.
Article 13 – Economic and social life
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole country:
d

621.

to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by means other than those
specified in the above sub-paragraphs.

In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled.

622. According to the fifth periodical report, the authorities have only limited possibilities to intervene in the
social and economic activities.
623. The Committee of Experts is not aware of any measures taken by the authorities to encourage the
use of Low German in economic and social life. Therefore, the Committee of Experts maintains its previous
conclusion that the undertaking is not fulfilled.
Paragraph 2
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the public authorities are competent, within
the territory in which the regional or minority languages are used, and as far as this is reasonably possible:
c

624.

to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and hostels offer the possibility of
receiving and treating in their own language persons using a regional or minority language who are in need
of care on grounds of ill-health, old age or for other reasons;

In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled.

625. In the fifth periodical report, the authorities state that they have only limited possibilities of
intervention in this field; however, they are continuing efforts, in cooperation with the relevant associations
and institutions, to strengthen the use of Low German in social care facilities.
626. The Committee of Experts reiterates that the undertaking requires the authorities to ensure that the
possibility of receiving and treating persons in Low German is offered, which implies structural measures with
a view to guaranteeing a systematic provision. Such measures could include regulations on the relevant
qualifications which take account of a person’s knowledge of Low German or facilities and incentives for the
existing social care personnel to improve their Low German skills. Without such measures, the chances of

78

being treated in Low German will continue to be patchy and there is nothing to prevent the situation from
deteriorating in the future.
627.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled.

79

3.2.7.

Romani in the Land of Hesse

628. In this section, the Committee of Experts will focus on problematic areas and new developments in
the protection and promotion of Romani in Hesse. It will therefore not assess the implementation of
provisions which were fulfilled in the previous monitoring cycles, apart from such undertakings where the
Committee of Experts has received new relevant information. The following provisions will not be commented
upon:
Article 8, paragraph 1.g;
Article 9, paragraph 2.a;
Article 10, paragraph 5;
Article 11, paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1.f;g
Article 12, paragraph 3;
Article 13, paragraph 1.a.c
629. For these provisions, the Committee of Experts refers to the conclusions reached in its previous
reports but reserves the right to evaluate the situation again at a later stage.
630. In the previous monitoring cycles the Committee of Experts already observed that certain difficulties
persisted in the implementation of the undertakings chosen by Land Hesse. These difficulties were partly
due to the fact that a part of the speakers did not wish to have any presence of Romani outside their
community and also due to the fact that, in accordance with the wishes of a number of speakers, the Romani
varieties spoken by German Sinti and Roma have not been codified.
631. These difficulties still prevail and are reported by the German authorities in the fifth periodical report.
However, it should be noted, as reported by the Sinti-Allianz Deutschland in their comments attached to the
fifth periodical report, that Romani consists of different linguistic varieties in Germany and that these varieties
are spoken by different groups clearly identifiable by their cultures.
632. The Committee of Experts is of the view that the Charter’s provisions must be implemented bearing
in mind the wishes of the Romani speakers. It therefore asks the authorities to develop, in cooperation with
the speakers, two separate policies on Romani, one for German Sinti and the other one for German Roma.
The Committee of Experts invites the German authorities to report separately on those two policies in the
next periodical report.
633. Moreover, the Committee of Experts would like to remind the German authorities that the Charter
requires that they take some positive measures to promote and protect Romani and inter alia to inform the
speakers of Romani of the possibility to use their language in the private and public spheres.
Article 8 – Education
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used, according to the
situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
a

b

I

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

iii

to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those pupils whose families so
request and whose number is considered sufficient; or

iv

if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school education, to favour and/or
encourage the application of the measures referred to under i to iii above;

i

to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of primary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

80

c

iii

to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or minority languages as an
integral part of the curriculum; or

iv

to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils whose families so
request and whose number is considered sufficient;

i

to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of secondary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

iii

to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or minority languages as an
integral part of the curriculum; or

iv

to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils who, or where
appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered sufficient;”

634. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertakings not fulfilled. It
encouraged the authorities to provide specific information regarding the presence of Romani in education at
all levels.
635. According to the fifth periodical report, teaching in Romani so far has not been promoted in schools
in Hesse and progress within the meaning of the Charter seems very unlikely as such action is neither
practicable nor wished by the minority concerned. During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was
informed that in the framework of a project combating school absenteeism and reintegrating Sinti and Roma
into the school system, 70 pupils are taught Romani. Two and a half teaching posts have been set up to this
end. The Committee of Experts welcomes this information. It encourages the authorities to continue
measures providing for the teaching of Romani in Hesse schools.
d

e

i

to make available technical and vocational education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of technical and vocational education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or

iii

to provide, within technical and vocational education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or minority
languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

iv

to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils who, or where
appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered sufficient;

i

to make available university and other higher education in regional or minority languages; or

ii

to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher education subjects; or

iii

if, by reason of the role of the State in relation to higher education institutions, sub-paragraphs i and ii
cannot be applied, to encourage and/or allow the provision of university or other forms of higher
education in regional or minority languages or of facilities for the study of these languages as
university or higher education subjects;

636. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertakings not fulfilled. It
encouraged the authorities to provide specific information regarding the presence of Romani in education at
all levels.
637. There is no relevant information in this respect in the fifth periodical report. The Committee of Experts
maintains its conclusion that the undertakings are not fulfilled.
f

iii

if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult education, to favour and/or
encourage the offering of such languages as subjects of adult and continuing education;

638. In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled. It
asked the authorities to strengthen their efforts to encourage the offering of Romani as a subject of adult
education.
639. According to the fifth periodical report, the Romani course at the education centre in Marburg did not
take place because no agreement was reached among Sinti and Roma on whether non-native speakers and
other persons than Sinti should be allowed to attend.
640. In light of this information, the Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled. It
encourages the authorities to promote the offering of Romani as a subject of adult education.
81

h

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of paragraphs a to g
accepted by the Party;

641.

In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled.

642.

In the fifth monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts received no information in this respect.

643. The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled. The Committee of Experts
encourages the authorities to look into the possibilities, as a first step, of training Romani speakers as
teaching staff for pre-school education.
i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken and progress
achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority languages and for drawing up
periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.

644. In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. The
Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “ensure that an effective monitoring
mechanism in the sense of the Charter exists in the field of education for all regional or minority
languages covered under Part III.”
645.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled.

Paragraph 2
With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are
traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow,
encourage or provide teaching in or of the regional or minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.

646. In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. It
asked the authorities to provide information on the protection and promotion of Romani in the Frankfurt area.
647.

In the fifth monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts received no information in this respect.

648.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled.

Article 9 – Judicial authorities
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents using the regional or minority
languages justifies the measures specified below, according to the situation of each of these languages and on condition that
the use of the facilities afforded by the present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration
of justice:
b

in civil proceedings:
iii

to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages,

if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;
c

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
iii

to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages,

if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

649. In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertakings formally
fulfilled. The Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take resolute action to
establish a structured policy for making it possible in practice to use regional or minority languages
[…] in the courts.”
650. According to the fifth periodical report, in order to provide official interpreters, the language must be
codified to allow verification.

82

651. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertakings are formally
fulfilled, but asks the authorities to provide more specific information on practical implementation in the next
periodical report.
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
Paragraph 2
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who are users of regional or
minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below, the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
e

the use by regional authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their assemblies, without
excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

f

the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their assemblies, without
excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

652. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertakings formally
fulfilled, but lacked information on the practical implementation of these undertakings.
653.

In the fifth monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts received no information in this respect.

654. The Committee of Experts considers the undertakings formally fulfilled and asks the authorities to
provide information on the practical implementation of these undertakings.
Paragraph 3
With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting on their behalf, the Parties
undertake, within the territory in which regional or minority languages are used, in accordance with the situation of each
language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
c

to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request in these languages.

655. In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. The
Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take resolute action to establish a
structured policy for making it possible in practice to use regional or minority languages in dealings
with the administration […]”.
656. According to the fifth periodical report, Sinti do not use Romani for communication outside the group.
The authorities are not aware of any request to use Romani in their relations with the administration. The
Committee of Experts reminds the authorities of their obligation to inform Romani speakers of the possibility
to submit a request in this language.
657.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled.

Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the Parties undertake to take
one or more of the following measures:
c

compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a knowledge of a
regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that language is used.

658. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. It
encouraged the authorities to strengthen their efforts to have some Romani speakers among their
employees, as this undertaking presupposes the presence of Romani speakers within staff.
659. According to the fifth periodical report, all jobs are available also for Romani speakers and the law
protects again discrimination. However, the Committee of Experts is not aware whether there are any
Romani speakers among the staff.
660.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled.

83

Article 11 – Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in which those languages are
spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are
competent, have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the
media:
b

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the regional or minority
languages on a regular basis;

c

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the regional or minority
languages on a regular basis;

661. In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertakings not fulfilled.
The Committee of Ministers recommended that the German authorities “take measures so that adequate
radio and television broadcasting is available in […] Romani […].”
662. According to the fifth periodical report, the authorities have informed the Hessischer Rundfunk about
Germany’s obligations under the Charter and initiated a dialogue between the state public service
broadcasting corporation and the Hessian Association of German Sinti and Roma. However, representatives
of the Sinti and Roma have not asked the state public service broadcasting corporation for any programming
in Romani. The periodical report further states that Deutsche Welle broadcasts a 15-minute weekly
programme in Romani.
663. According to a statement by Roma and Sinti associations, using the language in the media would be
a serious violation of the cultural norms of the Sinti community. The Sinti Allianz however is aware that Sinti
communities need to open up and that the Sinti culture needs to be presented to a certain degree to the
German society for prejudices to be overcome.
664. The Committee of Experts considers the undertakings partly fulfilled for radio and not fulfilled for
television.
d

665.

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual works in the regional
or minority languages;

In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled.

666. According to the fifth periodical report, the production of audio and audiovisual works is carried out by
the regional association of the Sinti and Roma and this has produced works using the funds provided by the
state government. The Committee of Experts asks the authorities to provide examples of such works.
e

667.

i

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one newspaper in the regional
or minority languages;

In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertakings not fulfilled.

668. According to the fifth periodical report, the approaches to solve the issue linked to the absence of
standard written form of Romani and the wish of some of the speakers not to make written materials in
Romani have been discussed with the regional association of the German Sinti and Roma. The Committee
of Experts received no further information on the results of these discussions.
669.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertakings not fulfilled.
f

ii

to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions in the regional or
minority languages;

670. In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. It
requested the authorities to provide relevant information with regard to its implementation.
671. According to the fifth periodical report, interesting stories may receive funding from the Hessen Film
Fund (Hessische Filmförderung) and producing a film in Romani would also be possible. However, during
the last ten years, no applications have been submitted, and therefore no films have been produced.
84

672.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking formally fulfilled.
g

to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using regional or minority languages.

673. In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. It
requested the authorities to provide specific information on the training programmes organised by the
Documentation and Cultural Centre in the next periodical report.
674. According to the fifth periodical report, in 2010 the Rhein-Neckar Chamber of Industry and
Commerce recognised the Documentation and Cultural Centre of German Sinti and Roma also as a training
institution. Since September, the centre has been offering one apprenticeship position for office assistants.
Since 2013 the centre has participated in the European Voluntary Service for Young People. In addition, it is
planned to establish and promote an academy and a professional training network to ensure sustainability in
the field of education and training. At the moment, the centre does not have the necessary funds.
675. However, the Committee of Experts received no relevant information with respect to the training of
journalists. The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural centres, museums, archives,
academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression,
festivals and the culture industries, including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory
in which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this
field:
a

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority languages and foster the
different means of access to works produced in these languages;

676. In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. It
asked the authorities to provide more information in the next periodical report on the extent to which the
Documentation and Cultural Centre supported by the authorities encourages types of expression and
initiatives specific to Romani and fosters the access to works produced in Romani.
677. According to the fifth periodical report, the Documentation and Cultural Centre follows a “from Sinti
for Sinti” approach. Seminars have been organised. In 2011 the Centre published an article about literary
works and storytelling of German Sinti and Roma, which was also distributed in Romani among the members
of the minority. A one-hour broadcast of the Hessian regional association was realised in cooperation with a
private broadcaster and was very successful. The Centre has also engaged in an exchange with the regional
associations of the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma. In addition, the Documentation Centre is
planning to create a restricted website, where people could log in and write in Romani
678. The authorities also ask the Committee of Experts to respect the wish of the Sinti and Roma, and in
particular of the Holocaust survivors, not to disclose their language to outsiders. The Committee of Experts is
aware of the position of some Sinti and Roma representatives on this issue and the difficulties that this may
be causing. However it would like to underline that this position might not be shared by all Sinti and Roma in
Germany. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts is aware that there is a number of activities in Romani in
other European countries. In fact, the German authorities also report that a written form of Romani is
developing on the Internet, mainly in chat rooms and forums, as young Sinti and Roma want to use their
language beyond everyday conversation.
679.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled.
d

680.

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of various kinds make
appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of regional or minority languages and
cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for which they provide backing;

In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled.

85

681. According to the fifth periodical report, various cultural activities take place: the international Roma
philharmonic orchestra in Frankfurt is supported by Hesse; various conferences and events about Sinti and
Roma during the Nazi regime, were organised by the Hessian state agency for civil education; a publication
on anti-Gypsyism was prepared in 2013 by the Hessian Ministry of Culture to complement existing education
standards; an opera, “Requiem für Auschwitz”, during which young people recited autobiographical accounts
of survivors and an exhibition “Frankfurt - Auschwitz” of the Förderverein Roma were presented.
682. The Committee of Experts welcomes these developments. However, it is not clear to the Committee
of Experts to what extent Romani was used in those events. The Committee of Experts considers the
undertaking partly fulfilled.
Paragraph 2
In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties
undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate
cultural activities and facilities in accordance with the preceding paragraph.

683. In the fourth monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts looked forward to receiving more specific
information on the promotional strategies and their practical implementation in urban areas where now there
are strong concentrations of Romani speakers.
684. According to the fifth periodical report, the Land Hesse does not have any promotional strategies
specifically for municipalities where there are many Romani speakers.
685.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled.

Article 13 – Economic and social life
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole country:
d

to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by means other than those
specified in the above sub-paragraphs.

686. In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled.
However, it commended the authorities for the initiative to ask the federation of Hesse employers’
associations to encourage its members to facilitate and support the use of Romani in economic activities and
looked forward to receiving information on any further developments in the next periodical report.
687. According to fifth periodical report, the Hessian government provides institutional funding for the
Hessian Association of German Sinti and Roma, for the association to offer advisory services in Romani in
all social areas. 850-900 Sinti and Roma contacted the association in 2011. The association helps Romani
speakers for example in dealing with the administration in the fields of school/education, labour/social affairs,
housing and childcare. The Committee of Experts welcomes this information.
688.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking fulfilled.

Article 14 – Transfrontier exchanges
The Parties undertake:
a

to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the States in which the same
language is used in identical or similar form, or if necessary to seek to conclude such agreements, in such
a way as to foster contacts between the users of the same language in the States concerned in the fields of
culture, education, information, vocational training and permanent education;

689. In the fourth evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking not fulfilled. It
looked forward for receiving more information on how Germany is applying the bilateral and multilateral
agreements in the fields of culture and education, which bind it to states where Romani is used in an
identical or similar form, with the objective of fostering contacts among Romani speakers in Germany and in
other countries.
86

690.

The fifth periodical report provides no specific information in this respect.

691.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled.

87

Chapter 4

Findings of the Committee of Experts in the fifth monitoring round

A.
The Committee of Experts compliments Germany on its continuing constructive dialogue with the
Committee of Experts and its transparent approach to the implementation of the Charter. It notes, in
particular, that the fourth evaluation report of the Committee of Experts was discussed with representatives
of regional or minority languages at an implementation conference and that the written comments of the
language groups were appended to the periodical report. The Committee of Experts commends the German
authorities for the precise and concise information contained in the fifth periodical report and their response
to requests for further information made by the Committee of Experts.
B.
There have been several positive new developments concerning some of the languages protected
under Part III of the Charter. Despite these achievements, however, the situation of some regional or
minority languages has not changed significantly since the first monitoring round and needs further efforts.
The Committee of Experts regrets to note that the situation of some of the more endangered languages
remains critical, in particular Lower Sorbian and Sater Frisian. The Committee of Experts considers that the
German authorities, in particular at Land level, should continue taking determined steps to tackle the
problems identified by the Charter’s monitoring mechanism.
C.
Under international law, the federal state is responsible for the implementation of the Charter
obligations. However, in the internal distribution of competences, the protection and promotion of regional or
minority languages is mainly the responsibility of the Länder. There is no federal language policy and the
federation mainly fulfils a coordinating role in this area. While some mechanisms of inter-Land cooperation
are also being put into place, the Committee of Experts considers that there is need for stronger cooperation,
in particular, between Länder where Low German is spoken with the possible assistance of the federal level,
also in financial terms. This also applies to Romani, most notably in the field of education.
D.
Measures taken in favour of regional or minority languages continue to vary significantly between the
Länder concerned. Positive examples include Saxony’s plan for measures encouraging the use of Sorbian in
public life and Hamburg’s efforts in developing a viable educational model for teaching Low German. Also,
the new developments in Schleswig-Holstein need mentioning, where the new Land government has
resolved the problems linked to the financing of the Danish educational system and has taken new initiatives
for strengthening the teaching of North Frisian and Low German. Overall, the promotion of regional or
minority languages is hampered, to varying degrees depending on the Land, by the lack of long-term,
structured policies of language promotion and the absence of a pro-active approach to this promotion.
Where the authorities show a positive attitude to regional or minority languages, and are prepared to devote
energy and resources to them, the Committee of Experts observed good progress. In certain other cases
such as Brandenburg, however, the Committee of Experts observed a regrettable lack of political will on the
part of the authorities to assume responsibility for implementing the Charter.
E.
Part III implementation of the Charter with regard to Romani in Hesse continues to lack a more proactive and structured policy. The Committee of Experts observes that compliance with many of the selected
undertakings is rendered difficult by the fact that a significant segment of Romani speakers does not wish
their language to have a presence in public life outside the Sinti and Roma communities. This position
makes the implementation of most of the Part III undertakings for Hesse very difficult, but there is room for
measures to be taken.
F.
The situation regarding education in Danish remains exemplary. The difficulties created by the
budgetary cuts in Schleswig-Holstein have been solved by creating a stable long-term financial scheme for
the Danish education system. In an ongoing procedure of amending the Land constitution, the financing of
Danish schools may even be entrenched in constitutional terms.
G.
Provision for teaching in or of Upper Sorbian in Saxony remains well developed. The “2 plus” model
of teaching Sorbian has been introduced successfully. However, there are still fears among the speakers
that this model may not be sufficient to develop native speakers' language competence. Replacing full
Sorbian medium education with a lesser offering (e.g. the “2plus” model) is perceived by some of the
speakers as a retrograde step. On the other hand, the “2plus” model has increased the offer of Upper
Sorbian education outside the traditional core area and thus contributes significantly to language
maintenance and revitalisation. The Government of Saxony has also taken decisive steps to strengthen the
use of Upper Sorbian in public life, by developing a Plan of Measures to Encourage and Revive the Use of
the Sorbian Language.

88

H.
There have been no noticeable improvements regarding Lower Sorbian education in Brandenburg.
The shortage of qualified Lower Sorbian teachers at all levels of education, in particular, is a problem that
has to be dealt with urgently in order to secure the future of Lower Sorbian, which the Committee of Experts
already identified as a particularly endangered language in its first evaluation report. The transfer of teacher
training for Sorbian teachers to Leipzig has evidently hampered the efforts to improve the situation, since too
few students from Brandenburg enrol in Sorbian studies at Leipzig University. There is also a pressing need
to invest in the Lower Sorbian pre-school sector to ensure a firm foundation for Lower Sorbian education. A
structured and systematic policy across all levels of education is still urgently needed, in particular to ensure
continuity of Sorbian education from pre- to primary school, and from primary to secondary school.
I.
North Frisian education continues to suffer because it remains outside the regular curriculum and
there is no structured policy ensuring a systematic offer of North Frisian education even where there is a
clear demand. The government in Schleswig-Holstein, however, has taken the initiative to strengthen the
position of North Frisian in the regular educational system and to develop a viable offer of North Frisian
education.
J.
The situation of Sater Frisian calls for additional and urgent steps to be taken by the Lower Saxony
authorities in order to maintain it as a living language. A number of positive steps have already been taken to
improve Sater Frisian education, although long-term efforts are necessary to safeguard the survival of the
language. The teaching and study of Sater Frisian need further strengthening. The Committee of Experts
regards this as a matter of utmost importance.
K.
While there have been considerable improvements in Hamburg, and decisive steps have been
planned in Schleswig-Holstein as regards the place of Low German in the Framework Curricula, in the
overwhelming majority of cases Low German is taught as part of other subjects (mainly German), rather than
as a subject in its own right. In the absence of clear guidelines regarding the minimum number of teaching
hours devoted to Low German, provision for the teaching of this language remains highly variable,
depending on the willingness of the schools, teachers and pupils, and generally is too limited to be
considered an integral part of the curriculum. The efforts undertaken by Hamburg to change the educational
model for Low German into that of a regular school subject being taught as an integral part of the curriculum
constitute an exemplary model of how to fulfil the undertakings for Low German under Article 8. Hopefully
other Länder will follow the example and adopt similar reforms. The study of and research into Low German
in higher education needs to be strengthened as a matter of urgency, given that the availability of adequately
trained teaching staff is crucial for all the efforts in this field.
L.
The situation of Low German in the three Länder in which only Part II applies (Brandenburg, North
Rhine-Westphalia and Saxony-Anhalt) gives rise to particular concerns. The authorities do not see the need
for any structured measures in implementing the obligations under Article 7. This creates a particular
problem with regard to Article 7.1.f, obliging the German authorities to base their policies, legislation and
practice on the objectives and principles including, inter alia, the provision of appropriate forms and means
for the teaching and study of Low German at all appropriate stages. The almost complete lack of adequate
educational offers for Low German does not live up to the requirements of Article 7. Hence, a set of
measures to develop such an offer is urgently needed in the three Länder mentioned.
M.
The absence of supervisory bodies within the meaning of Article 8, paragraph 1.i continues to be a
severe problem for any attempt to improve the situation of education. Only Lower Saxony has set up a
supervisory body for Sater Frisian that might fulfil the undertaking. Targeted mechanisms of supervision
designed to monitor the measures taken and the progress achieved in developing regional or minority
language education, along with corresponding reports which are made public, are vital for the
implementation of a structured education policy. The lack of such mechanisms makes it difficult to identify
and evaluate the success cases and shortcomings of regional or minority language education, and thus to
develop and implement long-term strategies for improving it. The publication of reports makes the monitoring
system transparent and creates opportunities for a public discussion on the development of minority
language education.
N.
The use of regional or minority languages before administrative authorities (and before judicial
authorities in the case of Upper and Lower Sorbian) remains marginal, with the exception of the use of
spoken Low German in some areas. In the opinion of the Committee of Experts this is due to the fact that
structured policies and relevant organisational measures to ensure the implementation of Germany’s
undertakings are often missing. Good practice that prevails elsewhere includes, for example, taking account
of civil servants’ skills in regional or minority languages, providing facilities and incentives for them to
improve these skills, creating an adequate framework for, and allocating resources to, translation and
89

interpretation. Not enough is done to make the speakers aware of the possibility to use their language before
the authorities.
O.
With regard to broadcasting, public service broadcasting continues to be good for some regional or
minority languages, in particular for Upper Sorbian. However, there is an insufficient offer, in particular of
television broadcasting with regard to Danish, North Frisian, Sater Frisian and Romani. Some progress has
been made for North Frisian which is now used on private radio (Friiskfunk) and for Low German. In other
cases, programmes in regional or minority languages are currently broadcast sporadically, mainly on the
Open Channel. Lower Saxony and Bremen have amended the legislation, in order to promote the
broadcasting in Low German and Sater Frisian.
P.
The conditions for the use of regional or minority languages in the field of culture remain favourable
in Germany. A particular problem has arisen in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, where the umbrella
organisations of the Low German speakers went bankrupt. There is a need for a new umbrella organisation
to be established. The Land of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania has announced its intention to support any
initiative in that direction. The federal authorities still make very limited provisions for regional or minority
languages and the cultures they reflect in pursuing their cultural policy abroad.
Q.
In the field of social and economic life, the Committee of Experts is concerned about the lack of a
policy ensuring that people are received and treated in their regional or minority languages in social care
facilities. Some regional or minority languages are used in practice in such institutions, but as a matter of
chance rather than design. More determined measures need to be taken in this respect.

The German government was invited to comment on the content of this report in accordance with Article
16.3 of the Charter. The German government made no comments.
On the basis of this report and its findings the Committee of Experts submitted its proposals to the
Committee of Ministers for recommendations to be addressed to Germany. At the same time it emphasised
the need for the German authorities to take into account, in addition to these general recommendations, the
more detailed observations contained in the body of the report.
th

At its 1200 meeting on 28 May 2014, the Committee of Ministers adopted its Recommendation addressed
to Germany, which is set out in Part B of this document.

90

Appendix: Instrument of ratification
Germany
Declarations contained in a letter from the Permanent Representation of Germany, dated
16 September 1998, handed to the Secretary General at the time of deposit of the instrument of
ratification, on 16 September 1998 - Or. Engl./Germ.
Minority languages within the meaning of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages in the
Federal Republic of Germany shall be the Danish, Upper Sorbian, Lower Sorbian, North Frisian and Sater
Frisian languages and the Romany language of the German Sinti and Roma; a regional language within the
meaning of the Charter in the Federal Republic shall be the Low German language.
Pursuant to Article 3, paragraph 1, of the Charter, the Federal Republic of Germany specifies the regional or
minority languages to which the provisions selected pursuant to Article 2, paragraph 2, of the Charter shall
apply upon the entry into force of the Charter in the Federal Republic of Germany:
Danish in the Danish language area in Land Schleswig-Holstein:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a iv; b iv; c iii/iv; d iii; e ii; f ii/iii; g; h; i; paragraph 2;
Article 9, paragraph 1 b iii; c iii; paragraph 2 a;
Article 10, paragraph 1 a v; paragraph 4 c; paragraph 5;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii; d; e ii; f ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 c; d; e; f; g; paragraph 2; paragraph 3;
Article 13, paragraph 1 a; c; d; paragraph 2 c;
Article 14 a; b.
Upper Sorbian in the Upper Sorbian language area in the Free State of Saxony:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a iii; b iv; c iv; d iv; e ii; f iii; g; h; i; paragraph 2;
Article 9 paragraph 1 a ii; a iii; b ii; b iii; c ii; c iii; d; paragraph 2 a;
Article 10, paragraph 1 a iv/v; paragraph 2 a; b; g; paragraph 3 b/c; paragraph 4 c; paragraph 5;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii; d; e i; f ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; b; c; d; e; f; g; h; paragraph 2, paragraph 3;
Article 13, paragraph 1 a; c; d; paragraph 2 c.
Lower Sorbian in the Lower Sorbian language area in Land Brandenburg:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a iv; b iv; c iv; e iii; f iii; g; h; i;
Article 9, paragraph 1 a ii; a iii; b iii; c iii; paragraph 2 a;
Article 10, paragraph 1 a iv/v; paragraph 2 b; g; paragraph 3 b/c; paragraph 4 a; c; paragraph 5;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii; d; e i; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; b; c; d; e; f; g; h; paragraph 2; paragraph 3;
Article 13, paragraph 1 a; c; d.
North Frisian in the North Frisian language area in Land Schleswig-Holstein:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a iii/iv; b iv; c iv; e ii; f iii; g; h; i; paragraph 2;
Article 9, paragraph 1 b iii; c iii; paragraph 2 a;
Article 10, paragraph 1 a v; paragraph 4 c; paragraph 5;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii; d; e ii; f ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; b; c; d; e; f; g; h; paragraph 2; paragraph 3;
Article 13, paragraph 1 a; c; d;
Article 14 a.
Sater Frisian in the Sater Frisian language area in Land Lower Saxony:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a iv; e ii; f iii; g; i;
Article 9, paragraph 1 b iii; c iii; paragraph 2 a;
Article 10, paragraph 1 a v; c; paragraph 2 a; b; c; d; e; f; paragraph 4 a; c; paragraph 5;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii; d; e ii; f ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; b; c; d; e; f; g; paragraph 2; paragraph 3;
91

Article 13, paragraph 1 a; c; d.
Low German in the Länder Free Hanseatic City of Bremen, Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg,
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Lower Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein:
Obligations regarding Low German in the territory of the Länder Free Hanseatic City of Bremen, Free and
Hanseatic City of Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Lower Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a iv; e ii; g;
Article 9, paragraph 1 b iii; c iii; paragraph 2 a;
Article 10, paragraph 1 a v; c; paragraph 2 a; b; f;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii; d; e ii; f ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; d; f; paragraph 3;
Article 13, paragraph 1 a; c;
and additionally:
- in the Free Hanseatic City of Bremen:
Article 8, paragraph 1 b iii; c iii; f i; h;
Article 10, paragraph 2 c; d; e;
Article 11, paragraph 1 g;
Article 12, paragraph 1 b; c; e; g;
Article 13, paragraph 2 c;
- in the Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg:
Article 8, paragraph 1 b iii; c iii; d iii; f ii; h; i;
Article 10, paragraph 2 e; paragraph 4 c;
Article 11, paragraph 1 g;
Article 12, paragraph 1 g;
Article 13, paragraph 1 d; paragraph 2 c;
- in Land Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania:
Article 8, paragraph 1 b iii; c iii; d iii; h; i;
Article 10, paragraph 4 c;
Article 12, paragraph 1 b; c; e; h;
Article 13, paragraph 1 d, paragraph 2 c;
- in Land Lower Saxony:
Article 8, paragraph 1 f iii; i;
Article 10, paragraph 2 c; d; e; paragraph 4 a; c;
Article 12, paragraph 1 b; c; e; g; paragraph 2;
Article 13, paragraph 1 d;
Article 14 a; b;
- in Land Schleswig-Holstein:
Article 8, paragraph 1 b iii; c iii; f iii; h; i; paragraph 2;
Article 10, paragraph 4 c;
Article 12, paragraph 1 b; c; g;
Article 13, paragraph 1 d; paragraph 2 c.
The separate specification of these provisions for the territories of each individual Land is in keeping with the
federal structure of the Federal Republic of Germany and takes into account the situation of each of these
languages in the Land in question.
The Romany language of the German Sinti and Roma in the territory of the Federal Republic of Germany
and Low German language in the territory of the Länder Brandenburg, North-Rhine/Westphalia and SaxonyAnhalt shall be protected pursuant to Part II of the Charter.
Part II of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages shall be applied to Romany, the minority
language of the German Sinti and Roma in the territory of the Federal Republic of Germany, and to the
regional language Low German in the territory of the Länder Brandenburg, North-Rhine/Westphalia and
Saxony-Anhalt upon its entry into force in the Federal Republic of Germany in accordance with the
92

declaration of the Federal Republic of Germany of 23 January 1998. The objectives and principles laid down
in Article 7 of the Charter shall form the bases with regard to these languages. At the same time, German
law and Germany's administrative practice thus meet individual requirements laid down in Part III of the
Charter:
With regard to Romany
for the territory of the Federal Republic of Germany:
Article 8, paragraph 1 f iii; g; h;
Article 9, paragraph 1 b iii; c iii; paragraph 2 a;
Article 10, paragraph 5;
Article 11, paragraph 1 d; e ii; f ii; g; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 g; paragraph 3;
Article 13, paragraph 1 a; c; d;
Article 14 a;
and additionally:
- in Land Baden-Württemberg:
Article 8, paragraphs 1 a iv, 1 e iii;
Article 10, paragraph 4 c;
Article 12, paragraphs 1 a, 1 d; f; paragraph 2.
- in Land Berlin:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a i/ii; b i/ii/iii/iv; e i/ii/iii; i; paragraph 2;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b i/ii: c ii; e i/ii;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; d; f;
- in the Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg:
Article 8, paragraph 1 b iv; c iv;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; d; f;
- in Land Hesse:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a iii/iv; b iv; c iv; d iv; e iii; i; paragraph 2;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii; e i;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; d; f; paragraph 2;
- in Land North-Rhine/Westphalia:
Article 8,paragraph 1 e iii; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; d; f; paragraph 2;
- in Land Lower Saxony:
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; d; f;
- in Land Rhineland-Palatinate:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a iv; e iii;
Article 11, paragraph 1 c ii;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; d; f;
- in Land Schleswig-Holstein:
Article 10, paragraph 1 a v; paragraph 2 b; paragraph 4 c;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; d; f; paragraph 2.
With regard to Low German:
- in Land Brandenburg:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a iv; b iv; c iv; f iii; g;
Article 9, paragraph 2 a;
Article 10, paragraph 2 b; paragraph 3 c;
93

Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii; d; e ii; f ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; f; g;
- in Land North-Rhine/Westphalia:
Article 8, paragraph 1 e iii; g; h; paragraph 2;
Article 9, paragraph 1 b iii; c iii; paragraph 2 a;
Article 11, paragraph 1 d; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; d; e; f; g; h; paragraph 2;
Article 13, paragraph 1 a; c; d;
- in Land Saxony-Anhalt:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a iv; b iv; c iv; g; h;
Article 9, paragraph 2 a;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii; e ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; f; g; h.
The separate specification of these provisions for the territory of each individual Land is in keeping with the
federal structure of the Federal Republic of Germany and takes into account the situation of each of these
languages in the Land in question.
In accordance with the national distribution of competencies, the way in which the above-mentioned
provisions of Part III of the Charter are implemented through legal regulations and Germany's administrative
practice with due regard to the objectives and principles specified in Article 7 of the Charter shall be the
responsibility of either the Federation or the competent Land. Details will be provided in the procedure for
implementing the federal act with which the legislature consents to the Charter as laid down in the
Memorandum to the Charter.
Period covered: 1/1/1999 The preceding statement concerns Article(s) : 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 2, 3, 7, 8, 9
Declaration contained in a letter from the Permanent Representative of Germany, dated 17 March
2003 and registered at the Secretariat General on 21 March 2003 - Or. Engl./Germ.
In accordance with Article 3, paragraph 2, of the Charter, the Federal Republic of Germany will apply to the
minority languages named below the following additional provision pursuant to Article 2, paragraph 2:
. North Frisian in the North Frisian language area in Land Schleswig-Holstein:
Article 10, paragraph 2 (g)
. Sater Frisian in the Sater Frisian language area in Land Lower Saxony:
Article 10, paragraph 2 (g)
. Romanes for the area of Land Hesse:
Article 8, paragraph 1 (a) (iii) and (iv); (b) (iv) ; (c) (iv); (d) (iv); (e) (iii) ; (i) ; paragraph 2
Article 10, paragraph 2 (e) ; (f) ; paragraph 3 (c); paragraph 4 (c)
Article 11, paragraph 1 (b) (ii); (c) (ii); (e) (i)
Article 12, paragraph 1 (a) ; (d) ; (f) ; paragraph 2
In connection with the undertakings given for the entire federal territory :
Article 8, paragraph 1 (f) (iii) ; (g) ; (h)
Article 9, paragraph 1 (b) (iii) ; (c) (iii) ; paragraph 2 (a)
Article 10, paragraph 5
Article 11, paragraph 1 (d); (e) (ii); (f) (ii) ; (g) ; paragraph 2
Article 12, paragraph 1 (g) ; paragraph 3
Article 13, paragraph 1 (a) ; (c) ; (d)
Article 14 (a)
Period covered: 21/3/2003 The preceding statement concerns Article(s) : 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 2, 3, 8, 9

94

B.
Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on
the application of the Charter by Germany

Recommendation CM/RecChL(2014)5
of the Committee of Ministers
on the application of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages by Germany
(Adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 28 May 2014
at the 1200th meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies)
The Committee of Ministers,
In accordance with Article 16 of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages;
Having regard to the instrument of ratification submitted by Germany on 16 September 1998;
Having taken note of the evaluation made by the Committee of Experts on the Charter with respect to the
application of the Charter by Germany;
Bearing in mind that this evaluation is based on information submitted by Germany in its fifth periodical
report, supplementary information given by the German authorities, information submitted by bodies and
associations legally established in Germany and the information obtained by the Committee of Experts
during its on-the-spot visit,
Recommends that the German authorities take account of all the observations and recommendations of the
Committee of Experts and, as a matter of priority:
1. adopt and implement a structured policy for the promotion and preservation of Lower Sorbian, including
measures which ensure that pre-school, primary and secondary education is systematically available in this
language;
2. continue the measures taken and further strengthen the efforts to develop viable offers for the teaching of
North Frisian and Sater Frisian;
3. develop an adequate educational offer for Low German in the Länder of Brandenburg, North
Rhine-Westphalia and Saxony-Anhalt;
4. upgrade the teaching of Low German to the status of a regular school subject taught as an integral part of
the curriculum in the Länder where Part III of the Charter applies to this language;
5. take measures to provide adequate radio and television broadcasting in Danish, Low German, Lower
Sorbian, North Frisian and Sater Frisian;
6. develop further measures to promote Romani and the culture of which this language is the expression, in
co-operation with the speakers.

95

