Strasbourg, 4 December 2002

ECRML (2002) 1

European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

APPLICATION OF THE CHARTER IN GERMANY

A.

Report of the Committee of Experts on the Charter

B.

Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers of the
Council of Europe on the application of the Charter by
Germany

The European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages provides for a control mechanism to
evaluate how the Charter is applied in a State Party with a view to, where necessary, making
Recommendations for improvements in its legislation, policy and practices. For this purpose a
Committee of Experts is established in accordance with Article 17 of the Charter. Its principal
task is to report to the Committee of Ministers on its evaluation of compliance by a Party with
its undertakings, to examine the real situation of the regional or minority languages in the
State and, where appropriate, to encourage the Party to gradually reach a higher level of
commitment. The Committee of Ministers considers and adopts any recommendation it
deems necessary in relation to a given Party, based on suggestions for recommendations
from the Committee of Experts.
To facilitate this task, the Committee of Ministers adopted, in accordance with Article 15.1, an
outline for the initial periodical report that a Party is required to submit to the Secretary
General. The report shall be made public by the State in accordance with Article 15.2. The
outline requires the State to give an account of the concrete application of the Charter, the
general policy for the languages protected under its Part II and in more precise terms all
measures that have been taken in application of the provisions chosen for each language
protected under Part III of the Charter. The Committee of Expert’s first task is therefore to
examine the information contained in the initial periodical report for all the relevant regional or
minority languages on the territory of the State concerned.
The Committee shall evaluate the existing legal acts, regulations and real practice applied in
each State for its regional or minority languages. It has established its working methods
accordingly. The Committee gathers information from the respective authorities and from
independent sources within the State, so as to attempt to obtain a just and fair overview of the
real language situation. After a preliminary examination of an initial periodical report, the
Committee submits, if necessary, a number of questions to each Party to procure
supplementary information from the authorities on matters it considers insufficiently developed
in the report itself. This written procedure is usually followed up by an “on-the-spot visit” by a
delegation of the Committee to the respective State. During this visit the delegation meets
bodies and associations whose work is closely related to the use of the relevant languages,
and consults the authorities on matters that have been brought to its attention. This
information-gathering process is designed to enable the Committee to better evaluate the
application of the Charter in the State concerned.
Having concluded this process, the Committee of Experts adopts its own report. This report is
submitted to the Committee of Ministers together with suggestions for recommendations that
the latter could decide to address to one or more Parties as may be required.

2

CONTENTS

A.

Report of the Committee of Experts on the application of the
Charter in Germany ……………………………….

5

Chapter 1:

Background information …………………

7

Chapter 2:

The Committee’s evaluation in respect of Part II and Part III of the Charter …

Chapter 3:

Findings of the Committee ……………….

Appendix I:
Instrument of ratification ……………….
Appendix II: Comments of the German authorities

B.

15
113
117
125

Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers of the
Council of Europe on the application of the Charter by
Germany …………………………………………………….
131

3

Strasbourg, 5 July 2002

MIN-LANG (2002) 4 final

European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

A. Report of the Committee of Experts on the application of the Charter

presented to the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
in accordance with Article 16 of the Charter

GERMANY

CONTENTS
Chapter 1. Background information .................................................................................................. 7
1.1.
1.2.
1.3.
1.4.
1.5.

The Charter’s ratification by the Federal Republic of Germany ............................................ 7
Work of the Committee of Experts ................................................................................... 7
Presentation of the regional or minority language situation in Germany................................ 7
General legal framework................................................................................................ 14
Particular issues arising in the evaluation of the application of the Charter in Germany........ 14

Chapter 2. The Committee’s evaluation in respect of Part II and Part III of the Charter......................... 16
2.1
2.2.
2.3
2.3.1
2.3.2.
2.3.3.
2.3.4.

The evaluation in respect of Part II of the Charter ............................................................. 16
Part III commitments regarding Low German in areas where Low German is covered by
Part II.......................................................................................................................... 21
The evaluation in respect of Part III of the Charter ............................................................ 34
Danish in the Danish Language area in Schleswig-Holstein....................................... 34
North Frisian in the North Frisian language area in Schleswig-Holstein....................... 43
Sater Frisian in the Sater Frisian language area in Lower Saxony.............................. 52
Low German in the Länder of Bremen, Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania,
Lower Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein.................................................................... 59

a. In the Free Hanseatic City of Bremen ................................................................................. 61
b. In the Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg ......................................................................... 67
c. In Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania ................................................................................... 74
d. In Lower Saxony ............................................................................................................... 81
e. In Schleswig-Holstein........................................................................................................ 88
2.3.5
2.3.6.

Upper Sorbian ...................................................................................................... 97
Lower Sorbian in the Lower Sorbian language area in Brandenburg.......................... 106

Chapter 3 Findings of the Committee ...........................................................................................116
APPENDIX I: INSTRUMENT OF RATIFICATION .............................................................................119
APPENDIX II : COMMENTS BY THE GERMAN AUTHORITIES ...................................................... 132

6

Chapter 1.
1.1.

Background information

The Charter’s ratification by the Federal Republic of Germany

1.
The Federal Republic of Germany signed the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
(hereafter referred to as the Charter) on 5 November 1992. By the Federal Act (to implement the Charter) of 9
July 1998, the German Bundestag, with the consent of the Federal Council (Chamber of the Länder), approved
the Charter. That Act was promulgated in the Federal Law Gazette on 16 July 1998, and the instrument of
ratification was deposited with the Council of Europe on 16 September 1998. The Charter entered into force in
Germany on 1 January 1999. Under the Federal Act ratifying the Charter, the latter ranks, in Germany, as a
federal law, which takes precedence over subordinate law, including Land law, and as a matter of principle
(primacy of international law), is to be applied as the more specific law overriding other federal laws.
2.
In accordance with Article 15.1, the initial periodical report on the application of the Charter in Germany
was due on 1 January 2000. It was presented to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe on 20
November 2000. The German version was published in October 2000 by the Federal Ministry of the Interior,
which is the department responsible for the drafting of the State Report. The Report was printed and also
included in the Ministry’s Internet site. Anybody interested in the document can order it - and extensive use is
being made of this offer. At the annual Implementation Conference on the Charter, the Länder and the umbrella
organizations of the linguistic groups were provided detailed information on the Report and were - and still are offered the opportunity to order as many copies of the Report as they like for their staff, members and affiliates.
3.
The instrument of ratification of the Federal Republic of Germany is set out in Appendix I to this report.
This instrument specifies the languages covered by Part III and the paragraphs and sub-paragraphs applicable
to each one of them in the respective territories.
1.2.

Work of the Committee of Experts

4.
After the Committee of Experts had made its preliminary examination of the report, a questionnaire was
drawn up and addressed to the German authorities. The Committee organised its “on-the-spot visit” to
Germany in October 2001. It met the authorities responsible for and/or concerned with the implementation of
the Charter, as well as representatives of the speakers of the relevant languages. It visited the Land of
Schleswig-Holstein, the Land of Brandenburg and the Free State of Saxony. It met several regional and local
authorities, as well as representatives from the sectors of the media and education, research and NGOs. It
also visited Berlin, where it met the federal authorities and the representatives of other Länder concerned by the
Charter, as well as representatives of the Roma community and the speakers of Low German. On the basis of
the information gathered from the initial periodical report, the questionnaire and the “on-the-spot-visit”, the
Committee of Experts was better able to prepare its evaluation of the application of the Charter in Germany.
5.
The Committee has established a list of general proposals for the preparation of recommendations from
the Committee of Ministers to Germany, as provided for in Article 16.4 (Chapter 3.2 of this report). The
Committee has furthermore, in the body of the report, made, where necessary, more detailed observations
which it encourages the German authorities to take into consideration when developing their policy with regard
to regional or minority languages.
6.
This report is based on the political and legal situation prevailing when the Charter entered into force in
Germany (January 1999), and when Germany presented its initial periodical report to the Council of Europe
(November 2000). It is based on the information obtained by the Committee as stated above (para. 4). The
report was adopted on 5 July 2002.
1.3.

Presentation of the regional or minority language situation in Germany

7.
According to the authorities, six minority languages are traditionally spoken in Germany: Danish,
Upper Sorbian, Lower Sorbian, North Frisian, Saterland Frisian and the Romany language of the German Sinti
and Roma. Low German is ratified as a regional language within the meaning of the Charter.

7

8.
The Committee of experts has requested the German authorities to clarify the status of Yiddish in
Germany. According to their answers, about 65 000 persons of Jewish faith live in Germany today, forming a
total of 62 communities. Yiddish originated from Middle High German, which was the German standard
language in the Middle Ages. During that period, after the emigration and flight of Jews from Germany to the
countries of Central and Eastern Europe, it gradually developed into an independent language and culture
through the specifically Jewish religious way of life and culture in those countries. There are now in Germany
only a few Jews of the older generation who still have a command of Yiddish. The Committee has received no
information contradicting this affirmation. Furthermore, no request by the Yiddish-speaking community has
been made for protection of Yiddish under the Charter.
9.
The Committee considers that the languages mentioned in paragraph 7 are those covered by the
Charter.
10.
Given the federal structure of the Federal Republic of Germany, the implementation of the obligations
assumed under the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages is primarily the responsibility of the
Länder. The Federal Republic of Germany has laid down the scope of the Charter's application in Germany in
Declarations made by the Federal Government to the Council of Europe in order to ensure the admissibility of a
territorially differentiated implementation of the Charter in keeping with the federal structure of Germany.
11.
Germany consists of 16 Länder. The languages covered by the Charter are traditionally spoken in the
following Länder:
§
§
§
§

Danish:
North Frisian:
Saterland Frisian:
Low German:

§
§
§

Upper Sorbian:
Lower Sorbian:
Romany
1.3.a

Schleswig-Holstein
Schleswig Holstein
Lower Saxony
Bremen
Hamburg
Brandenburg
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
Lower Saxony
North-Rhine Westphalia
Saxony-Anthalt
Schleswig-Holstein
Saxony
Brandenburg
the whole territory of the Federal Republic of Germany

Danish

12.
Danish is traditionally spoken by the Danish minority in the Land of Schleswig-Holstein to the south of
the German-Danish border. The Danish minority, along with the German majority population, live in the German
part of Schleswig in their traditional settlement area, just as the German minority and the Danish majority
population do on the Danish side in North Slesvig - Sønderjylland. Germans and Danes have been living
together in this area for more than a thousand years. Today's border between the two countries was laid down
in 1920 on the basis of the results of two plebiscites agreed upon in the Treaty of Versailles and was confirmed
after the second world war.
13.
The Danish minority population is estimated at some 50 000 persons who live mainly in the Schleswig
region in the Kreise (or counties) of Nordfriesland and Schleswig-Flensburg, the northern part of the Kreis of
Rendsburg-Eckernförde, and in the city of Flensburg. The percentage of the members of the Danish minority in
relation to the population of the various towns and communities varies greatly, and ranges from local
communities where only a small number of families of the minority live, to about 20 per cent in Flensburg and
some smaller places.
14.
All members of the Danish minority understand Danish, and most of them speak it. In addition, all of
them have a good command of German. In rural areas, parts of the Danish minority – and of the majority
population - speak the regional Low German language. In the area close to the border, the members of the
Danish minority also speak Sønderjysk, a South Jutish dialect of Danish.
8

15.
The majority of the members of the Danish minority use the Danish language in the private sphere and
within the organizations of the Danish minority. Constant use and promotion of the Danish language provide the
basis for all minority-related activities. Of particular importance for proficiency in the Danish language are the
Danish private schools, especially for children from mixed marriages.
1.3.b

The Sorbian languages (Upper Sorbian and Lower Sorbian)

16.
The Slavic people of the Sorbs, who have a history going back more than a millennium and a culture of
their own, have mostly lived within a setting of German statehood. In the Middle Ages, the Sorbian language
was spoken over a much more extensive area than today. Sorbian is part of the West Slavonic family of
languages. From the various dialects of colloquial Sorbian, two standard languages developed: Upper Sorbian
(the Sorbian of Upper Lusatia), and Lower Sorbian (the Sorbian of Lower Lusatia; also called Wendish). Today,
of the area in which Sorbian is spoken covers Upper Lusatia in the Northeast of the Free State of Saxony, and
Lower Lusatia in the Southeast of the Land of Brandenburg. The Sorbs living in Lower Lusatia are, until this day,
also known as Wends.
17.
It is not known exactly how many persons consider themselves Sorbs but the estimated number is
about 60 000, of whom two-thirds live in Saxony, and one third in Brandenburg. In some villages of the
settlement area, the majority of inhabitants are Sorbs; in some local communities in the Kreis of Kamenz, they
account for up to 90 per cent of the population. They make up about 10 per cent of the population of the overall
settlement area, while in the towns they account for less than 2 per cent. Approximately 20 000 Sorbs still have
a command of Sorbian in both its spoken and written form..
18.
Use of the Sorbian language in private depends, to a large extent, on the Sorbs themselves, especially
on whether the language is passed on to their children and grandchildren. Such traditional teaching and learning
of Sorbian is more frequent in the central settlements where there is a large share, or even majority, of Sorbs,
than in larger places and towns where they constitute a dispersed minority. In the case of the Sorbs, the
existence of many mixed marriages has an influence on the language spoken within the family and on the
extent to which Sorbian is passed on to the children, and thus attendance at Sorbian schools is of particular
importance to these children.
19.
Use of the Sorbian language in public is rendered difficult by the fact that the German-Sorbian
settlement area is not generally bilingual and that, as a rule, only the Sorbs have a command of both
languages. There is a tendency to use German before public bodies. Therefore, apart from a number of
exceptions, greater use is made of German than of the Sorbian language in public. Since the re-unification, the
difficult economic situation in Saxony and Brandenburg has contributed to the migration of Sorbs to other
Länder and to the large cities. The dispersion of the community of its speakers therefore constitutes a new
major threat to the maintenance and the development of the language.
20.
Article 35 of the Treaty on the Establishment of German Unity, Article 6 of the Constitution of the Free
State of Saxony and Article 25 of the Constitution of Brandenburg establish a very good legal basis to further
develop laws, rules and policies for the promotion of Upper and Lower Sorbian. In particular, Article 14 of the
Protocol to the German Unification Treaty states as follows:
“The Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic declare in connection with
Article 35 of the Treaty:
1. There shall be freedom of commitment to the distinctive Sorbian way of life and to Sorbian culture.
2. The maintenance and further development of Sorbian culture and traditions shall be
guaranteed.
3. The Sorbian people and their organizations shall be free to cultivate and preserve the
Sorbian language in public life.
4. The distribution of competence between the Federation and the Länder as set out in the
Basic Law shall remain unaffected.”

9

21.
It is also important to note that Sorbian organisations themselves, especially Domowina, play a
substantial role in protecting and promoting the Sorbian language and culture with official support and
recognition.

10

22.
Owing to the demographic situation and financial constraints, the general picture is not as favourable as
might be expected from the above-mentioned factors. Maintaining a substantial part of the existing
infrastructure has become uncertain.
1.3.c

The Frisian languages (North Frisian and Saterland Frisian)

23.
Frisian, as an autonomous and ancestral language, which descended from the North Sea Germanic
division of the West Germanic subfamily, distinctly differs from Netherlandic (Dutch and Flemish) and Low
German and, in terms of historical linguistics, is closely related to Old English. It has evolved in three
subgroups: West Frisian, East Frisian, and North Frisian. West Frisian is spoken in the province of Friesland in
the Netherlands. East Frisian is native to Ostfriesland in Lower Saxony. These two regions form the historical
(geographical) centre of the Frisians. North Frisian is spoken in the county of North Friesland in SchleswigHolstein.
24.
As early as 1500, the East Frisians replaced the Frisian language by Low German as the language to
be used for drafting legal documents. By 1800, most of them had relinquished their ancestral Frisian language,
which survived on one of the North Sea Islands until the turn of the 20th century..
25.
Only in the Saterland in the Oldenburg region, near the border with the Netherlands, do about 2 000
persons still use Saterland Frisian, which forms part of the Old East Frisian subgroup of languages. About
twice as many people understand Saterland Frisian. Despite many Low German loan words, Saterland Frisian
has preserved its linguistic independence. However, over the years the area where Saterland Frisian was used
became smaller and smaller until the language was nearly extinct. Today, the use of Saterland Frisian by the
Saterland Frisians is gradually increasing, as school children are taking a greater interest in learning this
language, and children and the grandparent generation have started to communicate in Saterland Frisian again.
26.
After the Frisians, had also settled north of the central Frisian area about 1000 years ago, their
language was influenced by Old Danish with regard to a number of linguistic characteristics and developed into
what we now know as North Frisian. North Frisian consists of two groups of dialects with nine local varieties:
six of these (so-called Continental North Frisian) are spoken along the west coast of Schleswig-Holstein
(including the holms, or Halligen islands), and three of them (so-called Insular North Frisian) on the offshore
islands of Sylt, Föhr, Amrum and Helgoland. Despite the linguistic diversity brought about by the subdivision
into dialects, the linguistic communality of North Frisian prevails. Of the total number of nine North Frisian local
idioms, three - which are spoken by less than 150 persons - are in great danger of becoming extinct. The other
six local idioms are not only used orally but also exist in written form. Their orthography is generally based on
uniform rules. The first book in the North Frisian language was published in 1809. Since then, a large amount of
Frisian-language literature has been published, covering several hundreds of books and, in addition, several
thousands of literary items in a variety of publications. This ensures that the Frisian language also meets the
requirements expected of a modern means of communication.
27.
The number of those who, on account of their origin and their sense of personal identity, consider
themselves North Frisians is estimated at as many as 50 000 to 60 000 persons, representing one-third of the
population of this region. Of these, some 10 000 persons still speak North Frisian; another 20 000 persons
understand the language.
28.
The North Frisian language is still spoken in private relations, especially among the Frisians living on
the islands and holms. This is less so on the mainland. In mixed-language marriages, German frequently
prevails.
1.3.d

The Romany language of the German Sinti and Roma

29.
The Romany spoken by the German Sinti and Roma is the language of the members of these
communities who traditionally live in Germany. Romany is spoken by an estimated 60 000 persons of Sinti
origin and 10 000 persons of German Roma origin. It is an autonomous language, deriving from Sanskrit, which
is spoken in a number of different variants.

11

30.
The majority of German Sinti and Roma nowadays live in the capitals of the "old Länder" of Germany
(the 11 federal States that belonged to the FRG within its territorial boundaries up to German unification),
including Berlin and its environs, and in the conurbations of the Greater Hamburg area, the Rhine/Ruhr region
with Düsseldorf and Cologne at its centre, and the Rhine/Main and Rhine/Neckar conurbations. In some cases,
significant numbers of German Sinti and Roma also live in regions of geographically close, smaller towns. Thus,
German Sinti and Roma populations are to be found, for instance, in medium-sized and small towns of
Ostfriesland, Northern Hesse, the Palatinate, Baden and Bavaria. Thus, there is no single language area
confined to a single Land for the Romany language traditionally spoken in Germany. Rather, the language is
spoken in most of the Länder.
1.3.e

The Low German language

31.
Low German (Niederdeutsch or Plattdeutsch) is the ancestral language of the German North. As far as
historical knowledge reaches back, people in Northern Germany have always used this language; its form and
function, however, have changed over the years. Until the end of the late Middle Ages, the German North used
only one other language besides the scholars' Latin: the Low German language, which met all communication
requirements. Whatever had to be said or written in everyday dealings or in the fields of trade, law, politics,
religion, literature and culture had to, and could be expressed in the respective variations of Low German. An
expansive linguistic development went hand in hand with the historical processes: while Low German, in its
oldest period, had only been the language of the Germanic tribal association of the Saxons - confined to a
relatively small settlement area - the area in which it was spoken later on expanded in territorial and functional
terms.
32.
In the 14th/15th Centuries, Low German was the prevailing linguistic medium for the entire economic and
cultural area of the Hanseatic League. The latter constituted - not least in the form of, and through, the Low
German language - one cultural area which, while not of a uniform nature, formed a coherent entity. The era of
Low German unilingualism ended rather abruptly in the 16th Century. It was followed by a period - continuing up
to this day - of the competing High German and Low German languages existing side by side. The role of Low
German was confined to being the generally less esteemed secondary language. From then on, this language
was of a socially lesser functional value than High German; it was rated lower and, consequently, its use
declined more and more.
33.
The progressive decline of Low German took place in two stages. At the turn of the 16th/17th Centuries,
Low German lost its written-language status to High German. After the chancelleries of princes and towns, the
educated middle classes also started to use High German for written communication. While the majority of the
North German population continued to use Low German for oral communication, its losses in terms of function
and prestige had such lasting effects that, over time, one social class after another adopted High German.
Finally the old language of the region survived mainly only as the everyday idiom of the "common folk",
especially among the rural population.
34.
In the course of the evolution of modern society, the scope for the development and survival of Low
German was increasingly curtailed. The social processes of the 19th and 20th Centuries threatened its existence
even as a fringe vernacular. Industrialization and urbanization not only increasingly limited the scope for the use
of Low German which by now had been reduced to a local idiom, but ultimately also resulted in the decline and
dissolution of the local language community where the regional vernacular had its actual sphere of life. The
bureaucratisation of community life as well as the democratisation of education brought about by the general
school and education system promoted and definitively consolidated the transition of the majority of the
population to High German as the community language.

12

35.
Despite these developments, a minority of committed citizens has, over the past 200 years, worked for
the cultivation and promotion of the Low German language. As early as the 17th and 18th Centuries, a number of
citizens spoke up, who saw the decline of the language as a severe loss of North German specificity and
countered this decline with literature written in Low German. Ever since efforts were made, at the end of the
Age of Enlightenment and at the beginning of Romanticism, to rediscover the 'people' with their vernacular
language and poetry and with their customs and ways of life, the sense of an increasing loss of identity has
given rise to the notion that Low German, as the ancestral vernacular of the North, was of particular value in,
and for, society. Nevertheless, the Low German language and the culture defined and shaped by it have had,
until this day, only a fringe status in public and cultural life and in education. So far, therefore, preservation of
the indigenous regional language has been achieved primarily by private initiatives. The achievements of such
initiatives in terms of cultivating and fostering the language and culture have been significant:
§
§
§

they have recreated an independent Low German literature;
they have established Low German in other spheres of cultural life as well: in theatre, in church and in
all modern media, so that an autonomous Low German cultural life has come into existence again;
they have to this end created an institutional infrastructure of clubs, societies and associations, which
in part also engage in supraregional work, theatres and publishing houses, and writers' unions,
teachers' and clergymen's associations, together with publication bodies.

36.
The success of these activities is also due, for a major part, to the increasing assistance, including
funding, provided by the Länder, local governments and other institutions.
37.
Nowadays Low German is traditionally spoken in eight Länder of the Federal Republic of Germany. The
Low German language area covers the entire territory of Bremen, Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania,
Lower Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein, and parts of Brandenburg, North Rhine/Westphalia and Saxony-Anhalt.
In the various regions of this language area, local or regional variations of Low German, which differ to a greater
or lesser degree, are spoken - but generally as a secondary language (High German standard language
remains the first language) and usually only for private purposes. The extent to which Low German idioms are
used varies from one region to another. Thus, Low German has, for a long time, been incomparably more alive
in the coastal regions than further inland.
38.
The number of people in Northern Germany who have a command of, and are still using, any of the
variations of Low German is not known. According to the only informative study available, a representative
survey of 1984, which only covers the Low German region in the "old" Länder ("West Germany") of the Federal
Republic of Germany,
§
§
§
§

an average of 56 % of the respondents said that they could speak Low German (very well, well, or a
little),
while 43 % stated that they could not speak it at all;
89 % of the respondents said that they were at least able to understand Low German,
while only 11 % stated that they could not understand it.

39.
For the three "new" Länder (i.e. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Brandenburg and Saxony-Anhalt)
where Low German is spoken, no directly comparable data are available; but the language situation in those
Länder is assumed to be quite similar. On this basis, the overall number of those who claim to have a more or
less good knowledge of the Low German language is estimated to amount to some eight million individuals.
40.
Notwithstanding the significant private commitment of those working in a large number of clubs and
associations, amateur theatre groups, writers' associations and circles of poets, and despite considerable
governmental promotional measures, the number of speakers of Low German continues to dwindle, mainly for
the reason that this language, on account of the low esteem in which it is held and because of its lack of
practical functional value, is no longer passed on by the respective older generation to the younger people.

13

1.4.

General legal framework

41.
The general legal framework governing the status and the use of languages in Germany consists of the
following:
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.

1.5.

the Basic Law of the Federal Republic of Germany (23 May 1949),
the Federal Act to implement the European Charter (16 July 1998);
the Bonn Declaration of 1955 (bilateral treaty between Germany and Denmark concerning the
Danish minority);
the Unification treaty of 1990 (in particular, article 35, concerning the Sorbian ethnic
community);
the Constitutions of the various Länder and in particular, the Constitutions of Brandenburg,
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Saxony, Saxony-Anhalt and Schleswig-Holstein;
various Federal Acts (Administrative procedures, Organisation of the Courts, Civil Status, etc) ;
several State treaties (in particular, the Broadcasting State treaties);
various Länder Acts concerning education, media, administrative procedure, courts, etc. or the
status of a given minority (the Act on the Sorbs’ Rights in the Free State of Saxony and the
Act on the Specification of Rights of the Sorbs in the Land of Brandenburg).

Particular issues arising in the evaluation of the application of the Charter in Germany

42.
The particular situation of Germany as a federal State and the logic of the distribution of competences
have an important impact on the way the language policy and the legislation are adopted and implemented in
Germany. Both the instrument of ratification and the initial periodical report reflect the specificity of the
situation. That also explains the complexity of the initial periodical report as well as of the present report
adopted by the Committee.
43.
The initial periodical report presented by Germany to the Council of Europe is divided into three
sections. The first section (A) provides a detailed presentation of the general situation of the regional or minority
languages traditionally spoken in Germany. The second section (B) indicates the measures taken by the
German authorities to apply Part II of the Charter (Article 7). The last section of the report (C) indicates the
measures taken both at the federal and at the Länder levels to comply with the undertakings of Part III
applicable to Danish (in Schleswig-Holstein), Sorbian (in Saxony and Brandenburg), Frisian (in SchleswigHolstein and in Lower Saxony), Romany (in those Länder having specified provisions of Part III applicable to this
Part-II-language) and to Low German (in the eight Länder concerned).
44.
The structure of the initial periodical report corresponds to the specificity of the instrument of ratification
presented by Germany. According to the latter, the scope of the Charter remains as follows:
a.

languages covered by Part III (Articles 8 to 14) of the Charter are:

§
§
§
§
§
§

Danish in Schleswig-Holstein;
North Frisian in Schleswig-Holstein,
Saterland Frisian in Lower Saxony,
Low German in Bremen, Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Lower Saxony and SchleswigHolstein;
Upper Sorbian in Saxony;
Lower Sorbian in Brandenburg.

b.

languages covered by Part II (Article 7) of the Charter are, in addition to those covered by Part III,

§
§

Low German in Brandenburg, North Rhine-Westphalia and Saxony-Anhalt;
Romany in the whole territory of the Federal Republic of Germany.

14

Additionally, for Romany and Low German, the instrument of ratification identifies some territories where
these languages also benefit from the protection foreseen in some provisions of Part III:
§
§

for Romany in Baden-Württemberg, Berlin, Hamburg, Hessen, North-Rhine-Westphalia, Lower Saxony,
Rhineland-Palatinate, Schleswig-Holstein;
for Low German in Brandenburg, North-Rhine Westphalia and Saxony-Anhalt.

In the respective territories mentioned, both languages remain nevertheless only covered by Part II, as the
minimum of 35 paragraphs or sub-paragraphs required by Article 2.2 of the Charter has not been reached.
45.
In the present report, the Committee of Experts has preferred not to follow the structure of the initial
periodical report to avoid possible confusion as regards the languages covered by Part II and Part III. When
evaluating compliance with Article 7 (Part II) in respect of Romany and Low German, the Committee has
nevertheless taken into consideration the additional information provided by the authorities regarding the efforts
made to comply with some of the provisions of Part III. At this stage, the information concerning Romany has
been insufficient to enter into an in-depth analysis of the Part III voluntary commitments regarding Romany.
46.
When evaluating the existing legal framework applicable to languages in Germany, the Committee of
Experts has observed that the lack of specific legislation or regulations in some areas (administration, judiciary,
media, etc…) hampers the effective implementation of some provisions of the Charter. The Federal Act to
implement the Charter ranks as a federal law in Germany and is to be applied as the more specific law
overriding other federal laws. The German authorities affirm that the self-executing nature of the treaty allows it
to be implemented directly and does not necessitate any intermediate legal or administrative measure.
However, while acknowledging the important efforts deployed by the German authorities to make the Charter
known, the Committee still considers that, due to the structure and content of the Charter, its full
implementation can only be guaranteed if specific legislation or administrative measures are adopted at all
relevant levels and in the different fields covered by the Charter, especially administration and the judiciary.
The Committee encourages the authorities to adopt specific legislation and administrative
measures in the various fields covered by the Charter, especially those of the administration and
the judiciary.
47.
Language policy in Germany follows the principle of territoriality. The speakers of a language can in
principle only claim certain public use of their language within the territory where their language is traditionally
spoken. Following this logic, the instrument of ratification precisely indicates the territories (the Länder and the
areas within the Länder) in which each single language is considered traditionally used, with one exception: the
case of Romany. The territorial base of Romany is the whole territory of Germany. Historically, the language
can be assigned to a considerable number of small regions in Germany where Roma and Sinti were for
centuries, or still are, traditionally present. The race policy of the Nazi regime - entailing stigmatisation and
discrimination, persecution and the genocide inflicted also on the Sinti and Roma - has destroyed the social
structures of these language communities. Since many survivors of Nazi persecution settled in central
conurbations after the end of the war, the speech community of their historical areas has changed.
48.
The high degree of dispersal of users of the Romany language must not, in the opinion of the German
authorities, result in any impairment of the objective scope of protection of the language if the causes of such
dispersal were generated, or at least significantly influenced, by earlier government action. In this regard, the
Government underlines that there is a particular obligation incumbent on the State to reduce the negative
impact of history on the Roma language and culture and to foster their development.

15

49.
The Committee is aware of the fact that several Länder are considering the inclusion of Romany under
the protection of Part III of the Charter. The Committee has also been informed that there are differences of
opinion among the Romany speakers themselves : whereas a major organisation (the Central Council of
German Sinti and Roma) supports the full protection of Romany by the Charter (and its Part III), another
important organisation (Sinti Allianz Germany) advocates the withdrawal of the undertakings promoting the use
of Romany in public life. Other voices representing the Sinti and Roma Länder associations also ask for the
withdrawal of the undertakings relating to the field of education. Their main argument is that education in
Romany has always been and should remain the sole responsibility of the community. According to them,
access to the Romany language should be limited to the members of this minority.
Chapter 2. The Committee’s evaluation in respect of Part II and Part III of the Charter
2.1

The evaluation in respect of Part II of the Charter

50.
Part II of the Charter sets out a number of general objectives and principles that a Party is obliged to
apply to all the regional or minority languages on its territory. The following paragraphs examine compliance by
Germany of Article 7 and place a particular emphasis on those languages only covered by Part II of the Charter
(Low German on the territory of Brandenburg, North Rhine/Westphalia and Saxony-Anhalt and Romany on the
whole of the territory of Germany).
Article 7 – Objectives and principles
“ In respect of regional or minority languages, within the territories in which such languages are
used and according to the situation of each language, the Parties shall base their policies,
legislation and practice on the following objectives and principles:
“a.

the recognition of the regional or minority languages as an expression of cultural
wealth;”

51.
Compliance by the German system of law with this provision is documented by the notification of the
two declarations on the scope of application of the Charter and by the extensive measures taken for its
implementation.
“b.

the respect of the geographical area of each regional or minority language in order to
ensure that existing or new administrative divisions do not constitute an obstacle to the
promotion of the regional or minority language in question;”

52.
As stated earlier, Low German’s speech area comprises territories of eight Länder. Because of the
devolution of competences to the Länder, there is a danger that the Länder are acting in isolation. In the view of
the Committee, measures should be taken to ensure co-operation between the Länder with the aim of
strengthening the impact of the measures taken to promote the use of this language.
53.
Romany is seen to be spoken in most of the Länder within the Federal Republic of Germany.
Consequently, existing or new administrative divisions have little influence on the promotion of Romany.
54.
The dissolution of the administrative division of the municipality of Horno, where the Lower Sorbian
language has a strong presence, in order to allow lignite mining to occur, suggests that respect for the
geographical area of minority languages may take a secondary place to other interests. The Committee takes
the view that appropriate and strong measures should be taken to compensate for the adverse impact on the
Lower Sorbian language. The Committee also emphasises the importance, in planning decisions of this kind, of
ensuring that adequate provision is made for weighing the interests of regional or minority languages protection
against economic considerations.
In the case of Horno, the Committee strongly encourages the authorities to take all appropriate
measures aimed at remedying the adverse effects on the Lower Sorbian language.

16

“c.

the need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in order to
safeguard them;”

55.
In conformity with the federal structure of the Federal Republic of Germany, responsibility for the
implementation of measures to promote and preserve the languages protected by the Charter lies primarily with
the Länder. The Constitutions of five Länder of the Federal Republic of Germany contain provisions relating to
national minorities and ethnic groups, or to national and ethnic minorities. In part, these provisions also directly
relate to the language(s) spoken by the latter. While in the case of legislation the objectives and principles are
present, in the field of policy and practice this varies considerably from Land to Land.
56.
The Land of Schleswig-Holstein is the Land with the highest number of regional or minority languages
(Danish, North Frisian, Low German and Romany) and can therefore be quoted as an example. Serious efforts
are made by the Land authorities to raise public awareness of the value of these languages and the interest of
protecting and promoting them. The role of the Minister-President’s Commissioner for Minorities is of the
utmost importance, as this institution has very much contributed to the launching of a series of projects
concerning the use of the different languages (such as the “Minority languages-friendly municipalities”, launched
during the European Year of Languages). Brochures, information seminars and other events have resulted in
increased co-operation among these four language groups and favourable public opinion towards them.
57.
With the exception of Land Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, where Low German enjoys Part III
protection and promotion, no other Land Constitution contains a provision devoted to Low German. However, a
wide variety of resolute measures exist to safeguard Low German, especially in the field of culture.
58.
As for the promotion of Romany, resolute action has been taken by several Länder in the legislative
field through the inclusion of various Part III provisions in the German ratification instruments, especially in the
field of education. However, the implementation of these commitments is rendered difficult by the conflicting
views prevailing among Romany-speakers on the public use of Romany.
“d.

the facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of regional or minority languages, in
speech and writing, in public and private life;”

59.
German is the official language of administration and justice. No distinction is made between the
treatment of regional or minority languages on the one hand, and extra-territorial languages on the other.
Languages traditionally used in Germany are therefore all treated as being “foreign”, except for Low German
which traditionally has been considered as a form of German. Aside from a few initiatives described in the next
section of this Chapter, so far the promotion of the use of regional or minority languages in public life seems to
be concentrated in the fields of education and culture. The German authorities often refer to the fact that
speakers of the languages covered by the Charter can also speak German, thus justifying the lack of
encouragement of their use in dealings with the administrative and judicial authorities. As regards the media
field, the authorities claim not to be allowed to “interfere” and do not, therefore, take any action likely to improve
the presence of regional or minority languages in this field. The Committee is not convinced by this argument.
Freedom of expression in the media is not compromised by facilitating or promoting use of regional or minority
languages in the media. By reason of their relative economic and political weakness, minority languages are at
an inherent disadvantage when it comes to opportunities to be seen and heard in the media. It is necessary
and appropriate for this imbalance to be redressed by positive measures. Such measures are needed both in
traditional and new media. Furthermore, Article 7, paragraph 2 expressly envisages the adoption of special
measures in favour of regional and minority languages aimed at reducing the disadvantages of regional and
minority languages, and thus at promoting equality between the users of these languages and the rest of the
population.

17

60.
According to the information available to the Committee, there is today no use of Romany in public life.
Due to the experiences of the past, there is reluctance among the speakers to push for a promotion of Romany
within the judiciary, the administration or the media. The Sinti and Roma communities are afraid of the negative
impact that interference from the outside might have on their culture. It is the wish of certain organisations
representing the speakers of Romany that their language remain accessible only to the members of their own
community.
“e.

the maintenance and development of links, in the fields covered by this Charter,
between groups using a regional or minority language and other groups in the State
employing a language used in identical or similar form, as well as the establishment of
cultural relations with other groups in the State using different language;”

61.
The existence of some major –or umbrella- organisations grouping respectively the speakers of Danish
(Sydslesvigsk Forening), Sorbian (Domowina), Frisian (Nordfriesischer Verein and Interfrasche Rädj) and
Romany (Central Council of German Sinti and Roma and Sinti Allianz Deutschland) very much facilitate the
development of links between groups interested in the promotion of the languages. The Federal Union of
European Nationalities (FUEN) and the German EBLUL Committee participate in the implementation of the
Charter and the European Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities. Through the regular
Conferences organised by the federal authorities, all the above-mentioned organisations meet, exchange
experiences and even join efforts to obtain further support from the authorities. Concerning Low German,
however, a comparable degree of internal organisation is lacking. The lack of an umbrella organisation and
inter-Land co-operation severely hampers the promotion of Low German.
62.
At the Länder level, the Committee welcomes the efforts made by the authorities of Schleswig-Holstein
to provide for a forum where the representatives of the languages spoken within the Land can co-operate. In
particular, the establishment of the Minister-President’s Commissioner for Minorities is seen as a useful
measure that might also be applied in other Länder and at federal level.
“f.

the provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of regional or
minority languages at all appropriate stages;”

63.
Teaching and study of the languages covered by Part III is examined in detail in the next section of this
Chapter.
64.
As far as Low German is concerned, in those Länder not covered by Part III Low German is used in
school education mainly in primary schools, although activity groups and optional courses in Low German also
exist in the upper grades. Lectures on local history and culture include Low German. Reading competitions
take place in elementary and secondary education and teaching materials are available. Furthermore, Low
German is taught in adult education centres. Although Low German is not an official element of teachertraining, courses are organised.
65.
The Central Council of German Sinti and Roma and some other associations of Sinti and Roma take
the view that Romany should neither be taught nor learnt by non-Sinti and non-Roma within the public education
system. According to the Initial Report, a majority of the German Sinti and Roma are, in fact, against all
inclusion of Romany in the state-run education system and emphasise their right to cultivate their language and
pass it on to future generations within the family and family clans only. Several Länder have declared that they
are prepared to make available pre-school, primary, secondary, and adult education of or in Romany, if the
speakers of the language put wishes to this effect to the Länder. So far, the support for Romany within the field
of education has been limited to the pre-school level. The Committee received information about some preschools in Kiel where a Romany-speaking mediator is available to facilitate the integration of Romany-speaking
children. According to the representatives of the Sinti and Roma in Schleswig-Holstein, the institution of the
mediator is seen as a positive measure, but it was emphasised that education in Romany should remain the
responsibility of the Sinti and Roma communities themselves. The problem is that the continuity of such
activities cannot be ensured on a voluntary basis only and there is a need for more financial assistance. The
Land of Schleswig-Holstein already provides some funding for this purpose.

18

66.
The lack of interest in the promotion of the various languages in the past has to some extent resulted in
the existence of a generation gap in the use of regional or minority languages, apart from Danish and Romany.
There is a tendency among today’s young parents not to speak Frisian, Low German or Sorbian with their
children. The recent campaigns to promote Frisian, Low German and Sorbian have raised the awareness of
these parents, who now are ready to send their children to schools offering these languages. However, the
generation gap will soon make it difficult to find trained teachers with a sufficient knowledge of those languages.
The position is further complicated by the fact that linguistic competence in regional or minority languages is
not consistently considered as a relevant factor when appointing or deploying teachers. Sater Frisian is the
most endangered of these languages and in spite of the fact that mother tongue instruction in Sater Frisian is
provided to a certain degree in the schools of Saterland, Germany has not chosen any obligations pertaining to
primary school education. In the initial report it is stated that school children are now taking a greater interest in
learning this language and that children and the grandparent generation have started to communicate in Sater
Frisian again. Primary school is of course a very important domain if a language is to be protected and
developed and the Committee would encourage the German government to consider the possibility to extend
the scope of its ratification of the Charter in order to cover also primary schools in respect of Sater Frisian.
“g.

the provision of facilities enabling non-speakers of a regional or minority language
living in the area where it is used to learn it if they so desire;”

67.
As developed in the next section, any person who so wishes can have access to courses of Danish,
Sorbian and Frisian in the territories where they are traditionally spoken. Various forms of education in Low
German are available to those who do not consider themselves to be Low German native speakers.
68.
At present this provision is not applied to the Romany language. The frequently expressed wish by
certain organisations representing members of this language group is that outsiders should not be taught this
language.
“h.

69.

the promotion of study and research on regional or minority languages at universities or
equivalent institutions;”

Research and study of the languages covered by Part III are evaluated in the next section of this report.

70.
Universities and colleges carry out study and research of Low German in North Rhine/Westphalia and
in Saxony-Anhalt, as well as in Brandenburg (not covered by Part III of the Charter).
71.
Several Länder have stated that they are prepared to encourage and/or allow university level education
in or of Romany, should a demand for it emerge. So far, there has been no such demand among the speakers
of Romany.
72.
The Committee considers the promotion of study and research to be central in the context of promoting
regional or minority languages. Study and research enable proper assessment to be made of the needs of
minority language speakers in order to develop the language and to plan for the provision of education and other
services. The Committee notes with concern the apparent decline in study and research at a time when there is
resurgence in linguistic consciousness. The Committee expresses the hope that competent authorities will
take advantage of the present growth of linguistic consciousness and increase the availability of study and
research of the languages.
“i.

the promotion of appropriate types of transnational exchanges, in the fields covered by
this Charter, for regional or minority languages used in identical or similar form in two
or more States.”

19

73.
The Danish minority benefits from the extensive efforts made to develop transnational exchanges with
the neighbouring Denmark. Some associations of Frisian speakers and universities have developed contacts
with their counterparts in The Netherlands. The Committee has been made aware of transfrontier co-operation
through inter-regional activities in the case of the Low German speaking community in Lower Saxony and the
northern provinces of the Netherlands.
74.
The Central Council of the German Sinti and Roma has participated in transnational exchanges with the
Kulturverein Österreichischer Roma in Vienna. Both sides keep up continuous exchanges of information and
share each other’s publications. This co-operation also extends to the fields of culture, education, and
vocational training.
75.
All regional or minority language groups in Germany participate in the international minority cooperation within the Federal Union of European Nationalities (FUEN) and the German EBLUL Committee.
“Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake to eliminate, if they have not yet done so, any unjustified distinction, exclusion,
restriction or preference relating to the use of a regional or minority language and intended to
discourage or endanger the maintenance or development of it. The adoption of special measures in
favour of regional or minority languages aimed at promoting equality between the users of these
languages and the rest of the population or which take due account of their specific conditions is not
considered to be an act of discrimination against the users of more widely-used languages.”
76.
According to the Initial Report, the principle of equality before the law and the ban on discrimination are
enshrined in the Basic Law of the Federal Republic of Germany and in the Constitutions of the Länder, as well
as in various subject specific laws. They comply with paragraph 2 nation-wide for all regional or minority
languages in Germany.
“Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to promote, by appropriate measures, mutual understanding between all the
linguistic groups of the country and in particular the inclusion of respect, understanding and tolerance
in relation to regional or minority languages among the objectives of education and training provided
within their countries and encouragement of the mass media to pursue the same objective.”
77.
Germany has taken a wide range of measures to promote mutual understanding. In particular,
according to the Initial Report, education in tolerance and solidarity is part of the educational mandate of
schools providing general education and of political education in Germany, and ranks high in these fields. In
addition, the report states that many non-governmental organisations and private initiatives are dedicated to this
goal and to the practical implementation of the intercultural dialogue. In the areas of education, culture and the
media, the aforementioned principles are embodied in laws and implementing statutes. These laws and
regulations are implemented in practice by means of various measures. Such measures are aimed at education
in tolerance and at promoting understanding for other cultures and languages as well as acceptance of people
with a different language and culture who live in the neighbourhood, the local community and society at large.
Of the language groups covered by the Charter, the Sinti and Roma are those who have been especially
targeted by xenophobic attacks. Because of this and on account of the historical events during the Nazi
regime, the history and the culture of the German Sinti and Roma, which is reflected in the Romany language,
is included in school education throughout the Federal Republic.
78.
According to the Initial Periodical Report, the broadcasting programming principles embodied in the
various Land Broadcasting Acts and State Treaties explicitly lay down that “ …programmes should help to
reduce xenophobia and to achieve protection and promotion of minorities”. There are monitoring bodies in place
although the Committee has no evidence as to how the interests of the regional or minority languages are
specifically catered for in this context or how these programming principles are carried out in practice to the
benefit of the regional or minority languages.

20

“Paragraph 4
In determining their policy with regard to regional or minority languages, the Parties shall take into
consideration the needs and wishes expressed by the groups which use such languages. They are
encouraged to establish bodies, if necessary, for the purpose of advising the authorities on all matters
pertaining to regional or minority languages.”
79.
As stated before, the competent authorities have regular contacts with the major organisations
representing the interests of the speakers of Danish, Frisian and Sorbian.
80.
Germany has taken into consideration the needs and the wishes of the organisations of the users of
Low German in its language policy, namely through the input of associations established at the Land level. That
also results from its inclusion amongst the languages protected and promoted by the Charter. As previously
noted, however, the lack of an umbrella organisation makes it difficult for the federal authorities to maintain a
dialogue with the speakers of this language.
81.
The interests of the German Sinti and Roma are represented by various associations and Land
Associations. The Central Council of German Sinti and Roma is the umbrella organisation of nine Land
Associations and a number of regional or local associations and institutions. The Central Council and the
Documentation and Cultural Centre of German Sinti and Roma have since 1991 been supported by publicly
funded institutional promotion. A number of organisations not affiliated to the Central Council and elders of
family clans of German Sinti have recently formed the Sinti Allianz Deutschland e.V. The Committee has been
informed that these organisations are consulted by the Federal authorities on matters dealing with these
languages. At present, there are no governmental bodies or institutions specifically dealing with the protection
and promotion of the Romany language. This is in line with the wishes of this language group.
“Paragraph 5
The Parties undertake to apply, mutatis mutandis, the principles listed in paragraphs 1 to 4 above to
non-territorial languages. However, as far as these languages are concerned, the nature and scope of the
measures to be taken to give effect to this Charter shall be determined in a flexible manner, bearing in
mind the needs and wishes, and respecting the traditions and characteristics, of the groups which use
the languages concerned.”
82.
As stated in paragraphs 43 and 44 above, the Romany language is regarded as a non-territorial
language although the German instrument of ratification identifies some territories where this language also
benefits from the protection foreseen in some provisions of Part III. In considering the position of Romany vis-àvis paragraphs 1 to 4 of article 7, the Committee has kept in mind that those principles should be applied
mutatis mutandis.
2.2.

Part III commitments regarding Low German in areas where Low German is covered by Part
II

83.
According to the instrument of ratification, certain areas where Low German is spoken are not included
amongst the undertakings entered into under Part III. These areas are comprised in the territories of the
following Länder: Brandenburg, Saxony-Anhalt and North Rhine-Westphalia. However, in respect of Low
German these Länder have voluntarily entered into a number of specific undertakings provided for under Part III.
The Committee has decided to deal separately with these commitments and to assess their fulfillment.

21

a. In Land Brandenburg
Article 8 – Education
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used,
according to the situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the official
language(s) of the State:
a

i

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or

iii

to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those pupils whose
families so request and whose number is considered sufficient; or

iv if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school education,
to favour and/or encourage the application of the measures referred to under i to iii
above;
84.
According to the information provided by the Government, the responsibility for pre-school education in
Brandenburg Land lies with the local authorities. The Land Government takes a positive approach to the use of
Low German in pre-school education. However, no statistics are available on the extent to which Low German
is used. The Committee would welcome further information on this in the next periodical report.
b

i

to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of primary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or

iii

to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or minority
languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

iv to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils
whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient;
85.
The German Government has informed the Committee that Low German is not taught as a regular
classroom subject in Brandenburg. However, it is possible to institute activity groups where interested pupils
can study the Low German language and culture. Such activity groups have been established at three schools
in the northern region of the Land. Also in this region local history and geography lessons include elements
concerning the Low German language and culture. The Committee considers that what has been reported by
the German government does not fulfil this undertaking. The Committee would therefore welcome further
information on the number of pupils or families who have requested secondary education in Low German and on
which measures are being taken by the German authorities to live up to the standard of this undertaking.
Accordingly, the Committee is not in a position to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
c

i

to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of secondary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or

iii

to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or minority
languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

iv to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils
who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered sufficient;

22

86.
See para. (b iv) above. The Committee considers that what has been reported by the German
government does not fulfil this undertaking. The Committee would therefore welcome further information on the
number of pupils or families who have requested secondary education in Low German and on which measures
are being taken by the German authorities to live up to the standard of this undertaking. Accordingly, the
Committee is not in a position to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
f iii i

if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult education, to
favour and/or encourage the offering of such languages as subjects of adult and
continuing education;

87.
According to the information received by the Committee, the Brandenburg part of the Low German
speech area has four Kreisvolkshochschulen, i.e. the Kreis Adult Education Centres of Uckermark, Prignitz,
Ostprignitz-Ruppin and Oberhavel. The Initial Report stresses a willingness to include Low German language
and cultural heritage in the programme of these centres. However, in some instances courses were not held
due to insufficient demand. Attempts will nevertheless be made in the future to offer such courses. The Land
pays part of the personnel expenses and the cost of materials in connection with the adult education centres.
In addition, other public funds are available to subsidise courses in Low German. The Committee considers
this undertaking fulfilled.
g

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is
reflected by the regional or minority language;

88.
According to the information given by the German Government, it follows from the Brandenburg Schools
Act that the teaching in the schools must reflect the Low German culture. The Committee considers this
undertaking fulfilled.
Article 9 – Judicial authorities
2

The Parties undertake:
a

not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because they
are drafted in a regional or minority language; or

89.
The validity of legal documents is not denied on the grounds that they have been drafted in Low
German. The Committee considers that this undertaking is fulfilled.
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
2

In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who
are users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below,
the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
b

the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written
applications in these languages;

90.
According to the initial report, it is not known whether any applications have been submitted to the
authorities in Low German. According to the Government, however, no case has ever been reported where a
practical solution was not found, in particular through the assistance by a member of the staff speaking Low
German..
91.
The Committee considers that the information above is not sufficient to assess whether and to what
extent this provision is actually applied in practice. The Committee considers that in order to make it clear to
the speakers of Low German that they may submit applications in this language and to ensure that the
administration is aware of this, it would be advisable that corresponding instructions (or, when necessary,
formal legal rules) are issued to the authorities and made public. The Committee considers that this
undertaking is only formally fulfilled.

23

3

With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other persons
acting on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which regional or
minority languages are used, in accordance with the situation of each language and as
far as this is reasonably possible:

a

to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in the provision of the service;
or

b

to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request and receive a reply
in these languages; or

c

to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request in these languages.

92.
The German Government interprets this provision in the sense that there must be no regulation
preventing the use of Low German for the submission of such requests. The Committee, however, considers
that in order to make it clear to the speakers of Low German that they may submit requests in this language
and to ensure that the public services concerned are aware of this, it would be advisable that corresponding
instructions (or, where necessary, formal legal rules) are issued to the authorities and made public. The
Committee considers that this undertaking is only formally fulfilled.
Article 11 – Media
1

The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the
territories in which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language,
to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or
play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of
the media:
b

i

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one radio station in the regional
or minority languages; or

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;

93.
The Government has informed the Committee that in the Land of Brandenburg radio and television
programmes of Norddeutscher Rundfunk (NDR) of Bremen can be received in the Low German speech area and
that these broadcasts are partly taken over by Ostdeutscher Rundfunk Brandenburg (ORB) in its own
programme schedule. The Committee considers that a commendable effort is made in the public sector.
However, taking into account the nature of the option chosen by the Government, the Committee does not have
any information as to measures of encouragement for the broadcasting of radio programmes in Low German by
private stations. The Committee is therefore not in a position to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
c

i

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one television channel in the
regional or minority languages; or

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the regional
or minority languages on a regular basis;

94.
In this regard too, the Government refers to the co-operation with Bremen. However, according to the
information provided by the German Government (see para. 270 below) the only programme in Low German
broadcast by the public television is the nativity story at Christmas. There is no information about television
programmes in Low German in private broadcasting and the Committee is aware of no information as to
measures of encouragement for the broadcasting of television programmes in Low German by private stations.
Therefore, the Committee considers that this obligation is not fulfilled.
d

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in the regional or minority languages;

24

95.
The Government refers to legislative measures, in particular Section 5, para. 2, of the Act on
Ostdeutscher Rundfunk Brandenburg (ORB Act). However, the Committee would welcome further information
on which practical measures have been taken to give effect to this undertaking.
e

i

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one
newspaper in the regional or minority languages; or

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the publication of newspaper articles in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;

96.
The Committee has been informed that the most important daily newspapers of the region regularly
publish articles in Low German. Furthermore, every two weeks a newspaper read in the North-East of the Land
publishes one page with Low German items. However, the Committee would welcome further information on
how the authorities are encouraging or facilitating the publication of newspapers articles in Low German on a
regular basis. The Committee is therefore not in a position to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
f

i

to cover the additional costs of those media which use regional or minority
languages, wherever the law provides for financial assistance in general for the
media; or

ii

to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions in the
regional or minority languages;

97.
According to the information provided by the Government, audio-visual works in Low German are eligible
for financial assistance and that will remain unchanged even with the new film promotion directives. The
Committee considers this undertaking formally fulfilled and would welcome examples of cases where financial
assistance has been provided to works in Low German.
2

The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a
regional or minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure
that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of
information in the written press in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or
minority language. The exercise of the above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties
and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as
are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national
security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for
preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the authority
and impartiality of the judiciary.

98.
Free reception of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries is guaranteed by the
Basic Law. Therefore, the Committee concludes that this undertaking is fulfilled.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
1

With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural
centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film
production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries,
including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have
power or play a role in this field:
a

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority languages
and foster the different means of access to works produced in these languages;

25

99.
According to the information provided by the Government, promotion of Low German culture is projectoriented. The Government mentions in particular a number of printing-cost subsidies for publications in Low
German. However, the Committee has not received any information on how the authorities foster the different
means of access to works produced in Low German. This undertaking is therefore partly fulfilled.
f

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or
minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

100.
According to the Government, legislation in this field is considered unnecessary and participation of the
users of Low German is already ensured within the institutions concerned. However, the Committee has not
been made aware of any measures of encouragement and is therefore not in a position to conclude that this
undertaking is fulfilled.
g

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for collecting,
keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the regional or minority
languages;

101.
There are no libraries or archives dedicated exclusively to the collection of writings in Low German,
which are therefore collected in municipal archives and libraries. Furthermore, publishers are required to offer at
least one copy of every new published book to the State and Land library and that also covers books in Low
German. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled but would welcome further information on the
approximate size of the collections of writings in Low German held in the above-mentioned libraries and on how
regularly the State and Land library actually makes use of the offers of newly published books in Low German.
b. In Land Saxony-Anhalt
Article 8 – Education
1

With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages
are used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the
teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
a

i

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant regional
or minority languages; or

iii to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those pupils
whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient; or
iv if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school education,
to favour and/or encourage the application of the measures referred to under i to iii
above;
102.
According to the information provided by the Government, the responsibility for pre-school education in
Saxony-Anhalt lies with the local authorities. The Land Government takes a positive approach to the use of
Low German in pre-school education. Pursuant to the Decision of 19 November 1991 adopted by the Landtag,
the Land Government is obliged to promote Low German, among others, in pre-school education. The Directive
on the Allocations of Grants explicitly lays down the promotion of German in pre-school facilities. However, no
statistics are available on the extent to which Low German is used. The Committee would welcome further
information in the context of the next periodical report.
b

i

to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority languages;

ii

to make available a substantial part of primary education in the relevant regional or
minority languages; or

or

26

iii to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
iv to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils
whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient;
103.
The German Government has informed the Committee that the Framework Curriculum recommends the
use of Low German in literature and texts, but teachers have no legal obligation to follow these instructions.
Brochures and a CD have been developed to help the teaching of Low German. It is possible to institute activity
groups, optional subject-courses and activities outside the school where interested pupils can study the Low
German language and culture. Promotional programmes have been launched in order to facilitate activities
outside the school and dialect camps are funded. Reading competitions also take place in Low German. The
Committee, however, would welcome further information on the number of pupils or families who have requested
primary education in Low German.
c

i

to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of secondary education in the relevant regional
or minority languages; or

iii to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
iv to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils
who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered sufficient;
104.
The Committee considers that what has been reported by the German government does not fulfil this
undertaking. The Committee would therefore welcome further information on the number of pupils or families
who have requested secondary education in Low German, the findings of the survey conducted by the
Arbeitsstelle Niederdeutsch and which measures are being taken by the German authorities to live up to the
standard of this undertaking. Accordingly, the Committee is not in a position to conclude that this undertaking
is fulfilled.
g

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is
reflected by the regional or minority language;

105.
According to the information given by the German Government, it follows from the Saxony-Anhalt
Framework Curricula that the teaching of History and German should reflect the Low German culture. The
Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
h

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of
paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;

106.
According to the information provided by the Government, training and continuing education of teachers
in Saxony-Anhalt are ensured primarily on the one hand, by the Arbeitsstelle Niederdeutsch (Workshop for Low
German) of the Germanistisches Institut of Otto von Guericke University in Magdeburg and on the other hand,
through follow-up and further training activities offered on a regular basis by the Landesinstitut für
Lehrerfortbildung Sachsen-Anhalt (LISA – Saxony-Anhalt Land Institute for Follow-up Training of Teachers). The
Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
Article 9 – Judicial authorities
2

The Parties undertake:
a

not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because they
are drafted in a regional or minority language; or
27

107.
The validity of legal documents is not denied on the grounds that they have been drafted in Low
German. The Committee considers that this undertaking is fulfilled.
Article 11 – Media
1

The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the
territories in which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language,
to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or
play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of
the media:
b

c

i

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one radio station in the regional
or minority languages; or

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;

i

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one television channel in the
regional or minority languages; or

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the regional
or minority languages on a regular basis;

108.
According to the initial report, both public and private radio and TV broadcasting corporations regularly
air programmes in Low German and report on Low German events. Furthermore, in the northern part of
Saxony-Anhalt, radio and TV broadcasts of Norddeutscher Rundfunk (NRD) can be received in the Low German
speech area and some Broadcasts of Ostdeutscher Rundfunk Brandenburg (ORB) are taken over by
Mitteldeutscher Rundfunk (mdr) in its own programme schedule. Finally, Open Channels and local broadcasting
stations already include Low German in their programmes depending on local demand. The Committee
considers these undertakings fulfilled.
d

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in the regional or minority languages;

109.
The Government refers to the possibility to grant subsidies within the funding scheme by the Land
Government aimed at promoting Low German (to a maximum amount of 70 per cent of the expenses eligible for
allocation of funds). However, the information provided does not allow to establish to which extent the
mentioned possibilities of funding are actually used for the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in Low German. The Committee is therefore not in a position to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
e

i

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one
newspaper in the regional or minority languages; or

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the publication of newspaper articles in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;

110.
The Government has informed the Committee that the week-end edition of the Volksstimme contains at
least one page entitled “Platt Spräken” (“Speaking Low German”). In addition, Low German texts (e.g. short
stories, legends, poems, etc.) appear in the local/regional section or in the feature section of both the
Volksstimme and other local or regional newspapers. The Committee would welcome further information on
how the authorities are encouraging or facilitating the publication of newspapers articles in Low German on a
regular basis. The Committee is therefore not in a position to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.

28

2

The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a
regional or minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to
ensure that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation
of information in the written press in a language used in identical or similar form to a
regional or minority language. The exercise of the above-mentioned freedoms, since it
carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions,
restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society,
in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of
disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation
or rights of others, for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for
maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.

111.
Free reception of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries is guaranteed by the
Basic Law. Therefore, the Committee concludes that this undertaking is fulfilled.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
1

With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural
centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film
production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries,
including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have
power or play a role in this field:
a

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority languages
and foster the different means of access to works produced in these languages;

112.
The Government has provided the Committee with detailed information about a great variety of projects
and research activities, many of which are subsidized by the Land, aimed at encouraging types of expression
and initiative specific to Low German and at fostering the different means of access to works produced in Low
German. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
f

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or
minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

113.
According to the information made available to the Committee, direct participation in the provision of
facilities and planning of cultural activities is ensured through the Head of the Low German Section of the
Landesheimatbund Sachsen-Anhalt e.V. (Saxony-Anhalt Land Union for Local and Regional Traditionals) and
the Arbeitsstelle Niederdeutsch (Workshop of Low German) of Otto von Guericke University in Magdeburg. Both
institutions are fully involved in a wide range of activities concerning Low German. Furthermore, the Arbeitskreis
“Ostfälisches Platt” e.V. ( Working Panel “Low German of Ostfalen”) is automatically a member of the
Executive Board of the Landesheimatbund Sachsen-Anhalt e.V. The Committee considers this undertaking
fulfilled.
g

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for collecting,
keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the regional or minority
languages;

114.
According to the Government, the establishment of institutions subsidized by the Land, such as the
ones mentioned under para. 113 above, ensures that works in Low German are collected and presented to the
public. However, the Committee considers that the information provided is not sufficient to take a position on
this undertaking.
h

if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and terminological research
services, particularly with a view to maintaining and developing appropriate administrative,
commercial, economic, social, technical or legal terminology in each regional or minority
language.
29

115.
The Government maintains that if required, the establishments and institutions listed in para. 113 above
provide for the translation and terminological research services as part of their on-going Land-funded activities.
However, the Committee considers that the information provided is not sufficient to take a position on this
undertaking and would welcome practical examples.
c. In Land North Rhine/Westphalia
Article 8 – Education
1

With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages
are used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the
teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
e

i

to make available university and other higher education in regional or minority
languages; or

ii

to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher
education subjects; or

iii if, by reason of the role of the State in relation to higher education institutions, subparagraphs i and ii cannot be applied, to encourage and/or allow the provision of
university or other forms of higher education in regional or minority languages or of
facilities for the study of these languages as university or higher education subjects;
116.
According to the information provided by the Government, Münster University, Bielefeld University and
Ruhr University in Bochum offer a large variety of courses in and on Low German. The Committee considers
this undertaking fulfilled.
g

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is
reflected by the regional or minority language;

117.
The Guidelines for the Lower Secondary Grades of Gymnasien (grammar schools) call upon schools to
develop a school programme which inter alia will cover the “cultural traditions of the local environment and home
region”. The curricula for the secondary grades and for the primary education level of schools of other types
provide for inclusion of an adequate proportion of regional languages in German lessons. The Committee
considers this undertaking fulfilled.
h

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of
paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;

118.
The circular decree on Low German in school, issued by the Münster Bezirk Government, contains
guidance on the inclusion of regional language culture in the curricula. In addition, the Münster Bezirk
Government offers follow-up training conferences on linguistic theory and practice. The Committee considers
this undertaking fulfilled.
2

With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the regional or
minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a
regional or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the
regional or minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.

119.
The Government has informed the Committee that instruction in Low German is also allowed in Land
regions other than those where Low German is spoken. However, in the absence of any further information the
Committee is not in a position to express a view on the fulfilment of this undertaking.

30

Article 9 – Judicial authorities
1

The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents
using the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to
the situation of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities
afforded by the present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper
administration of justice:
b

in civil proceedings:
i

to provide that the courts, at the request of one of the parties, shall conduct the
proceedings in the regional or minority languages; and/or

ii

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she
may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional
expense; and/or

iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;
c

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
i

to provide that the courts, at the request of one of the parties, shall conduct the
proceedings in the regional or minority languages; and/or

ii

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she
may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional
expense; and/or

iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;
120.
The codes of judicial procedures provide that legal documents shall be submitted in the original. If the
court does not understand the language in which a given legal document is drafted, it may, at its complete
discretion, order a translation to be produced (Section 142 (3) of the Code of Civil Procedure). On the basis of a
general reference to the Code of Civil Procedure, the other codes of procedure contain the same rule. The costs
incurred for translation become part of the litigation costs. The Committee considers these undertakings
fulfilled.
2

The Parties undertake:
a

not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because they
are drafted in a regional or minority language; or

121.
The validity of legal documents is not denied on the grounds that they have been drafted in Low
German. The Committee considers that this undertaking is fulfilled.

31

Article 11 – Media
1

The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories
in which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent
that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this
field, and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
d

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in the regional or minority languages;

122.
According to the information provided by the Government, the Landschaftsverband (regional local
authority) Westfalen-Lippe subsidizes the production costs of sound recordings regarding Low German
subjects. The production and dissemination of audiovisual works in Low German are also encouraged in the
same way. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled but it would welcome further information on the
practical impact of the implementation of this provision.
2

The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a
regional or minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure
that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of
information in the written press in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or
minority language. The exercise of the above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties
and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as
are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national
security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for
preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the authority
and impartiality of the judiciary.

123.
Free reception of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries is guaranteed by the
Basic Law. Therefore, the Committee concludes that this undertaking is fulfilled.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
1

With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural
centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and
film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries,
including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent,
have power or play a role in this field:
a

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority languages
and foster the different means of access to works produced in these languages;

124.
According to the information provided by the Government, the Landschaftsverband (regional local
authority) Westfalen-Lippe is composed of six commissions for studies covering the history, geography and
political system of a region and has the sole task of carrying out research on the history and geography of
Westphalia, publishing the findings and holding conferences. One of the commissions covers research on the
history of the Westphalian language, including archiving of Low German material and registration of the
Westphalian dialects, local place-names and proverbs. This commission publishes one journal (“The Low
German Word. Articles on Low German Philology”) and two series (“Low German Studies” and “Westphalian
Contributions to Low German Philology”). Ear-marked funds of the budget of the Landschaftsverband
Westfalen-Lippe are employed for the promotion of Low German writings and language cultivation and a part is
allocated to a Low German literary society. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.

32

d

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of
various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of
regional or minority languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for
which they provide backing;

125.
The German Government has informed the Committee that the Landschaftsverband Westfalen-Lippe is
a co-provider of the Westphalia and Lippe Local/Regional Traditions Associations which also support the
cultivation of Low German in cultural areas. However, the Committee considers that the information provided is
not sufficient to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
e

to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting
cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of the regional or
minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest of the population;

126.
The Government has informed the Committee that the activities referred to under para. 125 above
promote measures in order to ensure that the bodies responsible for organizing cultural activities also have Low
German-speaking staff at their disposal. The Committee considers that the information provided is not specific
enough to conclude that the undertaking is fulfilled.
f

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or
minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

127.
In this regard too the Government refers to the activities described under para. 125 above. In the
Committee’s view such information is not specific enough to conclude that the undertaking is fulfilled.
g

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for collecting,
keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the regional or minority
languages;

128.
The Government has informed the Committee that one of the priority tasks of the commission referred
to under para. 124 above is archival recording of Low German linguistic material and the registration of
Westphalian dialects, local place-names and proverbs. The Committee notes that this commission also
publishes one journal and two series (see para. 124 above). However, the Committee would welcome further
information on whether this commission also collects and keeps copies of works in Low German and presents
and publishes works produced in Low German. The Committee considers this undertaking partly fulfilled.
h

if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and terminological research
services, particularly with a view to maintaining and developing appropriate administrative,
commercial, economic, social, technical or legal terminology in each regional or minority
language.

129.
The Government has informed the Committee that the tasks of the commission referred to above under
paras. 124 and 128 include terminological research services. The Committee would welcome further information
on the output of such services and considers that the information provided is not sufficient to conclude that the
undertaking is fulfilled.
2

In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are
traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority
language justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and
facilities in accordance with the preceding paragraph.

130.
According to the initial report, under the existing system of law cultural activities in North RhineWestphalia are admitted also in territorial areas other than those where Low German is traditionally used.
However, the Committee considers that the information provided is not sufficient to conclude that the
undertaking is fulfilled.

33

Article 13 – Economic and social life
1

With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole country:
a

to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without justifiable
reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to economic or
social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical documents such as
instructions for the use of products or installations;

131.
The Committee has not received any information indicating the existence of legislation which
prohibits or limits the use of the minority language and considers this obligation fulfilled.
c

132.
is fulfilled.
d

to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority languages in
connection with economic or social activities;
The Committee has received no information which enables it to judge whether or not this obligation

to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by means other
than those specified in the above sub-paragraphs.

133.
No specific information concerning North Rhine-Westphalia has been provided in this respect.
Therefore, the Committee is not in a position to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
2.3

The evaluation in respect of Part III of the Charter

2.3.1

Danish in the Danish Language area in Schleswig-Holstein

Article 8 – Education
1

With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are
used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the
teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
a

i

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant regional or
minority languages; or

iii

to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those pupils
whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient; or

iv

if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school education, to
favour and/or encourage the application of the measures referred to under i to iii above;

134.
Pre-school education in Danish is organised by Dansk Skoleforening for Sydslesvig, a private
organisation funded by the State which operates 58 nursery schools and day nurseries providing pre-school
activities for some 1 800 children. In addition to that, a number of German nursery schools offer Danish as part
of their activities. The Committee therefore considers that this undertaking is fulfilled.
“b i
ii

to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or
to make available a substantial part of primary education in the relevant regional or
minority languages; or

34

iii

to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or minority
languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

iv

to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils whose
families so request and whose number is considered sufficient;”

135.
Primary education in Danish is offered in 47 Danish schools run by the Dansk Skoleforening for
Sydslesvig. These schools are formally private but function in the same manner as state schools and receive
from the Land the same amount per pupil as the “German” schools. In addition, publicly maintained schools of
all types in Schleswig-Holstein offer Danish as a foreign language. The Committee was informed that the cost
per pupil is higher in the Danish schools, especially in rural areas where the number of pupils per class is
lower, and the announced reduction of the budget will therefore seriously affect the otherwise well-established
network of Danish schools. Although there seems to be no legal entitlement, the present system seems to
meet the demands of the users of Danish. The Committee therefore considers that this obligation is at present
fulfilled.
“c i

to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of secondary education in the relevant regional or
minority languages; or

iii

to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or minority
languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

iv

to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils who,
or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered sufficient;”

136.
The school system run by the Dansk Skoleforening for Sydslesvig comprises secondary schools of all
types (Hauptschulen, Realschulen, one Gesamtschule and one Gymnasium). Apart from the subject of
German, the medium of instruction is generally Danish. Final examinations from these schools are recognised
in both Germany and Denmark. In addition to that, many publicly maintained secondary schools offer Danish as
a foreign language. Danish is also offered by some schools situated outside the traditional Danish area.
Although there seems to be no legal entitlement, the system seems to meet the demands of the users of
Danish. The Committee therefore considers that this obligation is fulfilled.
d

iii to provide, within technical and vocational education, for the teaching of the relevant
regional or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

137.
At part-time vocational schools, Danish is offered as one of the foreign languages as part of general
education courses. At the specialised Gymnasium, Danish is taught as an optional foreign language. The
Committee considers that this provision seems to be fulfilled.
e

ii
to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher education
subjects;

138.
Danish is offered as a field of study within Nordic Philology at Kiel University and as part of teacher
training at Flensburg University. The Committee considers that this undertaking is fulfilled.
f

ii

to offer such languages as subjects of adult and continuing education; or
iii
if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult education, to
favour and/or encourage the offering of such languages as subjects of adult and continuing
education;

35

139.
Danish language courses are offered by the adult education centres of Schleswig-Holstein and by
Jarplund Højskole in South Schleswig, a privately run but publicly funded institution. In 1997, 486 Danish
language courses were held at 99 adult education centres in Schleswig-Holstein. Among the Danish minority,
287 adult education courses in Danish were attended in 1998 by 2 952 participants in 39 places in the
Schleswig region. The Committee considers that this obligation is fulfilled.
g

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected by
the regional or minority language;

140.
The curricula for primary and lower secondary education in Schleswig-Holstein provide for teaching
about minorities, for example about the history of Danes in the region, their language and their specific culture.
The Committee considers that this undertaking is fulfilled.
h

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of
paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;

141.
The teachers of the private schools of the Danish minority are trained either in Germany or in Denmark.
In addition to the teacher training in Flensburg University, training is also provided by Danish minority
institutions in Germany or Danish institutions in Denmark, following the Bonn/Copenhagen Declarations of 1955
on trans-frontier promotion of minorities on the basis of the reciprocity principle. In order to ensure recruitment
of teachers belonging to the Danish minority who are able to teach all subjects included in the curriculum,
Section 5, para. 3 of the Federal Educational Grants Act grants members of the Danish minority unrestricted
subsidised educational advancement for attending a training institution located in Denmark if such training
cannot be received in Germany. The Committee considers that this undertaking is fulfilled.
i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken and
progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority
languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.

142.
The Education Offices of the Kreise/kreisfreie Städte (counties/county towns) are responsible for
supervising all the measures taken in primary schools, secondary modern schools and Realschulen. The
Gymnasien, comprehensive schools and vocational schools are supervised by the Ministry for Education,
Science, Research and Cultural Affairs. Legal supervision of the schools of the Danish minority also lies with
this Ministry. According to the information gathered by the Committee, there is no body specifically entrusted
with the monitoring of the measures taken and progress achieved as mentioned in paragraph i. Moreover, the
existing general supervisory bodies do not draw up any periodical reports which are made public. The
Committee considers that this undertaking is not fulfilled.

The Committee encourages the authorities to improve and better coordinate the supervision of
the measures taken and progress achieved in the field of teaching and to take the necessary
steps to provide for the drafting and publication of periodical reports.
2

With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the regional or
minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional
or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the regional or
minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.

143.
Courses of Danish are offered by schools in Kiel and in a number of other places in the Holstein region
which is outside the traditional Danish language area. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.

36

Article 9 – Judicial authorities
1

The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents using
the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to the
situation of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the
present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of justice:
b

in civil proceedings:
iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

144.
The codes of judicial procedures provide that legal documents shall be submitted in the original. If the
court does not understand the language in which a given legal document is drafted, it may, at its complete
discretion, order a translation to be produced (Section 142 (3) of the Code of Civil Procedure). On the basis of a
general reference to the Code of Civil Procedure, the other codes of procedure contain the same rule.
Documents and evidence drafted in Danish are allowed. The costs incurred for translation become part of the
litigation costs, the only exception being the social court, where payment is never required. The Committee
considers this undertaking to be fulfilled.
c

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
iii

to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

145.
Documents and evidence drafted in Danish in administrative proceedings are allowed. German
procedural law does not distinguish between documents drafted in German and those drawn up in any other
language. As a general rule, the loser of the case pays for the translation, the only exception being the social
court, where payment is never required. If the court hearing is attended by persons who do not know the
German language, an interpreter must be called in. The Committee considers this provision to be fulfilled.
2

The Parties undertake:
a

not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because they
are drafted in a regional or minority language;

146.
The validity of legal documents is not denied on the grounds that they have been drafted in Danish (see
paras. 144 and 145 above). The Committee considers this obligation to be fulfilled.
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
1 Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of
regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the situation
of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

v

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document in
these languages;

37

147.
According to Section 82a, para 2, of the Land Administration Act, the authorities may admit the
submission of applications, petitions, records, deeds or other documents in Danish. There seems, however, to
be no awareness of the existence of this legal entitlement or of this provision of the Charter on the part of the
Danish speakers or in the administration. The Land Administration Act, furthermore, provides for a general
possibility to submit documents in a “foreign language”, that is, in a language other than German. In the Initial
Report it is mentioned that use of this possibility is made for example by land survey offices and by the Land
Statistical Office. However, the Committee has been informed that the use of the languages within the
administration is very limited and that few practical measures have been introduced to improve the situation. A
promotional measure worth mentioning in this connection is that various administrations within the Land have
encouraged their employees to put signs on their doors announcing their command of minority languages, for
example Danish.
148.
The majority of the Danish community is bilingual and has never been encouraged to use Danish in
public matters. The fact that the existing provisions allowing for the submission of documents in a “foreign
language” also apply to the traditional regional or minority languages reflects a view prevailing among the
authorities that these languages are just foreign languages as opposed to German. The question of who will
support the costs generated by the use of a minority language is also left to the discretion of the administration.
Although there is a legal right to submit documents in Danish, the Committee must therefore conclude that the
undertaking is only formally fulfilled.
The Committee encourages the authorities to take the necessary measures in order to ensure
that Danish can be used in practice in public matters as a minority language. In this regard,
the Committee also encourages the authorities to provide for the necessary financial
arrangements.
4

With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them,
the Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
c

compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a
knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that
language is used.

149.
According to the Initial Report, wishes regarding such an appointment at the Land Government level will
be examined and the scope for complying with the request will be determined. The Committee has been made
aware of a wish among the Danish community that serious measures be taken to increase the number of
administrative staff with a command of Danish.
150.
The Committee has no reason to believe that there is a practice aimed at discouraging the appointment
of public service employees having a command of Danish in the area concerned. However, the Committee has
not received any information on a positive practice or a structural approach with regard to this undertaking.
Therefore, the information provided does not make it possible to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled. The
Committee nevertheless wishes to draw the attention of the German authorities to the fact that the Danish
community would like serious measures be taken to increase the number of administrative staff with a
command of Danish.

5

The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or minority
languages, at the request of those concerned.

151.
The Committee has been informed that under German law persons may assume the minority-language
version of their names by making a pertinent declaration before the Registrar. The Committee considers this
undertaking fulfilled.

38

Article 11 – Media
1

The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in
which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that
the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this field,
and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
b

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;

152.
The Committee has been informed that Radio Schleswig-Holstein disseminates short newsprogrammes in Danish on weekdays in the Schleswig region, and that, based on the Broadcasting Act, the
programming principles for private broadcasting state that “programmes shall help to … achieve protection and
promotion of minorities”. There is, however, no information as to the practical effects of the programming
principles, and the Committee has received complaints from users of Danish that there are practically no radio
programmes in Danish which are made and broadcast in the region. Since the Committee has received no
information as to whether Radio Schleswig-Holstein is public or private, the Committee is at present not in a
position to conclude that the undertaking is fulfilled.
c

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;

153.
Some television programmes are transmitted in Danish on public service broadcasting. However, the
Committee has received insufficient information to be able to conclude that the undertaking is fulfilled with
regard to private television programmes.
The Committee encourages the authorities to take positive measures aimed at promoting the
regular broadcasting of television programmes in Danish.

d

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audio-visual works
in the regional or minority languages;

154.
The legal basis relevant for this provision is the Land Broadcasting Act of 13 October 1999, Section 24,
para. 3, Section 53, para. 2, and Section 73, para 2. Financial support is given, especially within the audiovisual sector to non-profit-making cultural organisations and special funds are given for the promotion of
commissioned productions and co-productions in cinema, television and sound-broadcasting which are made
by producers who are native to, or resident in, Schleswig-Holstein. However, the origin or place of residence of
the producers does not necessarily have any connection with the language used in the productions. It is also
mentioned in the Initial Report that it is left to the Danish minority to decide on pertinent measures and to
implement them by using the funds available for cultural promotion by the Land and following the principle of
self-government.
155.
The Committee observes that there is a general scheme for financial support for audiovisual
productions, but there are no specific provisions for productions in Danish. Nor has the Committee received any
information about productions in Danish which have been supported through the general scheme.
156.

The Committee has therefore concluded that this obligation is not fulfilled.
e

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the publication of newspaper articles in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;

157.
There is one bilingual German-Danish newspaper available for the Danish minority. The Committee has
been informed that the situation is difficult because this newspaper is relatively expensive and not widely read
by the Danish-speakers. The Committee has been informed that the German authorities indirectly support
written media through the financial assistance provided to the Danish organisations. The Committee therefore
considers this undertaking to be fulfilled.
39

f

ii

to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audio-visual productions in the
regional or minority languages;

158.
Funding for audiovisual productions in Danish may be provided via the funds generally available for nonprofit-making cultural organisations, or via the funds reserved for the promotion of commissioned productions
and co-productions in cinema, television and sound-broadcasting which are made by producers native to, or
resident in, Schleswig-Holstein. However, as mentioned earlier, there is no indication that the scheme is used
to promote productions in Danish. The Committee considers this undertaking formally fulfilled and would
welcome examples of cases where financial assistance has been provided to works in Danish.
2

The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television broadcasts
from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or
minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from
neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure that no restrictions
will be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of information in the written press
in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of
the above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to
such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a
democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the
prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the
reputation or rights of others, for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for
maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.

159.
In the area of the Danish minority in the Schleswig region of the Land there are good possibilities of
receiving radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring Denmark. The Committee therefore considers that
this obligation is fulfilled.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
1

With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural centres,
museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production,
vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries, including inter alia the
use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are
used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this
field:
c

to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages by
aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;

160.
The institutions of the Danish minority, such as Sydslesvigsk Forening (The Association for Southern
Schleswig) and the Dansk Centralbibliotek (The Danish Central Library), receive funds provided by the Land of
Schleswig-Holstein for translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling into, or in, the Danish language.
Thus the Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
d

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of various
kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of regional or
minority languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for which they
provide backing;

161.
In the Initial Report it is stated that promotional funds from the Land Government help the institutions of
the Danish minority to ensure that the knowledge and use of the Danish language and culture are appropriately
incorporated in their cultural activities. This undertaking can therefore be considered as fulfilled.

40

e

to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural
activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of the regional or minority
language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest of the population;

162.
Activities regarding the Danish culture and language are mostly offered by Danish minority
organisations within the framework of the cultural autonomy. These activities, including payroll costs, are partly
supported with public funds of Schleswig-Holstein. The full-time staff employed within the Danish cultural
activities are bilingual in Danish and German. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
f

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or minority
language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

163.
The organisations of the Danish minority are regularly invited to participate in arranging the biannual
Schleswig-Holstein Tag. As a part of the EXPO 2000 in Hanover, Sydslesvigsk Forening contributed to the
Kulturen, Sprachen, Minderheiten project, and the Danish library also took part in a cultural programme. The
Danish minority is also regularly invited to take part in local cultural events, such as town festivals and town
anniversaries. The Committee therefore considers this undertaking fulfilled.
g

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for collecting,
keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the regional or minority
languages;

164.
Collecting, keeping a copy of and publishing works produced in Danish is the responsibility of the
Dansk Centralbibliotek, which is at least partly funded by the authorities. The Committee considers this
undertaking fulfilled.
2

In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are traditionally
used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to
allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in accordance with the
preceding paragraph.

165.
According to the Initial Report, cultural activities in keeping with the framework of the law in force are
not subject to any restrictions. However, outside the Danish language area, the provision of Danish cultural
activities and facilities is left to the decision of the autonomous cultural bodies, especially the Danish minority
organisations. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
3

The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for
regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.

166.
The Committee is aware that Schleswig-Holstein has taken measures to include Danish in the
presentation of the culture of the Land abroad. However, according to the information received by the
Committee, the federal authorities, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, do not make any special provision
for Danish culture. Thus the Committee considers this undertaking partly fulfilled.
Article 13 – Economic and social life
1

With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole country:
a

to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without justifiable
reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to economic or
social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical documents such as
instructions for the use of products or installations;

167.
The established law of the Federal Republic of Germany is in compliance with the obligation under
subpara. a. The Committee therefore considers this undertaking fulfilled.

41

c

to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority languages in
connection with economic or social activities;

168.
The Committee has received no information which enables it to judge whether or not this obligation is
fulfilled.
d

to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by means other
than those specified in the above sub-paragraphs.

169.
The promotion of the use of the Danish language in the private sphere, especially in mixed marriages,
and within the Danish institutions and organisations is taken up in the Initial Report. The existence of brochures
including information about the language situation of the Danish-speakers and about the implications of the
Charter for the linguistic rights of the speakers of regional or minority languages (“Sprache ist Vielfalt”) was
brought to the attention of the Committee. The Committee therefore considers this undertaking fulfilled.
2

With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the public
authorities are competent, within the territory in which the regional or minority languages are used,
and as far as this is reasonably possible:
c

to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and hostels offer the
possibility of receiving and treating in their own language persons using a regional or minority
language who are in need of care on grounds of ill-health, old age or for other reasons;

170.
According to the Initial Report, staff members speaking Danish are available in the specialised clinics of
the Land. However, direct nursing and other care of persons in need of nursing and care is not a public-sector
responsibility but carried out mostly by private-sector and free non-profit-making institutions, which, it is
claimed, makes it impossible to lay down any requirements concerning the use of Danish. The authorities also
justify this state of affairs by mentioning that there are no language barriers in oral communication because the
members of the Danish minority are bilingual. The Committee has been informed that two private hospitals in
Flensburg offer care facilities in Danish, while in other care institutions, such facilities are not always available.
However, in the view of the Committee a systematic approach is necessary to fulfil the undertaking, which
accordingly cannot be considered as fulfilled.
The Committee encourages the authorities to take the necessary measures to increase and
make more systematic the possibility for the persons concerned to be received and treated in
Danish in social care facilities. This should include a bilingual human resources policy.
Article 14 – Transfrontier exchanges
The Parties undertake:
a

to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the States in which the
same language is used in identical or similar form, or if necessary to seek to conclude such
agreements, in such a way as to foster contacts between the users of the same language in the
States concerned in the fields of culture, education, information, vocational training and permanent
education;

171.
The provision is complied with by the practical implementation of the Bonn/Copenhagen Declarations of
1955. The undertaking is fulfilled.
b

for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or promote co-operation across
borders, in particular between regional or local authorities in whose territory the same language is
used in identical or similar form.

42

172.
Co-operation between users of Danish is facilitated by funding made available by the Ministry for Rural
Areas, Town and Country Planning, Agriculture and Tourism to Danish consultants who serve as links between
farmers of the Danish minority in Schleswig-Holstein and those in Denmark. The Kreise of Nordfriesland and
Schleswig-Flensburg and Flensburg City also jointly promote trans-border cultural projects and events. This is
in keeping with an agreement concluded in 1997 between the territorial authorities in question. Their priority
activities also include education. In 2000, a further training project of the Police Directorate of SchleswigHolstein Nord was carried out in conjunction with Denmark. The project included language courses and joint
seminars on the culture and history on either side of the border. The Committee therefore considers this
undertaking fulfilled.
2.3.2. North Frisian in the North Frisian language area in Schleswig-Holstein
Article 8 – Education
1

With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used,
according to the situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the
official language(s) of the State:
a

i

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or

iii to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those pupils
whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient; or
iv if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school education,
to favour and/or encourage the application of the measures referred to under i to iii
above;
173.
The two sub-paragraphs chosen by Germany under this article should normally be exclusive
alternatives, however the Committee notes that in the German context pre-school education, though publicly
financed, is normally provided by private bodies. If no such facilities are offered by private institutions, there is
an obligation on the authorities to offer the necessary services through its own bodies. At present, Frisian is
used in varying degrees in 28 nursery schools in the North Frisian area. While Frisian activities on the island of
Föhr focus on consolidating and improving the children's existing knowledge of the language, the work related to
Frisian in all other areas of Nordfriesland concentrates on learning Frisian as a second language since the
majority of families in those communities no longer use Frisian as their common language. Most nursery
schools offer Frisian activities one or two days per week. Participation in Frisian instruction is voluntary.
According to the information received by the Committee, there is still an evident lack of resources which
threatens the presence of Frisian in pre-schools. The authorities favour and encourage the availability in and of
Frisian in pre-school but they have not instituted any legal schemes that guarantee the implementation of the
provisions taken under Art. 8 (1)(a)(iii). The Committee thus considers this undertaking partly fulfilled.
The Committee encourages the establishment of a legal framework and the allocation of adequate
resources to secure the implementation of this undertaking.
b

i

to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority languages;
or
ii to make available a substantial part of primary education in the relevant regional or
minority languages; or
iii to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
iv to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils
whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient;

43

174.
Frisian is taught as a subject at a number of publicly maintained schools in the North Frisian language
area and in many schools of the Danish minority. This instruction is usually offered as a voluntary optionalsubject course for the 3rd and 4th grades, competing with foreign-language instruction, mainly English. With the
exception of the Lindholm Primary School, where Frisian is used as a medium of instruction from 1st to 9th
grade, instruction of Frisian is usually only offered in the form of (voluntary) teaching as a second language. The
Committee has been informed that the interest for Frisian instruction has risen among young parents but most
of the Frisian school initiatives still depend on the good will and interest on the part of the teachers and school
leaders and the motivation of the parents. The Committee was presented with evidence that acknowledges that
North Frisian is taught in primary education. However, on the basis of the information received the Committee
has the impression that the teaching of Frisian is not an integral part of the curriculum. Therefore, this
undertaking cannot be considered fulfilled.
The Committee encourages the authorities to make the teaching of North Frisian an integral part of the
curriculum at least to those pupils whose families so request .

c

i

to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of secondary education in the relevant regional
or minority languages; or

iii to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
iv to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils
who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered sufficient;
175.
Secondary schools offer some teaching of Frisian. In Lindholm and Risum secondary modern schools,
Frisian instruction is mandatory from 1st to 9th grade. However the Realschulen in the Frisian language area do
not offer any Frisian instruction at all and the Gymnasien provide such courses only in their upper grades. The
Committee has no information about whether any requests have been made in the Realschulen and in lower
parts of the Gymnasium. As far as the Committee is aware, there are no regulations ensuring that education in
or of North Frisian will be available to those families who so wish. The Committee therefore concludes that the
undertaking is not fulfilled.
The Committee encourages the establishment of a legal framework and the allocation of adequate
resources to secure the implementation of this undertaking.
e

ii

to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher education
subjects;

176.
Frisian is offered as a subject at Kiel University and Flensburg University as part of a supplementary
course for teacher-training. Participation in a course in Frisian (or Low German) is also one of the requirements
for admission to examinations in the subject “German”. Frisian can be studied at Kiel University as a major or
minor subject for a Master’s degree. At the North Frisian Dictionary Institute at Kiel University, scholarly
research on North Frisian has been carried out since 1978. At Flensburg University, there is a part-time
professorship and other lectureships covering 15 hours per week per semester. At Kiel University, there is a
grade C3 professorship covering eight hours per week per semester.
177.
According to the information gathered by the Committee, university-level study of Frisian is at risk
because of recent developments in this field. The existing post of one research assistant will be abolished after
the retirement of the person presently occupying the post, and the presently vacant chair at Flensburg
University has not been filled. Since the facilities offered at Kiel and Flensburg Universities are the only ones for
the study of North Frisian as a university subject, the loss of these facilities would jeopardize efforts to maintain
and revitalize the North Frisian language. The Committee considers that the undertaking is at present fulfilled.

44

The authorities are encouraged to ensure that sufficient university-level study of Frisian is
preserved.
f

iii if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult education, to
favour and/or encourage the offering of such languages as subjects of adult and
continuing education;

178.
In Schleswig-Holstein, the Adult Education Centres in the Kreis of Nordfriesland offer courses in the
Frisian language. Language courses for adults are also provided by the North Frisian Institute in Bredstedt and
by other Frisian organisations, which are partly subsidised by the Land. The Committee considers this
undertaking fulfilled.
g

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is
reflected by the regional or minority language;

179.
In the field of education in the Länder, promoting the knowledge of the history and the culture reflected
by the regional or minority languages is part of the curricula of all schools. The state institutions for political
education also contribute to the imparting of such knowledge in and outside schools. The Committee considers
this undertaking fulfilled.
h

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of
paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;

180.
At Kiel University, an offer of Frisian as a subject is included in a supplementary course of studies for
teacher training for all school types. The Nordfriesland Supervisory School Authority co-ordinates and supports
the publication and dissemination of teachers’ support materials for Frisian lessons. It also supports the Frisian
‘learning workshop’ where educational materials, Frisian translations of children’s books, audio-visual media
etc. are available for pupils and for the follow-up training of teachers. Meetings of Frisian teachers, instituted
and organised by the Institute for Practical and Theoretical School Matters are used for presenting and
disseminating the newly developed aids and materials. The Committee is nevertheless aware of the lack of
qualified teachers at all levels of education, especially in pre-school and primary school. Although the
authorities have taken steps to ensure some teacher training, the Committee is of the opinion that additional
efforts are needed. The undertaking is partly fulfilled.
The Committee encourages the authorities to ensure that appropriate facilities for teacher training are in
place to meet the needs for education in North Frisian.
i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken and
progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority
languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.

181.
The supervisory school authorities of the Kreise or Kreisfreie Städte have the responsibility of
monitoring the measures taken and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or
minority languages, for instance North Frisian. The Ministry for Education, Science, Research and Cultural
Affairs of Schleswig-Holstein is responsible for the supervision of the Gymnasien and comprehensive schools.
However, there is no body specifically responsible for monitoring the measures taken and progress achieved in
establishing or developing the teaching of North Frisian. In addition, no periodic reports describing the state of
affairs of language maintenance in education of North Frisian have so far been made public. The Committee
considers this undertaking not fulfilled.
The Committee encourages the authorities to improve and better coordinate the supervision of the
measures taken and progress achieved in the field of teaching and to take the necessary steps to
provide for the drafting and publication of periodical reports.

45

2

With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the regional or
minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional
or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the regional or
minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.

182.
The Committee is aware that North Frisian is taught at university level outside the traditional area of its
use. The Committee furthermore notes that article 5 paragraph 3 of the Basic Law allows the teaching of North
Frisian outside the language area. However, the Committee has received no information indicating that outside
the traditional area of its use North Frisian can be taught at levels other than the university one. The Committee
therefore concludes that the undertaking is partly fulfilled.
Article 9 – Judicial authorities
1

The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents
using the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to
the situation of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded
by the present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of
justice:
b

in civil proceedings:
iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

c

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

183.
The codes of judicial procedures provide that legal documents shall be submitted in the original. If the
court does not understand the language in which a given legal document is drafted, it may, at its complete
discretion, order a translation to be produced (Section 142 (3) of the Code of Civil Procedure). On the basis of a
general reference to the Code of Civil Procedure, the other codes of procedure contain the same rule. Thus,
documents and evidence drafted in Frisian are allowed. The costs incurred for translation become part of the
litigation costs, the only exception being the social court, where payment is never required. The Committee
considers this undertaking fulfilled.
2

The Parties undertake:
a

not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because they
are drafted in a regional or minority language; or

184.
The validity of legal documents is not denied on the grounds that they have been drafted in North
Frisian. The Committee considers the undertaking fulfilled.
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
1

Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of
regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the
situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

v

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document in
these languages;

46

185.
The submission of applications, petitions, records, deeds or other documents in North Frisian is
allegedly covered by Section 82 a, paragraph 2, of the Schleswig-Holstein Land Administration Act which
provides for a general possibility to submit documents in a “foreign language”, that is, in a language other than
German. The Committee has been informed that the use of the Frisian languages in administration is virtually
non-existent. The majority of the North Frisian community is bilingual but has been traditionally discouraged
from using North Frisian vis-à-vis administrative authorities and public services. Also, the question of who will
support the costs generated by the use of a minority language is left at the discretion of the administration. The
information received by the Committee indicates that the possibility to validly submit documents in North
Frisian is rarely used in practice. The Committee does not know if the reason for this is that few persons can
write North Frisian or because conditions for using this possibility are not favourable enough.
186.
On the basis of the assumption that foreign language means any language other than German, the
Committee concludes that this undertaking is formally fulfilled. In the Committee's view, efforts should be made
with a view to creating the conditions encouraging users of North Frisian to use their language before the
administrative authorities.
4

With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them,
the Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
c.

compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a
knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that
language is used.

187.
According to the Initial Report, requests regarding such an appointment at the Land Government level
will be examined and the scope for complying with the request will be determined. As a preparation for
implementing this obligation, an announcement to this effect was made at the conference of Personnel Officers
in June 1999.
188.
While acknowledging the positive approach of the authorities, the Committee has not received any
information on positive practice or a structural approach with regard to this undertaking. Therefore, the
information provided does not make it possible to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
5

The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or minority
languages, at the request of those concerned.

189.
The Committee has been informed that under German law persons may assume the minority-language
version of their names by making a pertinent declaration before the Registrar. The Committee considers the
undertaking fulfilled.
Article 11 – Media
1

The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories
in which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent
that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this
field, and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
b

ii. to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;

190.
Once a month, a 30-minute programme of Radio Friislon is broadcast by Offener Kanal Westküste. At
irregular intervals, Schleswig-Holstein Radio airs a one-hour special single–subject broadcast in the North
Frisian language. Open channels alone do not provide an adequate response to the lack of media broadcasting
in Frisian. In particular, the Committee has been informed that the lack of funding greatly hampers the use of
the open channels.
191.
It is obvious that very little broadcasting time is available in North Frisian. The Committee is aware of
the fact that the authorities are conscious of the situation and that they intend to facilitate broadcasting in North
Frisian.
47

192.

The Committee nevertheless considers that the obligation is not yet fulfilled.
c

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the regional
or minority languages on a regular basis;

193.
There are no television programmes in North Frisian on a regular basis. The Schleswig-HolsteinMagazin occasionally includes broadcasts on the Frisian tradition and culture, but even these programmes are
usually not broadcast in Frisian. Accordingly, the Committee does not consider this undertaking fulfilled.

The Committee encourages the authorities to take measures in order to facilitate broadcasting in radio
and television in North Frisian.
d

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in the regional or minority languages;

194.
As stated in the Initial Report, it is left to the linguistic minorities, on the basis of the cultural
promotion by the Land to decide on pertinent measures and to implement these within the limits of the overall
funds available. The Committee is aware of support schemes for productions of audio and audio-visual materials
directed towards non-profit-making organisations. These schemes seem to be of a general nature and not
specifically directed towards productions in North Frisian. The Committee, however, is aware of three radiobroadcasting projects which have received support. It therefore concludes that this undertaking is partly fulfilled.

The Committee encourages the authorities to take measures to facilitate the production and distribution
of audio-visual works.
e

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the publication of newspaper articles in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;

195.
There are four daily newspapers published in the North Frisian speech area which carry journalistic
texts in North Frisian once a month. In addition, North Frisian items are published at irregular intervals in one
daily, one weekly and two monthly papers. However, the Committee would welcome further information on how
the authorities are encouraging or facilitating the publication of newspaper articles in North Frisian on a regular
basis. The Committee is not in a position to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
f

ii

to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audio-visual productions in the
regional or minority languages;

196.
According to the Initial Report, direct financial assistance by the State is problematic, due to the
freedom of the media. Financial support is given especially within the audio-visual sector to non-profit-making
cultural organisations, and special funds are given for the promotion of commissioned productions and coproductions in the cinema sector, television and sound-broadcasting which are made by producers who are
native to, or resident in, Schleswig-Holstein. The Committee considers this undertaking formally fulfilled and
would welcome examples of cases where financial assistance has been provided to works in North Frisian.

48

2

The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television broadcasts
from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or
minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from
neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure that no restrictions
will be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of information in the written press
in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of
the above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to
such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a
democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the
prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the
reputation or rights of others, for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for
maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.

197.
The Basic Law guarantees freedom of information, including the free reception of radio and television
broadcasts from the neighbouring countries. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
1

With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural
centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film
production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries,
including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have
power or play a role in this field:
a

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority languages
and foster the different means of access to works produced in these languages;

198.
The Schleswig-Holstein Land promotes various types of expression and initiative specific to Frisian by
funding, at least partly, bodies like the North Frisian Institute, the Friesenstiftung, the Friesenrat and a number
of local Frisian associations which engage in diverse cultural work among the Frisians. The Frisian Institute has
a specialised library and archives and offers seminars, courses, workshops and lectures. The Friesenrat and
the other Frisian associations supported by the State operate various initiatives and programmes which foster
access to works produced in Frisian. The Committee thus considers this undertaking fulfilled.
b

to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in regional or
minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation
and subtitling activities;

199.
Translation, post-synchronisation and dubbing of works in Frisian into other languages can be financed
by promotional funds of Schleswig-Holstein. Although not very many works are produced in Frisian, the
mechanism for making such works available in other languages exists. The Committee therefore concludes that
the undertaking is fulfilled.
c

to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages by
aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;

200.
Translation, post-synchronisation and dubbing of works into Frisian can be financed by promotional and
project funds of Schleswig-Holstein and by the annual interest earnings of the Friesenstiftung. Although the
Committee has no information on the number of works being translated into Frisian, it considers the
undertaking fulfilled.
d

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of
various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of
regional or minority languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for
which they provide backing;

49

201.
According to the Initial Report, the promotional funds from the Land go to the Frisian institutions and/or
appointed bodies for the Frisian Cultural self-management, ensuring in this way that the provision in question is
fulfilled. The Land also allocates project funds on a case-by-case basis. Representatives of speakers of North
Frisian have pointed to the fact that a mere project-funding approach is not conducive to effectiveness over the
longer term. Although this reservation is justified, the Committee nevertheless considers the undertaking
fulfilled.
e

to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting
cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of the regional or
minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest of the population;

202.
The Schleswig-Holstein Land subsidises the institutions and associations of the North Frisian ethnic
group, which, in turn, organise cultural activities. Germany also mentions in its report that Land-provided
subsidies can also include funds for covering personnel expenses. There appears to be economic support for
personnel on a temporary basis but support on a long term basis seems to be lacking.
203.
The Committee takes it for granted that there are Frisian-speaking staff working in Frisian cultural
organisations. However, concerning other institutions which may organise or support cultural activities in the
Frisian language area the Committee has no evidence of personnel with Frisian language capacity.
204.

Therefore the Committee considers this undertaking partly fulfilled.
f

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or
minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

205.
The North Frisian organisations and associations are regularly invited to arrange and organise such
activities. The Frisian library was also invited to participate in the EXPO 2000 in Hanover. The Committee
considers this undertaking fulfilled.
g

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for collecting,
keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the regional or minority
languages;

206.
The library and archives of the North Frisian Institute are responsible for the collection, storage and
publication of works produced in North Frisian. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
h

if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and terminological research
services, particularly with a view to maintaining and developing appropriate administrative,
commercial, economic, social, technical or legal terminology in each regional or minority
language.

207.
The North Frisian Dictionary Institute of Kiel University has produced nine dictionaries and glossaries in
several North Frisian dialects based on the present day and 19th century vocabulary. The Committee considers
this undertaking fulfilled.
2

In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are traditionally
used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to
allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in accordance with the
preceding paragraph.

208.
Cultural North Frisian activities can be offered outside the Frisian language area if there is a demand for
it. Participation in the Schleswig-Holstein-Tag held in varying places of the Land encourages participation from
Nordfriesland. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
3

The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for
regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.

50

209.
The Committee is aware that Schleswig-Holstein supports the Section North of a branch of the
Inter-Frisian Council (a joint umbrella organization charged inter alia with presenting the Frisian culture and
maintaining links amongst Frisians). However, according to the information received by the Committee, the
federal authorities, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, do not make any special provision for North Frisian
culture. Thus the Committee considers this undertaking partly fulfilled.
Article 13 – Economic and social life
1

With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole country:
a

to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without justifiable
reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to economic or
social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical documents such as
instructions for the use of products or installations;

210.
The established laws of the Federal Republic of Germany are in compliance with undertaking (a). The
obligation incurred under this provision is therefore fulfilled for North Frisian.
c

to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority languages in
connection with economic or social activities;

211.
The Committee has received no information which enables it to judge whether or not this obligation is
fulfilled.
d

to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by means other
than those specified in the above sub-paragraphs.

212.
Efforts are especially encouraged among the general public to keep North Frisian alive by promoting the
use of Frisian in families. For this purpose, the Friesenrat has published a brochure with information about
Frisian in schools and preschools directed to parents (“Zwei sind mehr als Eine”). The North Frisian Institut has
published another brochure about the importance of minority languages and bilingualism (“Sprachenland
Nordfriesland”). A more comprehensive information booklet (Kulturen – Sprachen – Minderheiten”) was
published in connection with EXPO 2000 in Hanover, including information about bringing up children in Frisian
and German. The existence of brochures with information about the language situation of the Frisian-speakers
and about the implications of the Charter for the linguistic rights of the speakers of regional or minority
languages (“Sprache ist Vielfalt”) is likely to encourage the use of North Frisian among the general public. The
Committee believes that this work also has an effect in the economic and social sphere and therefore considers
the obligation fulfilled.
Article 14 – Transfrontier exchanges
The Parties undertake:
a

to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the States in
which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if necessary to seek to
conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster contacts between the users of the
same language in the States concerned in the fields of culture, education, information,
vocational training and permanent education;

213.
To the knowledge of the Committee, no bilateral or international agreements exist for North Frisian and
the Committee has not been informed of any initiatives to develop any such agreements. The Committee
therefore considers that the undertaking is not fulfilled.
214.
The Committee, however, is aware of the cross-border co-operation developed within the Inter-Frisian
Council. This would comply with the undertaking in option (b) of Art. 14, which, however, has not been chosen
by the Federal Republic of Germany for North Frisian.

51

2.3.3. Sater Frisian in the Sater Frisian language area in Lower Saxony
Article 8 – Education
1

With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used,
according to the situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the
official language(s) of the State:
a

i

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or

iii

to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those pupils whose
families so request and whose number is considered sufficient; or

iv if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school education,
to favour and/or encourage the application of the measures referred to under i to iii
above;
215.
In the Sater Frisian language area, Saterland Frisian is spoken, if the parents so wish, for one hour per
week with the children attending the five nursery schools in Saterland Municipality. In 2000, 130 parents availed
themselves of this opportunity. Frisian activities in the nursery schools are usually directed by voluntary
helpers. According to the information gathered by the Committee, there is an urgent need for “institutionalising”
the Sater Frisian language activities as a regular part of pre-school offerings in the Saterland area due to the
very endangered position of the language. This implies positive action to implement this undertaking. The
Committee does not consider this undertaking fulfilled.
The Committee encourages the establishment of a legal framework and the allocation of adequate
resources to secure the implementation of this undertaking.
e

ii

to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher education
subjects;

216.
According to the information received by the Committee, Sater Frisian is not offered as a university and
higher education subject at any university. The Committee is aware of some research in Sater Frisian being
carried out at Oldenburg and Göttingen Universities. Since there are no facilities for studying the language, the
Committee does not consider this undertaking fulfilled.
The Committee encourages the authorities to ensure that research into the language is carried out and
that strategies for its preservation are developed, including facilities to study the language.
f

iii if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult education, to
favour and/or encourage the offering of such languages as subjects of adult and
continuing education;

217.
As stated in the initial periodical report, the course “Speak and read Saterland Frisian” is offered once a
year by the Saterland Catholic Educational Association. The course covers ten 2-hour evening classes. The
Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
g

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is
reflected by the regional or minority language;

52

218.
Under the Framework Curriculum of Lower Saxony, the history and culture reflected in the Sater Frisian
language can be offered in class by including regional aspects when studying the subjects “German” and
“Music” and when taking part in Frisian instruction. The Committee has received no information about a
structural approach to this undertaking and can therefore not conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken and
progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority
languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.

219.
According to the Initial Report, a Working Group established in 1997, consisting of representatives from
the Landschaften and Landschaftsverbände, the Niedersächsischer Heimatbund and the schools offices, has
the responsibility of monitoring the implementation of the obligations under the Charter which have been
accepted by the Land. The preparation and regular publication of the report regarding the provisions on
education is the task of the Ministry of Education and Cultural Affairs of Lower Saxony. However, there is no
body specifically responsible for monitoring the measures taken and progress achieved in establishing or
developing the teaching of Sater Frisian. In addition, no periodic reports describing the state of affairs of
language maintenance in education of Sater Frisian have so far been made public. The Committee considers
that this undertaking is not fulfilled.
The Committee encourages the authorities to establish a supervisory body designed to monitor the
measures taken in developing education in the Sater Frisian and to draw up periodic reports.
Article 9 – Judicial authorities
1

The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents
using the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to
the situation of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded
by the present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of
justice:
b

in civil proceedings:
iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

c

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

220.
The codes of judicial procedures provide that legal documents shall be submitted in the original. If the
court does not understand the language in which a given legal document is drafted, it may, at its complete
discretion, order a translation to be produced (Section 142 (3) of the Code of Civil Procedure). On the basis of a
general reference to the Code of Civil Procedure, the other codes of procedure contain the same rule.
Documents and evidence drafted in Sater Frisian are thus allowed. The costs incurred for translation become
part of the litigation costs, the only exception being the social court, where payment is never required. The
Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
2

The Parties undertake:
a

not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because they
are drafted in a regional or minority language; or

53

221.
The validity of legal documents is not denied on the grounds that they have been drafted in Sater
Frisian. The Committee considers the undertaking fulfilled.
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
1

Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of
regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the
situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

v

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document in
these languages.

222.
According to the Initial Report, this possibility exists, but no use has so far been made of it. The
Committee considers this undertaking only formally fulfilled and emphasizes that decided efforts should be
made in order to create the conditions encouraging users of Sater Frisian to use their language before the
administrative authorities.
c

to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in a regional or minority
language.

223.
The Committee notes that the initial report implies that this provision has become directly applicable in
relation to Sater Frisian following the entry into force of the Charter. However, in the Initial Report it is stated
that no use has been made of this possibility. The Committee considers that in order to make it clear to the
speakers of Sater Frisian that they may submit applications in this language and to ensure that the
administration is aware of this, it would be advisable that corresponding instructions (or, when necessary,
formal legal rules) are issued to the authorities and made public. The Committee considers that this
undertaking is only formally fulfilled.
2

In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who
are users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below,
the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
a

the use of regional or minority languages within the framework of the regional or local
authority;

224.
In Saterland Municipality, the availability of bilingual administrative staff provides for the possibility to
use this language in administrative matters. Staff members indicate their proficiency in Sater Frisian on their
office doorplates. It is possible to have civil marriage ceremonies in Sater Frisian and other official acts may
also be performed in the Sater Frisian language. The local government also supports publications in Sater
Frisian by guaranteeing a minimum number of copies. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
b

the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written
applications in these languages;

225.
In Saterland Municipality, citizens may present their requests in Sater Frisian and receive replies in the
same language. Written applications may be submitted in Sater Frisian, According to the Initial Report, no use
has so far been made of this possibility. The Committee considers, however, that this undertaking is formally
fulfilled.
c

the publication by regional authorities of their official documents also in the relevant
regional or minority languages;

226.
As stated in the Initial Report, the Saterland Municipality, which is the traditional Sater Frisian
language area, represents the local government level. The information pertinent to this provision is the one under
(d). In the Initial Report under this obligation, the information relates only to local authorities. The Committee
has received no information regarding the regional authorities and therefore cannot conclude that the
undertaking is fulfilled.
54

d

the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in the relevant regional
or minority languages;

227.
So far, there have been no publications in Sater Frisian. However, according to the Initial Report,
preparations are underway with regard to short official communications in Sater Frisian, such as notices on the
bulletin boards, especially as regards standard texts which are later to be published as bilingual notices. The
undertaking is fulfilled.
e

the use by regional authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

228.
As stated in the Initial Report, the Saterland Municipality, which is the traditional Sater Frisian
language area, represents the local government level. The information pertinent to this provision is the one under
(f). In the Initial Report under this obligation, the information relates only to local authorities. The Committee has
received no information regarding the regional authorities and can therefore not conclude that the undertaking is
fulfilled.
f

the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their assemblies,
without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

229.
Although the use of Sater Frisian in assemblies is formally allowed, local council members do not,
according to the Initial Report, make use of it. The Committee considers this undertaking only formally fulfilled.
4

With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them,
the Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
a

translation or interpretation as may be required;

230.
The facilities and staff required for the purpose are available in Saterland Municipality. The Committee
therefore considers this undertaking fulfilled.
c

compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a
knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that
language is used.

231.
The Committee is aware that there are people in the local administration with a command of Sater
Frisian. However, the Committee has not been informed of any deployment policy adopted regarding this
undertaking. The Committee is therefore not in a position to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
5

The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or minority
languages, at the request of those concerned.

232.
The Committee has been informed that under German law persons may assume the minority-language
version of their names by making a pertinent declaration before the Registrar. The Committee considers the
undertaking fulfilled.
Article 11 – Media
1

The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories
in which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent
that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this
field, and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
b

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the regional
or minority languages on a regular basis;

55

233.
The Broadcasting Act of Lower Saxony lays down that the programmes of private broadcasters must
also make appropriate allowance for the cultural diversity of the regions and for the regional languages spoken
in Lower Saxony. Despite the Broadcasting Act, there are no private radio programmes broadcast on a regular
basis in Sater Frisian. The Committee considers that this option chosen by Germany should lead to practical
results. Therefore, this undertaking is only formally fulfilled.
The Committee encourages the authorities to consider measures aimed at encouraging and/or
facilitating the broadcasting of radio programmes in Sater Frisian on a regular basis.
c

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the regional
or minority languages on a regular basis;

234.
The Broadcasting Act of Lower Saxony lays down that the programmes of private broadcasters must
also make appropriate allowance for the cultural diversity of the regions and for the regional languages spoken
in Lower Saxony. Despite the Broadcasting Act, there is no broadcasting on a regular basis. The Committee
considers that over a longer period of time this option chosen by Germany should have practical results and
would ask the authorities for information as to how this can be achieved. Therefore, the undertaking is only
formally fulfilled.
The Committee encourages the authorities to consider measures aimed at encouraging and/or
facilitating the broadcasting of television programmes in Sater Frisian on a regular basis.
d

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in the regional or minority languages;

235.
Germany points out in the initial periodical report that the Land Broadcasting Act for private
broadcasting is also designed to motivate the production and dissemination of audio and audio visual works in
the Sater Frisian language. It is also mentioned that the Land of Lower Saxony grants subsidies towards the
production costs in view of supporting such productions within the framework of cultural promotion. However,
the Committee has not been made aware of any special measures designed to encourage or facilitate
production of such works in Sater Frisian. The Committee has not been informed of any audio or audiovisual
works in Sater Frisian which have received support through these general schemes. The Committee considers
this undertaking formally fulfilled and would welcome examples of cases where financial assistance has been
provided for works in Sater Frisian.
e

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the publication of newspaper articles in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;

236.
One daily paper publishes articles in Sater Frisian in its Saturday issue. Some newspapers are
reported to be prepared to publish such articles but point out that only a few people are able to read Sater
Frisian. The Committee would welcome further information on how the authorities are encouraging or facilitating
the publication of newspapers articles in Sater Frisian on a regular basis. The Committee is therefore not in a
position to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
f

ii

to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions in the
regional or minority languages;

237.
According to the Initial Report, the general programming principles which are valid in the Land form the
basis for the production and dissemination of audio and audio-visual work in the Saterland Frisian language.
According to the initial report, the Land of Lower Saxony supports productions within the framework of cultural
promotion and the committee understands that this financial assistance is also available for audiovisual
productions in Sater Frisian. The Committee considers this undertaking formally fulfilled and would welcome
examples of cases where financial assistance has been provided to works in Sater Frisian.

56

2

The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a
regional or minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure
that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of
information in the written press in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or
minority language. The exercise of the above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties
and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as
are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national
security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for
preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the authority
and impartiality of the judiciary.

238.
The Basic Law guarantees freedom of information, including the reception of radio and television
programmes from the neighbouring countries. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
3 The Parties undertake to ensure that the interests of the users of regional or minority languages
are represented or taken into account within such bodies as may be established in accordance
with the law with responsibility for guaranteeing the freedom and pluralism of the media.
239.
The Committee has not received any information regarding this undertaking and can therefore not
conclude that it is fulfilled.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
1

With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural
centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film
production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries,
including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent,
have power or play a role in this field:
a

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority languages
and foster the different means of access to works produced in these languages;

240.
The Land of Lower Saxony promotes Saterland Frisian literature through the general promotion of
production, distribution and reception of literature in the Land. In addition, Land-subsidised institutions such as
the Literature Council and the Literature Offices are encouraged to include Sater Frisian in their activities. The
cultural activities of the Seelter Buund, the association for the preservation of the Saterland local and regional
traditions, are sometimes subsidised by the Land. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
b

to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in regional or
minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation
and subtitling activities;

c

to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages by
aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;

241.
Within the framework of general literature promotion, translators are allocated funds for translating
literary works. These funds are also available for translations to and from Sater Frisian. The Workshop for Low
German and Sater Frisian at Oldenburg University has developed a Sater Frisian dictionary, and it also offers
translation services. Although the Committee has not been informed of any concrete works which have
benefited from these schemes, the Committee considers the undertaking fulfilled.

57

d

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of
various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of
regional or minority languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for
which they provide backing;

242.
The Committee has been informed of the Seelter Buund, a cultural association, dedicated to the
preservation of local traditions. However, the Committee has not been informed if this body is responsible for
organising and supporting such cultural activities and facilities as required in article 12 paragraph 1. Therefore,
the Committee cannot conclude that the obligation is fulfilled.
e

to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting
cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of the regional or
minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest of the population;

243.
The initial report mentions that the bodies representing the Saterland Frisian interests, which are
responsible for organising Sater Frisian cultural activities, are expected to ensure that this provision is fulfilled.
The Seelter Bund has no permanent staff but the majority of the honorary chairmen and members have at least
a passive knowledge of Sater Frisian. The local authorities encourage staff members to take part in Sater
Frisian courses. The Catholic Educational Association offers courses in Sater Frisian on various levels to
extend the knowledge of the language to wider circles. The Committee considers the undertaking fulfilled.
f

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or
minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

244.
In Lower Saxony, many full-time and honorary helpers are involved in the planning and organisation of
activities and events in Sater Frisian. The obligation seems to be fulfilled.
g

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for collecting,
keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the regional or minority
languages;

245.
The libraries of Oldenburg and Göttingen Universities have a wide range of Frisian literature. However,
the Committee has not been informed as to how extensive the collection of works is. Furthermore, it is not clear
whether the activities referred to above are carried out on a voluntary basis or whether a clear responsibility has
been assigned. Therefore, the Committee would welcome further information and considers this undertaking
partly fulfilled.
2

In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are
traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority
language justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and
facilities in accordance with the preceding paragraph.

246.
Participation in the annual “Tag der Niedersachsen” organised in varying places of the Land is possible.
Other cultural Sater Frisian events can also be organised outside the Saterland Municipality if there is a
demand for it. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
3

The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy
abroad, for regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.

247.
On the basis of the information made available to the Committee, it would appear that Lower Saxony
supports the Inter-Frisian Council (a joint umbrella organization charged inter alia with presenting the Frisian
culture and maintaining links amongst Frisians). However, according to the information received by the
Committee, the Federal authorities, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, do not make any special provision
for Sater Frisian culture. Thus the Committee considers this undertaking partly fulfilled.

58

Article 13 – Economic and social life
1

With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole country:
a

to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without justifiable
reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to economic or
social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical documents such as
instructions for the use of products or installations;

248.
The obligation under (a) is in compliance with the established law of the Federal Republic of Germany
and therefore fulfilled for Sater Frisian as well as other regional or minority languages. The Committee considers
this undertaking fulfilled.
c

to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority languages in
connection with economic or social activities;

249.
The Committee has received no information which enables it to judge whether or not this obligation is
fulfilled.

d

to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by means other
than those specified in the above sub-paragraphs.

250.
The Committee has not received any information aimed at facilitating and/or encouraging the use of
regional or minority languages by means other than those specified in the above sub-paragraphs and is
therefore not in a position to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.

2.3.4.

Low German in the Länder of Bremen, Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Lower
Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein

251.
Over the last four centuries, Low German has traditionally been excluded from public life and is rarely
used in written form. The speakers tended to accept this exclusion (as Low German is still seen by the majority
as “a part of German”, or as one of its dialects), and they do not attempt to speak it when dealing with the
judicial and administrative authorities. The lack of specific administrative/judicial terminology makes things
more difficult and the setting up of a specific institution fostering the use of Low German in public life would be
necessary to improve the situation.
252.
The inclusion of Low German within the scope of the Charter has represented a kind of revolution, a
very big, positive step towards the recognition by the German society of the value of this language (although the
perception still differs from one region to another). Although they receive some official help, most of the
activities described in the report, exist thanks to the motivation of associations, teachers and parents working
on a voluntary basis. There is a need for consistent Federal and Land policies and specific regulations to make
the undertakings more applicable. In many cases the protection actually provided for Low German in practice
seems more to resemble Part II protection, although formally in the above mentioned Länder it enjoys protection
under Part III.
253.
The introduction of Low German in the school curricula by some Länder has had a positive impact, but
there are many obstacles to overcome. One important obstacle is the general lack of trained teachers who are
competent to work at pre-school, primary and secondary schools. At present, many of them are working as
volunteers in giving additional courses of Low German, without support at university level and without
systematic education in Low German. As long as the legal regulation of school education leaves it to teachers
and directors of school institutions to decide whether and to what degree Low German is taken up as a topic of
teaching, progress will depend on general attitudes of teachers and parents. In the broad public view, however,
Low German still tends to be perceived as a dialect. The generation gap in the use of Low German will very
soon represent an additional problem for school education, since only few teachers of the middle and young
generations use Low German as an ordinary means of communication. The Committee considers that positive
measures are necessary in order to ensure that Low German is recognised as a language in its own right and
regards the ratification in favour of Low German as a positive step in that direction.
59

60

a. In the Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
Article 8 – Education
1

With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages
are used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the
teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
a

i

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant regional
or minority languages; or

iii to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those pupils
whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient; or
iv if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school education,
to favour and/or encourage the application of the measures referred to under i to iii
above;
254.
Bremen has organised advisory services for day care centres to help them to provide for the use of Low
German in pre-school education. Taking into account the competence of Bremen in the field of pre-school
education, the above information is not sufficient to conclude whether the undertaking is fulfilled or not and the
Committee would welcome further information in the next periodical report.
b

iii to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum;

255.
Low German is an option for teaching staff within the curricula for the subject of German and it is left to
the arbitrary choice of teachers to decide whether the Low German language is taught or not. Clearly Low
German is an integral part of another subject, rather than forming a part of the curriculum in its own right.
However, on the basis of the information given, it is not clear if there actually is teaching of Low German as
indicated in this obligation. For these reasons the Committee cannot conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
The authorities are encouraged to take the necessary measures to ensure that Low German
forms a part of the curriculum in its own right.
c

iii to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum;

256.
The Committee has received no information enabling it to assess whether teaching of Low German is
an integral part of the curriculum and is therefore not in a position to conclude that the undertaking is fulfilled.
e

ii

to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher education
subjects;

257.
Bremen University regularly offers Low German courses. The Committee thus considers this
undertaking fulfilled.
f

i

to arrange for the provision of adult and continuing education courses which are taught
mainly or wholly in the regional or minority languages;

258.
The adult education centres regularly offer courses on Low German language and literature. The
Committee thus considers that this undertaking is fulfilled.

61

g

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is
reflected by the regional or minority language;

259.
Bremen University offers various courses on learning of Low German and on regional history. However,
there is no clear information about arrangements in the other areas. The Committee would welcome further
information.
h

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of
paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party

260.
Bremen University offers various courses on Low German and regional history. Low German is also
taught as a topic in follow-up training for teachers. The Committee has also been informed that there are
possibilities to learn Low German both in teacher education and teacher-training. However, there is no
information about any systematic scheme for providing Low German in teacher education and training with the
view to implementing the undertaking regarding education. The Committee is therefore not in a position to
conclude whether this undertaking is fulfilled.
Article 9 – Judicial authorities
1

The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents
using the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to
the situation of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded
by the present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of
justice:
b

in civil proceedings:
iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

c

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

261.
The codes of judicial procedures provide that legal documents shall be submitted in the original. If the
court does not understand the language in which a given legal document is drafted, it may, at its complete
discretion, order a translation to be produced (Section 142 (3) of the Code of Civil Procedure). On the basis of a
general reference to the Code of Civil Procedure, the other codes of procedure contain the same rule. Thus,
documents and evidence drafted in Low German are allowed. The costs incurred for translation become part of
the litigation costs, the only exception being the social court, where payment is never required. The Committee
considers these undertakings fulfilled.
2

The Parties undertake:
a

not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because they
are drafted in a regional or minority language; or

262.
The validity of legal documents is not denied on the grounds that they have been drafted in Low
German. The Committee considers that this undertaking is fulfilled.

62

Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
1

Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of
regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the
situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

v

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document in
these languages;

263.
The German Government has informed the Committee that this provision has become directly
applicable in Bremen following the entry into force of the Charter. Bremen has expressly refrained from adopting
any special administrative regulations in this respect, in order “to stem the flood of legal rules”. However, the
Committee takes the view that this provision is formulated in a way which would not automatically make it selfexecuting. Furthermore, in order to make it clear to speakers of Low German that they may submit documents
in this language and to ensure that the administration is aware of this, it would be advisable that corresponding
instructions (or, where necessary, formal legal rules) are issued to the authorities and made public. The
Committee considers that this undertaking is only formally fulfilled.
c

to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in a regional or minority
language.

264.
The Committee notes that the initial report implies that this provision has become directly applicable in
relation to Low German following the entry into force of the Charter. However, in the Initial Report it is stated
that no use has been made of this possibility. The Committee considers that in order to make it clear to the
competent administrative authorities that they may draft documents in Low German, it would be advisable that
corresponding instructions (or, where necessary, formal legal rules) are issued to the authorities and made
public. The Committee therefore considers that this undertaking is only formally fulfilled.
2

In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who
are users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below,
the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
a

the use of regional or minority languages within the framework of the regional or local
authority;

265.
The German Government has informed the Committee that this provision is directly applicable in
Bremen. The German Government also refers to practical measures and mentions, as an example, doorplates
indicating the relevant linguistic competence of the staff member concerned. The Committee refers here to the
general comments made under para. 263 above. On the basis of the information received, the Committee
considers the undertaking partly fulfilled.

b

the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written
applications in these languages;

266.
The German Government has informed the Committee that this provision is directly applicable. The
Committee refers here to the general comments made under para. 263 above. Even assuming that no further
legal acts may be required for its implementation, the Committee has not received any information as to what
extent this provision is actually applied in practice. Furthermore, in order to make it clear to the speakers of
Low German that they may submit applications in this language and to ensure that the administration is aware
of this, it would be advisable that corresponding instructions (or when necessary formal legal rules) are issued
to the authorities and made public. The Committee considers that this undertaking is only formally fulfilled.
c

the publication by regional authorities of their official documents also in the relevant
regional or minority languages;

d

the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in the relevant regional
or minority languages;
63

267.
The German Government has informed the Committee that these provisions are likewise directly
applicable. The Committee refers here to the general comments made under para. 263 above. The Committee
has not received any information of examples of the practical implementation of this provision or of the
encouragement of such publications. The Committee is therefore not in a position to conclude whether or not
these undertakings are fulfilled.
e

the use by regional authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

f

the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their assemblies,
without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

268.
According to the information provided by the German Government, Low German is used to some extent
in the regional parliaments (Beiräte) and in the Bremen Bürgerschaft. The Committee therefore considers that
these undertakings are fulfilled.
Article 11 – Media
1

The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories
in which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent
that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this
field, and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
b

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;

269.
Radio Bremen regularly broadcasts in Low German. In its regional programme “Buten en binnen”
(“Outside and Inside”), Radio Bremen (which is a member of the ARD, i.e. The Association of Public
Broadcasting Stations in Germany) deals with all relevant subjects related to Low German and will further
develop such offers. The Committee considers that a commendable effort is made by public stations. However,
taking into account the nature of the option chosen by the Government, the Committee does not have any
information as to measures of encouragement for the broadcasting of radio programmes in Low German by
private stations. The Committee is therefore not in a position to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
c

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the regional
or minority languages on a regular basis;

270.
According to the information provided by the German Government, the only programme in Low German
broadcast by the public television is the nativity story at Christmas. There is no information about television
programmes in Low German in private broadcasting and the Committee is aware of no information as to
measures of encouragement for the broadcasting of television programmes in Low German by private stations.
Therefore, the Committee considers that this obligation is not fulfilled.
d

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in the regional or minority languages;

271.
Some of the productions of Radio Bremen – Plattdeutsche Nachrichten (“Low German news”) are
disseminated, as texts with audio versions, on the Internet. However, the Committee has not received any
information on the steps taken by Bremen aimed at encouraging the production and distribution of audio and
audiovisual works in Low German. On this basis, the Committee cannot conclude that this undertaking is
fulfilled.
e

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the publication of newspaper articles in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;

64

272.
A monthly magazine exists (“INS PRESSE”, i.e. the magazine of the Institut für Niederdeutsche
Sprache) but no newspaper articles are published on a regular basis. However, the Committee would welcome
further information on how the authorities are encouraging or facilitating the publication of newspaper articles in
Low German on a regular basis. The Committee is therefore not in a position to conclude that this undertaking
is fulfilled.
f

ii

to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions in the
regional or minority languages;

273.
Open Channel productions are granted subsidies. The Committee considers this undertaking formally
fulfilled and would welcome examples of cases where financial assistance has been provided to audiovisual
productions in Low German.
g

to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using regional or minority
languages.

274.
No information has been provided to the Committee in this respect. The Committee therefore, cannot
conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
2

The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a
regional or minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure
that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of
information in the written press in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or
minority language. The exercise of the above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties
and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as
are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national
security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for
preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the authority
and impartiality of the judiciary.

275.
Free reception of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries is guaranteed by the
Basic Law. Therefore, the Committee concludes that this undertaking is fulfilled.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
1

With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural
centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film
production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries,
including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have
power or play a role in this field:
a

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority languages
and foster the different means of access to works produced in these languages;

276.
The Committee notes that Bremen co-finances the Institute for Low German (INS) and takes note of the
important contribution by the latter in this field. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled. However, it
would welcome further information in the forthcoming report on which activities Bremen carries out in addition to
the work performed by the INS.
b

to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in regional or
minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation
and subtitling activities;

65

277.
The Committee was informed that Bremen allocates funds for translations of published works from Low
German. The obligation has therefore been fulfilled.
c

to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages by
aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;

278.
The Committee notes that funds are allocated to the production of Low German stage performances of
plays originally written in other languages. Bremen promotes the required translations. However, the Committee
has not been informed of any other activities concerning translation of works nor has it been informed of any aid
to develop dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities. On the basis of the information it has received
the Committee considers that this undertaking is only partly fulfilled.

d

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of
various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of
regional or minority languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for
which they provide backing;

279.
The Committee has not been made aware of any information in this respect and can therefore not
conclude that this provision is fulfilled.
e

to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting
cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of the regional or
minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest of the population;

280.
The Committee has not received any relevant information in this respect and therefore cannot conclude
that this provision is fulfilled.
f

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or
minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

281.
The Committee has not been made aware of any information pointing to the inclusion of representatives
of Low German. The Committee therefore cannot conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
g

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for collecting,
keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the regional or minority
languages;

282.
The Institute for Low German collects works in Low German. The Committee therefore considers this
undertaking fulfilled.
3

The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad,
for regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.

283.
Within the New Hanseatic Interregio, an association of the Länder of Bremen and Lower Saxony with
the northern provinces of the Netherlands, cultural events also include Low German as the typical language of
Northern Germany. However, according to the information received by the Committee, the federal authorities, in
pursuing their cultural policy abroad, do not make any special provision for Low German culture in Bremen.
Thus the Committee considers this undertaking partly fulfilled.

66

Article 13 – Economic and social life
1

With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole country:
a

to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without justifiable
reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to economic or
social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical documents such as
instructions for the use of products or installations;

284.
The Committee has not received any information pointing to the existence of legislation which prohibits
or limits the use of the minority language and considers this obligation fulfilled.
c

to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority languages in
connection with economic or social activities;

285.
The Committee has received no information which enables it to judge whether or not this obligation is
fulfilled.
2

With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the public
authorities are competent, within the territory in which the regional or minority languages are
used, and as far as this is reasonably possible:
c

to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and hostels offer the
possibility of receiving and treating in their own language persons using a regional or
minority language who are in need of care on grounds of ill-health, old age or for other
reasons;

286.
According to the Initial Report, staff members speaking Low German are available in the specialised
clinics of the Land. However, direct nursing and other care of persons in need of nursing and care is not a
public-sector responsibility but carried out mostly by private-sector and free non-profit-making institutions,
which, it is claimed, makes it impossible to lay down any requirements as regards the use of Low German. The
Committee must conclude that the Land has not ensured implementation of this undertaking.
The Committee encourages the authorities to take the necessary measures to increase and
make more systematic the possibility for the persons concerned to be received and treated in
Low German in social care facilities.
b. In the Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
Article 8 – Education
1

With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages
are used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the
teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
a

i

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant regional
or minority languages; or

iii to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those pupils
whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient; or
iv if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school education,
to favour and/or encourage the application of the measures referred to under i to iii
above;

67

287.
Work on the development of a concept for the inclusion of Low German in pre-school education is to
start in 2002. On the basis of this information the Committee considers that this undertaking is not fulfilled at
the present stage.
b

iii to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

288.
Low German is an optional element of the curriculum. Low German texts on language and literature are
included, mostly in an integrative fashion, in the study of German language and literature. However, there is
insufficient information for the Committee to assess whether this scheme actually ensures that there will be
sufficient teaching of Low German as an integral part of the curriculum. The Committee can therefore not
conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
c

iii to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

289.
Low German is an optional element of the curriculum for German courses. An additional option is the
establishment of courses in subjects chosen from a compulsory group in secondary education stage I or a
basic course, with an emphasis on Low German, in the Gymnasium upper secondary grades. However, a
prerequisite is a sufficient demand by pupils or teachers and use of this offer has been made in two cases only,
despite a circular by the Senate Authority for Schools, Youth and Vocational Training encouraging the
organisation of such courses.
290.
The Committee observes that these optional elements do not provide for the teaching of Low German
as an integral part of the curriculum.
291.

The Committee therefore concludes that this obligation is not fulfilled.
d

iii to provide, within technical and vocational education, for the teaching of the relevant
regional or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

292.
The Committee has been informed that due to lack of demand, Low German at present is not part of
the curriculum as far as technical and vocational education is concerned. The Committee therefore considers
that this obligation is not fulfilled.
e

ii

to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher education
subjects; or

293.
The Hamburg University provides facilities for this purpose. In general, at the university level Low
German may be chosen as a subject. The Committee therefore considers this undertaking fulfilled.
f

ii

to offer such languages as subjects of adult and continuing education; or

294.
Two courses are available on a regular basis. The Committee therefore considers that this obligation is
fulfilled.
g

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is
reflected by the regional or minority language;

295.
In Hamburg, the Low German language was flourishing at the time of the Hanseatic League and
determined daily life. History lessons in school draw attention to this fact and inform about this particular part of
history and culture. The Committee accordingly considers that this obligation is fulfilled.
h

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of
paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;

68

296.
Teacher-training does not provide for particular training in Low German. Would-be teachers can attend
courses on Low German language and literature at university and can demand that courses be included in their
required-subject credits. Low German subjects can also be included in examinations. However, the grades
obtained for Low German courses are not shown on the certificate and do not provide a specific qualification as
teacher in/of Low German. On the basis of the information given the Committee is not in a position to conclude
that the training referred to in this undertaking is adequate to implement the provisions of article 8.
i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken and
progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority
languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.

297.
The Senate Authority for Schools, Youth and Vocational training provides advice and guidance to the
Hamburg schools with regard to the dissemination of Low German. There is, however, no supervisory body
specifically entrusted with the task of monitoring the measures taken and the progress achieved in developing
the teaching of Low German, nor are there any public reports of the findings of such bodies. The Committee
therefore concludes that the obligation is not fulfilled.
The Committee encourages the authorities to establish a supervisory body designed to monitor the
measures taken in developing education in Low German in Hamburg and to draw up periodic reports.
Article 9 – Judicial authorities
1

The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents
using the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to
the situation of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded
by the present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of
justice:
b

in civil proceedings:
iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

c

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

298.
The codes of judicial procedures provide that legal documents shall be submitted in the original. If the
court does not understand the language in which a given legal document is drafted, it may, at its complete
discretion, order a translation to be produced (Section 142 (3) of the Code of Civil Procedure). On the basis of a
general reference to the Code of Civil Procedure, the other codes of procedure contain the same rule. The costs
incurred for translation become part of the litigation costs. The Committee considers these undertakings
fulfilled.
2
a

The Parties undertake:
not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because they
are drafted in a regional or minority language;

299.
The validity of legal documents is not denied on the grounds that they have been drafted in Low
German. The Committee thus considers that this undertaking is fulfilled.

69

Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
1

Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of
regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the
situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

v

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document in
these languages;

300.
The German Government has informed the Committee that this provision has become directly
applicable in Hamburg following the entry into force of the Charter. The city of Hamburg has expressly refrained
from adopting any special administrative regulations in this respect, in order to “stem the flood of legal rules”.
However, in the view of the Committee this provision is formulated in a way which would not make it selfexecuting. Furthermore, in order to make it clear to speakers of Low German that they may submit documents
in this language and to ensure that the administration is aware of this, it would be advisable that instructions
(or, where necessary, formal legal rules) are issued to the competent authorities and made public. The
Committee considers that this undertaking is only formally fulfilled.
c

to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in a regional or minority
language.

301.
The considerations expressed above, para. 300, also apply here. Furthermore, the Committee
considers that in order to make it clear to the competent administrative authorities that they may draft
documents in Low German, it would be advisable that instructions (or, where necessary, formal legal rules) are
issued to the competent authorities and made public. The Committee therefore considers that this undertaking
is only formally fulfilled.
2

In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who
are users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below,
the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
a

the use of regional or minority languages within the framework of the regional or local
authority;

302.
The German Government has informed the Committee that this provision is directly applicable in
Hamburg. The German Government also refers to practical measures and mentions, as an example, doorplates
indicating the relevant linguistic competence of the staff member concerned The Committee refers here to the
general comments made under para. 300 above. On the basis of the information received, the Committee
considers the undertaking partly fulfilled.
b

the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written
applications in these languages;

303.
The German Government has informed the Committee that this provision is directly applicable. The
Committee refers here to the general comments made under para. 300 above. Even assuming that no further
legal acts may be required for its implementation, the Committee has not received any information as to what
extent this provision is actually applied in practice. Furthermore, in order to make it clear to the speakers of
Low German that they may submit applications in this language and to ensure that the administration is aware
of this, it would be advisable that instructions (or, where necessary, formal legal rules) are issued to the
competent authorities and made public. The Committee therefore considers that this undertaking is only
formally fulfilled.
e

the use by regional authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

f

the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their assemblies,
without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

70

304.
Occasionally, Low German is spoken in the City-State Parliament sessions and Bezirk assemblies by
individual delegates proficient in that language. In the City-State Parliament this happened last on the occasion
of the debate on the ratification of the Charter and of the debate on the “major interpellation” (Groote Anfroog). In
addition, the Senate provides answers in Low German to written questions concerning the Charter submitted in
Low German. The Committee therefore considers these undertakings fulfilled.
4

With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them,
the Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
c

compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a
knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that
language is used.

305.
Applications for re-assignments have not yet been submitted by public service employees wishing to be
appointed in the territory in which Low German is used. In some District Council Offices, however, employees
were asked whether they spoke Low German so that they might, if required, be appointed to appropriate posts.
Article 11 – Media
1

The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories
in which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent
that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this
field, and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
b

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;

306.
The programming mandate under Section 5 of the Inter-State Treaty on Norddeutscher Rundfunk (NDR)
contains the stipulation that "adequate room must be given in the programme to the North German region, its
culture and language". The radio broadcasting programme of "Hamburg-Welle 90.3" covers regular broadcasts
in Low German; on weekdays, the news is read in Low German once a day. Once a month, the public event
"Sonntakte" is broadcast by Hamburg-Welle and parts of it are often in Low German. The Committee considers
that a commendable effort is made by public stations. However, taking into account the nature of the option
chosen by the Government, the Committee does not have any information as to measures of encouragement for
the broadcasting of radio programmes in Low German by private stations. The Committee is therefore not in a
position to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
c

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the regional
or minority languages on a regular basis;

307.
The broadcasting station N 3 of Norddeutscher Rundfunk (NDR) broadcasts the talk show "Talk op
Platt" ("Talk in Low German"). However, taking into account the nature of the option chosen by the Government,
the Committee does not have any information as to measures of encouragement for the broadcasting of
television programmes in Low German by private stations. The Committee is therefore not in a position to
conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
d

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in the regional or minority languages;

308.
According to the information provided by the broadcasting corporation Norddeutscher Rundfunk (NDR),
which is an incorporated public-law institution, there are no plans to increase the airtime of NDR devoted to Low
German items. The Committee has not received any information on the steps taken by Hamburg aimed at
encouraging the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual works in Low German. On this basis, the
Committee cannot conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
e

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the publication of newspaper articles in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;
71

309.
Low German articles appear every day in the daily evening paper "Hamburger Abendblatt" and regularly
in various weeklies of the city districts (e.g. in the weekly "Niendorfer Wochenblatt") and in relevant information
bulletins. However, the Committee would welcome further information on how the authorities are encouraging or
facilitating the publication of newspaper articles in Low German on a regular basis. The Committee is therefore
not in a position to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
f

ii

to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions in the
regional or minority languages;

310.
The German Government has informed the Committee that tape-recordings and videograms of readings
by authors and stage productions in Low German are on sale. However, the Committee has not received
information about the possibility to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual
productions in the regional or minority languages. The Committee considers this undertaking formally fulfilled
and would welcome examples of cases where financial assistance has been provided to works in Low German.
g

to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using regional or minority
languages.

311.
The Committee has not received any information in this respect. It can therefore not be concluded that
this undertaking is fulfilled.
2

The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a
regional or minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure
that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of
information in the written press in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or
minority language. The exercise of the above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties
and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as
are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national
security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for
preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the authority
and impartiality of the judiciary.

312.
Free reception of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries is guaranteed by the
Basic Law. Therefore, the Committee concludes that this undertaking is fulfilled.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
1

With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural
centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film
production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries,
including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have
power or play a role in this field:
a

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority languages
and foster the different means of access to works produced in these languages;

313.
Financial support is provided to the INS (Institute for the Low German Language) and to the Hamburg
Ohnsorg-Theater. Due account is taken by various institutions for funding of Low German activities (e.g.
Quickborn-Vereinigung, Fehrsgilde). The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.

72

d

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of
various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of
regional or minority languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for
which they provide backing;

314.
In handling applications for support for literary projects in Low German, the Hamburg (Senate) Authority
for Cultural Affairs gives equal priority to such projects and to those related to standard German. It also
encourages institutions, included in the budget, in the literary field (Hamburger Öffentliche Bücherhallen Hamburg Public Libraries, Literaturhaus – House of Literature, Freie Akademie der Künste - Academy of Liberal
Arts) to grant equal treatment to Low German. The Committee would welcome further information on the extent
to which the institutions mentioned above actually take into consideration the Low German background of
proposed activities.
f

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or
minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

315.
The Hamburg Senate Authority for Cultural Affairs provides co-funding for the Institut für niederdeutsche
Sprache (INS - Institute for the Low German Language) in Bremen; the Institute's full-time and voluntary staff
and members carry out a considerable range of cultural planning and counselling. The Committee considers
however that this information is not sufficient to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.

g

316.

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for collecting,
keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the regional or minority
languages;

The INS collects works in Low German. The Committee therefore considers this undertaking fulfilled.
3

The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad,
for regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.

317.
The Committee has not been made aware of any information in this respect. This undertaking can
therefore not be considered as being fulfilled.
Article 13 – Economic and social life
1

With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole country:
a

to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without justifiable
reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to economic or
social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical documents such as
instructions for the use of products or installations;

318.
The Committee has not received any information pointing to the existence of legislation which prohibits
or limits the use of the minority language and considers this obligation fulfilled.
b

to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of companies and private documents of any clauses
excluding or restricting the use of regional or minority languages, at least between users of the
same language;

c

to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority languages in
connection with economic or social activities;

d

to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by means other
than those specified in the above sub-paragraphs.

73

319.
The Committee has not received any information in this respect. These undertakings can therefore not
be considered as being fulfilled.
2

With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the public
authorities are competent, within the territory in which the regional or minority languages are
used, and as far as this is reasonably possible:
c

to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and hostels offer the
possibility of receiving and treating in their own language persons using a regional or
minority language who are in need of care on grounds of ill-health, old age or for other
reasons;

320.
In publicly subsidised care facilities working in the field of aid for the homeless, integration assistance,
care for the elderly, nursing, care for drug-users and sheltered workshops for the disabled, no specific
measures are taken. Only day-care centres for the elderly subsidised by the City of Hamburg can provide such
a possibility. In general terms, reference is also made to non-specified pragmatic solutions when speakers of
Low German wish to communicate in this language. On the basis of the information received the Committee
cannot consider this undertaking fulfilled.
The Committee encourages the authorities to take the necessary measures to increase and
make more systematic the possibility for the persons concerned to be received and treated in
Low German in social care facilities.
c. In Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
Article 8 – Education
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are
used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the
teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
a

i

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant regional
or minority languages; or

iii to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those pupils
whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient; or
iv if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school education,
to favour and/or encourage the application of the measures referred to under i to iii
above;
321.
Recommendations and model projects exist for nursery schools in this respect. There is a certain
presence of Low German in 56 pre-schools, but the quality and the intensity of this presence is very different
from school to school. About 30 pre-school educators have received training in Low German. Long-term
arrangements are being considered. However, the Committee has not received any information about any
planned activities in order to apply the measures envisaged under Article 8 para. 1(a)(iv). Therefore, the
Committee considers the undertaking partly fulfilled.
b

iii to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

74

322.
A mandatory Low German Framework Curriculum exists. Low German is not taught as a separate
subject but is included in regular class instruction (e.g. German, music, elementary science, geography).
Activity groups and competitions in Low German exist. However, the extent to which the implementation of the
Low German Framework Curriculum amounts to teaching of the Low German is unclear. The Committee is
therefore not in a position to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
c

iii to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

323.
A mandatory Low German Framework Curriculum exists. Low German is included in German and other
subjects and is taught in the form of required elective courses, optional subject and activity groups. The regular
classroom instruction ranges from 38% to 75% of the pupils according to different forms of secondary
education. However, the extent to which the implementation of the Low German Framework Curriculum
amounts to teaching of the Low German is unclear. The Committee is therefore not in a position to conclude
that this undertaking is fulfilled.
d

iii to provide, within technical and vocational education, for the teaching of the relevant
regional or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

324.
Low German is not offered as a separate subject but as a part of other subjects on the basis of the
Framework Curriculum. However, the extent to which the implementation of the Low German Framework
Curriculum applies to teaching of the Low German is unclear. The Committee is therefore not in a position to
conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
e

ii

to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher education
subjects; or

325.
Colleges and universities offer a large variety of Low German courses. In particular, there are two Chairs
for Low German (universities of Rostock and Greifswald) that very much contribute to increase the interest for
this language and its future development. The Committee therefore considers this undertaking fulfilled.
g

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is
reflected by the regional or minority language;

326.
The Committee has been informed that the Low German professors of the Universities of Rostock and
Greifswald are responsible for such arrangements. However, the Committee needs further information in the
second periodical report on the activities pursued by the institutions mentioned to be able to conclude on the
fulfilment of this undertaking.
h

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of
paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;

327.
Both basic and further training of German teachers cover Low German. In particular, University studies
of Low German are based on the Training and Examination Regulations of the Rostock and Greifswald
Universities. Continuing training of teachers for schools offering general education is governed by the provisions
of the Schools Act. During the second training phase at the Landesinstitut Mecklenburg-Vorpommern für
Schule und Ausbildung (L.I.S.A.), teachers in training in the primary school sector or for the subject of 'German'
in secondary schools can select and treat topics referring to Low German aspects. These activities build on,
and continue, the Low German training taken up at Greifswald University and the course of study followed at
Rostock University, with Low German as a main subject. Since 1992, follow-up training of teachers for Low
German in schools has been organized by the L.I.S.A. Over the past few years, an Advi sory Centre for Low
German in Schools has developed at L.I.S.A. headquarters. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.

75

i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken and
progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority
languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.

328.
In September 2000 the Low German Consultative Councils of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania and
Schleswig-Holstein held a joint meeting covering, inter alia, the subject of “Low German in pre-school, school
and college/university”. The basic findings are documented in a publication issued specifically for this meeting.
However, there does not seem to exist a supervisory body specifically entrusted with the task of monitoring the
measures taken and the progress achieved in developing the teaching of Low German, nor are there any public
reports of the findings of such a body. The Committee therefore concludes that the obligation is not fulfilled.
The Committee encourages the authorities to establish a supervisory body designed to monitor the
measures taken in developing education in Low German in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania and to
draw up periodic reports.
Article 9 – Judicial authorities
1

The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents
using the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to
the situation of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded
by the present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of
justice:
b

in civil proceedings:
iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

c

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

329.
The codes of judicial procedures provide that legal documents shall be submitted in the original. If the
court does not understand the language in which a given legal document is drafted, it may, at its complete
discretion, order a translation to be produced (Section 142 (3) of the Code of Civil Procedure). On the basis of a
general reference to the Code of Civil Procedure, the other codes of procedure contain the same rule. The costs
incurred for translation become part of the litigation costs. The Committee considers these undertakings
fulfilled.
2

The Parties undertake:

a

not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because they
are drafted in a regional or minority language; or

330.
The validity of legal documents is not denied on the grounds that they have been drafted in Low
German. The Committee considers that this undertaking is fulfilled.

76

Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
1

Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of
regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the
situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

v

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document in
these languages;

331.
The German Government has pointed to Section 23 of the Land Administrative Procedure Act and has
informed the Committee that this act does not rule out the use of Low German. Furthermore, the Committee
has been informed that documents drafted in Low German can be submitted in this language. However, the
Committee lacks practical information to be able to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
c

to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in a regional or minority
language.

332.
The Committee has been informed that documents, speeches, letters etc. are drafted in Low German
within the Land administration and local administration. Furthermore, letters sent by citizens in Low German
will be answered in Low German as far as possible. The Committee, however, considers that in order to make it
clear to the speakers of Low German that they may submit requests in this language and to ensure that the
public services concerned are aware of this, it would be advisable that corresponding instructions (or, where
necessary, formal legal rules) are issued to the authorities and made public. The Committee considers that this
undertaking is only formally fulfilled.

2

In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who
are users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below,
the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
a

the use of regional or minority languages within the framework of the regional or local
authority;

333.
The Committee has been informed that a wide range of initiatives in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
are being pursued by the regional and local authorities. The Committee needs further information on how the
authorities encourage the use of regional or minority languages within the framework of the regional or local
authority.
b

the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written
applications in these languages;

334.
The Committee has been informed that under Section 23 of the Land Administrative Procedure Act,
Low German may be used for oral and written communications with local and regional authorities. The
Committee therefore considers this undertaking fulfilled.
f

the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their assemblies,
without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

335.
In local and regional assemblies Low German is used by the councillors. In rural areas, the use of Low
German is quite frequent. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
4

With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them,
the Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
c

compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a
knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that
language is used.

77

336.
Reference is made to the fact that Low German is spoken throughout Mecklenburg-Western
Pomerania. Account can be taken of individual proficiency in Low German, for example in the appointment of
teachers, administrative employees, etc. The Committee however has received no information as to the policy
of the authorities regarding requests from employees to be appointed in the territory in which their knowledge of
Low German can be most useful.

Article 11 – Media
1

The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories
in which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent
that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this
field, and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
b

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;

337.
Radio programmes are regularly broadcast in Low German. The Committee considers that a
commendable effort is made by public stations. However, taking into account the nature of the present option
chosen by the Government, the Committee does not have any information as to measures of encouragement for
the broadcasting of radio programmes in Low German by private stations. The Committee is therefore not in a
position to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
c

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the regional
or minority languages on a regular basis;

338.
According to the information received, no television programmes are broadcast in Low German on a
regular basis. Taking into account the nature of the option chosen by the Government, the Committee does not
have any information as to measures taken with a view to encouraging or facilitating the broadcasting of
television programmes in Low German. The Committee therefore considers that this undertaking is not fulfilled.
d

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in the regional or minority languages;

339.
According to the information provided by the Government several projects for the promotion of Low
German are carried out by audiovisual means. Both the production and distribution of audio and audio-visual
works in Low German are facilitated. The Committee therefore considers this undertaking fulfilled.
e

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the publication of newspaper articles in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;

340.
The Committee has been informed that daily newspapers, advertising papers and Sunday papers play
an important role in the dissemination of Low German texts. A number of papers publish articles in Low
German on a regular basis. However, the Committee would welcome further information on how the authorities
are encouraging or facilitating the publication of newspaper articles in Low German on a regular basis. The
Committee is therefore not in a position to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
f

ii

to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions in the
regional or minority languages;

341.
The making and funding of audiovisual productions in the regional language of Low German can be
applied for within the framework of project-oriented promotion. The Committee has been informed of several
projects which have been financed through this system. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.

78

2

The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a
regional or minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure
that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of
information in the written press in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or
minority language. The exercise of the above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties
and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as
are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national
security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for
preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the authority
and impartiality of the judiciary.

342.
Free reception of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries is guaranteed by the
Basic Law. Therefore, the Committee concludes that this undertaking is fulfilled.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
1

With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural
centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film
production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries,
including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have
power or play a role in this field:
a

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority languages
and foster the different means of access to works produced in these languages;

343.
According to the information provided by the German Government a wide variety of projects and
institutions are supported on a broad scale. The effort made in this respect by Mecklenburg-Western
Pomerania is commendable. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
b

to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in regional or
minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation
and subtitling activities;

344.
Translation projects are supported. However, the Committee has not been informed of any other
activities concerning aid to develop dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities. The Committee
therefore considers that this undertaking is fulfilled.
c

to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages by
aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;

345.
The Committee has received information regarding translations of books and plays into Low German.
However, the Committee has not been informed of any other activities concerning aid to develop dubbing, postsynchronisation and subtitling activities. The Committee therefore considers that this undertaking is partly
fulfilled.
d

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of
various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of
regional or minority languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for
which they provide backing;

79

346.
Counselling is offered by the Low German Chairs of the Rostock and Greifswald Universities, by the
Volkskulturinstitut (Institute of the Kulturbund for Folk Culture, Mecklenburg and Western Pomerania) in
Rostock and, for several Länder, by the Institut für Niederdeutsche Sprache in Bremen. Furthermore, the
criteria for membership in the Kulturbeirat (Cultural Consultative Council) of the Ministry of Education include
proficiency in Low German. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
e

to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting
cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of the regional or
minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest of the population;

347.
Institutions for language-related and cultural work have at their disposal staff members having a
command of Low German. Speakers of Low German are also represented in the Landesarbeitskreis Kultur, a
joint body of Land Associations which every year prepare and organize the Landeskulturtage (Land Cultural
Days) in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
f

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or
minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

348.
Representatives speaking Low German participate in the planning and co-ordination of Land-wide
activities (e.g. Low German Competition, Land Cultural Days) and are represented at local and municipal
jubilees. In 1999, the first Land-wide 'Low German Day' was organized at the initiative of the
Landesheimatverband Mecklenburg-Vorpommern e.V. (Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania Land Union for Local
and Regional Traditions). The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
h

if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and terminological research
services, particularly with a view to maintaining and developing appropriate administrative,
commercial, economic, social, technical or legal terminology in each regional or minority
language.

349.
The aim to develop appropriate terminology is pursued in co-operation with the Low German Chairs of
the Rostock and Greifswald Universities and with the Institut für Volkskunde (Institute of Folklore) of the
Rostock University. Additional sources available are the Mecklenburgisches Wörterbuch (Mecklenburg
Dictionary) and the Pommersches Wörterbuch (Pomeranian Dictionary). Help with translations and terminology
is also provided by the Volkskulturinstitut Mecklenburg und Vorpommern im Kulturbund e.V. (Folk Culture
Institute of the Kulturbund, Mecklenburg and Western Pomerania) and by the Institut für niederdeutsche
Sprache (INS - Institute for the Low German Language) in Bremen. The Committee considers this undertaking
fulfilled.
3

The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad,
for regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.

350.
Within the framework of cultural exchanges with the Baltic Republics, the Scandinavian countries and
Poland, folklore ensembles from the Land of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania give performances abroad. In
addition to presenting the customs and traditions as a part of the Low German culture, choral works and songs
are also performed in Low German. However, according to the information received by the Committee, the
federal authorities, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, do not make any special provision for Low German
culture in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania. Thus the Committee considers this undertaking partly fulfilled.
Article 13 – Economic and social life
1

With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole
country:
a

to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without justifiable
reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to economic or
social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical documents such as
instructions for the use of products or installations;
80

351.
The Committee has not received any information pointing to the existence of legislation which prohibits
or limits the use of the minority language and considers this obligation fulfilled.
b

to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of companies and private documents of
any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or minority languages, at least
between users of the same language;

c

to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority languages in
connection with economic or social activities;

352.
The Committee has not received any information in this respect. These undertakings therefore cannot
be considered as being fulfilled.
d

to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by means other
than those specified in the above sub-paragraphs.

353.
The Committee has not received any information aimed at facilitating and/or encouraging the use of
regional or minority languages by means other than those specified in the above sub-paragraphs and is
therefore not in a position to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
2

With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the public
authorities are competent, within the territory in which the regional or minority languages are
used, and as far as this is reasonably possible:
c

to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and hostels offer the
possibility of receiving and treating in their own language persons using a regional or
minority language who are in need of care on grounds of ill-health, old age or for other
reasons;

354.
According to the information received by the Committee, Low German is used to a certain extent in
social care facilities. However, this will depend on whether there are Low German speakers among the staff.
The information provided does not allow the Committee to assess if this undertaking is fulfilled.
d. In Lower Saxony
Article 8 – Education
1

With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used,
according to the situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the
official language(s) of the State:
a

i

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or

iii

to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those pupils whose
families so request and whose number is considered sufficient; or

iv if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school education,
to favour and/or encourage the application of the measures referred to under i to iii
above;
355.
A model test (bilingualism in nursery schools) has been implemented in 36 nursery schools in the
period 1997-2000. However, the Committee has not received any information about any planned activities in
order to apply the measures envisaged under Article 8 para. 1(a)(iv). Therefore, the Committee considers the
undertaking partly fulfilled.
81

e

ii

to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher education
subjects; or

356.
Two major universities offer courses on Low German. The Committee considers this undertaking
fulfilled.
f

iii if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult education, to
favour and/or encourage the offering of such languages as subjects of adult and
continuing education;

357.
According to the information provided by the German Government, Low German is offered by various
adult education centres in Ostfriesland. The Committee would welcome information concerning the situation in
other areas of Lower Saxony.
g

358.

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is
reflected by the regional or minority language;

A wide variety of arrangements exist in this respect. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken and
progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority
languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.

359.
A Working Group was established in 1997 and given the task of monitoring the proper implementation
of the obligations under the Charter relevant for Lower Saxony. This Working Group is advised on the
substance, form, time and addressees of regular publications on measures to introduce instruction in Low
German. The Committee would welcome further information in the second periodical report concerning these
publications, i.e. who is in charge of drafting them and their contents.
The Committee encourages the authorities to establish a supervisory body designed to monitor the
measures taken in developing education in Low German in Lower Saxony and to draw up periodic
reports.
Article 9 – Judicial authorities
1

The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents
using the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to
the situation of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded
by the present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of
justice:
b

in civil proceedings:
iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

c

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

82

360.
The codes of judicial procedures provide that legal documents shall be submitted in the original. If the
court does not understand the language in which a given legal document is drafted, it may, at its complete
discretion, order a translation to be produced (Section 142 (3) of the Code of Civil Procedure). On the basis of a
general reference to the Code of Civil Procedure, the other codes of procedure contain the same rule. The costs
incurred for translation become part of the litigation costs. The Committee considers these undertakings
fulfilled.
2

The Parties undertake:
a

not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because they
are drafted in a regional or minority language; or

361.
The validity of legal documents is not denied on the grounds that they have been drafted in Low
German. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
1

Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of
regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the
situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

v

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document in
these languages;

362.
The German Government has informed the Committee that this provision became directly applicable in
Lower Saxony following the entry into force of the Charter. The Land of Lower Saxony has expressly refrained
from adopting any special administrative regulations in this respect, in order to “stem the flood of legal rules”.
However, in the view of the Committee this provision is formulated in a way which would not make it selfexecuting. Furthermore, in order to make it clear to speakers of Low German that they may submit documents
in this language and to ensure that the administration is aware of this, it would be advisable that instructions
(or, where necessary, clear legal rules) are issued to the competent authorities and made public. The
Committee considers that this undertaking is only formally fulfilled.
c

to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in a regional or minority
language.

363.
The considerations expressed above also apply here. Furthermore, the Committee considers that in
order to make it clear to the competent administrative authorities that they may draft documents in Low
German, it would be advisable that instructions (or, where necessary, clear legal rules) are issued to them and
are made public. The Committee therefore considers that this undertaking is only formally fulfilled.
2

In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who
are users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below,
the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
a

the use of regional or minority languages within the framework of the regional or local
authority;

364.
The Committee has been informed that Low German is used to some extent within the administration.
Furthermore, working panels dealing specifically with the implementation of Article 10 of the Charter have been
set up. The Committee considers that the information above is not sufficient to assess whether and to what
extent this provision is actually applied in practice. The Committee considers that in order to make it clear to
the speakers of Low German that they may submit applications in this language and to ensure that the
administration is aware of this, it would be advisable that corresponding instructions (or, where necessary,
formal legal rules) are issued to the authorities and made public. The Committee considers that this
undertaking is only formally fulfilled.

83

b

the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written
applications in these languages;

365.
The German Government has informed the Committee that this provision is directly applicable. The
Committee refers here to the general comments made under para. 362 above. Even assuming that no further
legal acts may be required for its implementation, the Committee has not received any information as to what
extent this provision is actually applied in practice. Furthermore, the Committee considers that in order to make
it clear to the speakers of Low German that they may submit requests in this language and to ensure that the
public services concerned are aware of this, it would be advisable that corresponding instructions (or, where
necessary, formal legal rules) are issued to the authorities and made public. The Committee considers that this
undertaking is only formally fulfilled.
c

the publication by regional authorities of their official documents also in the relevant
regional or minority languages;

d

the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in the relevant regional
or minority languages;

366.
The German Government has informed the Committee that these provisions are directly applicable in
Lower Saxony. The Committee refers here to the general comments made under para. 362 above. The
Committee has not received any information of examples of the practical implementation of this provision or of
the encouragement of such publications. The Committee is therefore not in a position to conclude whether or
not these undertakings are fulfilled.
e

the use by regional authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

367.
The Committee has not received any information. The Committee can therefore not conclude that this
undertaking is fulfilled.
f

the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their assemblies,
without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

368.
The use of Low German is possible and according to the information given Council meetings are often
held in Low German or are bilingual. The undertaking is fulfilled.

4

With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them,
the Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
a

translation or interpretation as may be required;

369.
According to the information provided by the Government, the authorities also employ staff with a
command of Low German and there has been no problem regarding translation or interpretation. The Committee
considers this undertaking fulfilled.
c

compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a
knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that
language is used.

84

370.
The Committee has received no information as to the policy of the authorities regarding requests from
employees to be appointed in the territory in which their knowledge of Low German can be most useful. It is
therefore not in a position to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
Article 11 – Media
1

The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories
in which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent
that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this
field, and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
b

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;

371.
Radio programmes in Low German are regularly broadcast. In particular, the Committee has been
informed that the Lower Saxony Land Broadcasting Act states that the programmes of private broadcasters
must make appropriate allowance for the regional languages used in Lower Saxony. Compliance with this
requirement is monitored by a supervisory body. Furthermore, the Land supervisory authority for private
broadcasters of Lower Saxony also supports non commercial local broadcasters and the “open channels”,
which carry programmes focusing on regional and local matters. The Committee therefore considers this
undertaking fulfilled.
372.
The Committee also takes note of the information given concerning public radio programmes in Low
German.
c

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the regional
or minority languages on a regular basis;

373.
According to the information provided, there is a bi-weekly ten-minute programme in Low German. In
addition to this there are other programmes in Low German from time to time. Taking into account the nature of
the option chosen by the Government, the Committee does not have any information as to measures with a
view to encouraging the broadcasting of television programmes in Low German. The Committee therefore
considers that this undertaking has only been partially fulfilled.
d

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in the regional or minority languages;

374.
Upon application, the Land of Lower Saxony grants subsidies to the production costs regarding audio
and audiovisual productions in Low German. This provision is fulfilled.
e

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the publication of newspaper articles in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;

375.
According to the information given, supraregional newspapers, but especially regional and local papers,
contain several articles in Low German, in part as regular columns. On appropriate occasions, the Land
Government makes appeals to include and present Low German also in press publications. These appeals are
addressed both directly to the publishing houses and through the Verband Nordwestdeutscher Zeitungsverleger
(Association of North West German Newspaper Publishers). The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
f

376.

ii

to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions in
the regional or minority languages;

See para. 374 above. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.

85

2

The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a
regional or minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure
that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of
information in the written press in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or
minority language. The exercise of the above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties
and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as
are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national
security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for
preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the authority
and impartiality of the judiciary.

377.
Free reception of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries is guaranteed by the
Basic Law. Therefore, the Committee concludes that this undertaking is fulfilled.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
1

With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural
centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film
production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries,
including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have
power or play a role in this field:
a

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority languages
and foster the different means of access to works produced in these languages;

378.
Several measures of encouragement have been taken. As an example, Low German literature can be
included in all areas of the promotion of literature (promotion of production, distribution and reception) in the
Land of Lower Saxony and the Ministry for Scientific and Cultural Affairs encourages events regarding Low
German and organized by Land-subsidized institutions such as the Literaturrat (Literature Council) or the
Literaturbüros (Literature Offices). This undertaking can be considered as being fulfilled.
b

to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in regional or
minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation
and subtitling activities;

c

to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages by
aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;

379.
As part of literature promotion, funds are available to translators for the translation of literary works both into and from Low German. However, the Committee has not been informed of any other activities
concerning aid to develop dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities. The Committee therefore
considers that these undertakings are partially fulfilled.
d

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of
various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of
regional or minority languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for
which they provide backing;

380.
The Lower Saxony Ministry of Scientific and Cultural Affairs subsidizes the Ostfriesische Landschaft in
Aurich. Its tasks refer both to the cultural sector and to science and education with a view to ensuring that Low
German and its culture are taken into consideration in keeping with the accepted obligation. On the basis of
this information, the Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.

86

e

to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting
cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of the regional or
minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest of the population;

381.
The German Government has informed the Committee that the Ostfriesische Landschaft has staff
members speaking Low German. That is also the case for other bodies organizing events, such as Oostfreeske
Taal or De Spieker, Heimatbund für niederdeutsche Kultur e.V. (a local/ regional traditions association for Low
German culture). The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
f

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or
minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

382.
In respect of Lower Saxony the Government refers in particular to an event held in 1996 at the Land
mission of Lower Saxony in Bonn and organized in co-operation with the associations mentioned in paragraphs
380 and 381 above. The Committee would welcome further information concerning the degree of direct
participation by representatives of the users of Low German in Lower Saxony in providing facilities and planning
cultural activities. On the basis of the information provided the Committee is not in a position to conclude
whether this undertaking is fulfilled.
g

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for collecting,
keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the regional or minority
languages;

383.
The Institut für niederdeutsche Sprache (INS - Institute for the Low German Language) in Bremen,
whose main tasks are the collection, classification and scholarly analysis of Low German linguistic material, is
also subsidized by the Land of Lower Saxony. Both the Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek (State and
University Library) in Göttingen and the library of Carl von Ossietzky University in Oldenburg have abundant
holdings of Low German literature. In addition, the Municipal Libraries of the Land capital Hanover own the
Börsmann Collection. The (Land-funded) library of Ostfriesische Landschaft also owns a collection of Low
German literature. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
2

In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are
traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority
language justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and
facilities in accordance with the preceding paragraph.

384.
There is no information as to activities of the Government intended to encourage and/or provide
appropriate cultural activities and facilities in the Southern part of Lower Saxony where Low German is
traditionally not used.
3

The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad,
for regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.

385.
Cultural activities within the "Neue Hanse Interregio" (NHI), an association of the Länder of Bremen and
Niedersachsen and the northern provinces of the Netherlands, include Low German. However, according to the
information received by the Committee, the federal authorities, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, do not
make any special provision for Low German culture in the Land of Lower Saxony. Thus the Committee
considers this undertaking partly fulfilled.

87

Article 13 – Economic and social life
1

With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole
country:
a

to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without justifiable
reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to economic or
social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical documents such as
instructions for the use of products or installations;

386.
The Committee has not received any information pointing to the existence of legislation which prohibits
or limits the use of the minority language and considers this obligation fulfilled.
b

to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of companies and private documents of
any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or minority languages, at least
between users of the same language;

c

to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority languages in
connection with economic or social activities;

387.
The Committee has not received any information in this respect. This undertaking therefore cannot be
considered as being fulfilled.
d

to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by means other
than those specified in the above sub-paragraphs.

388.
The Committee has not received any information in this respect. This undertaking therefore cannot be
considered as being fulfilled.
Article 14 – Transfrontier exchanges
The Parties undertake:
a

to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the States in
which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if necessary to seek to
conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster contacts between the users of the
same language in the States concerned in the fields of culture, education, information,
vocational training and permanent education;

389.
Assuming that the Neue Hanse Interregio (NHI) is based on an agreement in the sense of Article 14
(a), the Committee considers the undertaking fulfilled but would welcome further information in the context of
the next periodical report.
b

for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or promote co-operation
across borders, in particular between regional or local authorities in whose territory the
same language is used in identical or similar form.

390.
Taking account of the purposes and activities of the NHI and of the other activities of regional
transborder co-operation, the Committee considers this provision fulfilled.
e. In Schleswig-Holstein
Article 8 – Education
1

With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used,
according to the situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the
official language(s) of the State:
a

i

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or
88

ii

to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or

iii

to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those pupils whose
families so request and whose number is considered sufficient; or

iv if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school education,
to favour and/or encourage the application of the measures referred to under i to iii
above;
391.
The generation gap is very visible in the case of Low German but the recent efforts to promote this
language have resulted in a growing interest for bilingual teaching. The Low German Centres established and
financed by the Land in Leck (Schleswig) and Ratzeburg (Holstein), promote the teaching of Low German in
pre-schools and provide for teacher-training. The existing bilingual pre-schools have had a wide acceptance and
the demand from parents is increasing. Much is done on a voluntary basis by the parents, teachers and other
“friends of Low German” to meet the needs. There are two Centres for Low German (in Leck and Ratzeburg)
providing teacher training and assistance on the use of the immersion method by the educators in pre-schools.
Many pre-schools have staff members who are proficient in Low German. Low German is offered in seven
nurseries.
392.
In some pre-schools, “adoptive parents” who speak Low German work with the children on a regular
basis. During a recent meeting in Hamburg, the role of Low German in schools (teaching material, teachertraining, information exchange) was discussed by professionals of different Länder.
393.

The Committee welcomes the efforts by Schleswig-Holstein and considers this undertaking fulfilled.
b

iii to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

394.
According to the information provided by the German Government, there is no curriculum for Low
German since Low German does not have the status of a classroom subject. The legal basis for the inclusion of
Low German in school education is provided by the Decree on “Niederdeutsch in der Schule” (“Low German in
school”) and by the common basic section of the curricula for all classroom subjects which states that Low
German is a field of general importance. The curriculum applies to all primary schools. No statistics have been
collected on the extent to which the curriculum is actually applied and much depends on the area (Low German
is less present in urban areas) and on the demand by pupils. There are no general regulations defining the
extent to which Low German must be offered in classroom instruction. Therefore, the extent to which the
implementation of the Low German Framework Curriculum appeals to teaching of the Low German is unclear.
Consequently, the Committee is not in a position to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
c

iii to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

395.
According to the information given, the curricula which entered into force on 1 August 1997 establish
Low German as a task area of general education. Furthermore, various subject-specific curricula (German,
history, etc.) explicitly include Low German. However, no information has been provided as to how many
secondary schools actually teach Low German within regular school hours. The Committee can therefore not
conclude that the undertaking is fulfilled.
e

ii

to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher education
subjects; or

396.
According to the information given, the Universities in Kiel and Flensburg offer courses in Low German.
The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
f

iii if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult education, to
favour and/or encourage the offering of such languages as subjects of adult and
continuing education;
89

397.
More than forty adult education centres offer Low German courses. The Committee considers this
undertaking fulfilled.
g

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is
reflected by the regional or minority language;

90

398.
The “German” curriculum of publicly maintained schools provides such arrangements. The Committee
considers this undertaking fulfilled.
h

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of
paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;

399.
Basic teacher-training covers Low German. Furthermore, two centres offer further training in Low
German. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken and
progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority
languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.

400.
Two centres have been established to support education in Low German, but they do not actually play
the role of supervisory bodies. Beside these centres, general school authorities exist. There is, however, no
supervisory body specifically entrusted with the task of monitoring the measures taken and the progress
achieved in developing the teaching of Low German, nor are there any public reports on the findings of such a
body. The Committee therefore concludes that the obligation is not fulfilled.
The Committee encourages the authorities to establish a supervisory body designed to monitor the
measures taken in developing education in Low German in Schleswig-Holstein and to draw up periodic
reports.
2

With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the regional or
minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a
regional or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the
regional or minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.

401.
The Committee has not been made aware of any measures on the part of the German authorities in this
respect.
Article 9 – Judicial authorities
1

The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents
using the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to
the situation of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded
by the present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of
justice:
b

in civil proceedings:
iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

c

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

91

402.
The codes of judicial procedures provide that legal documents shall be submitted in the original. If the
court does not understand the language in which a given legal document is drafted, it may, at its complete
discretion, order a translation to be produced (Section 142 (3) of the Code of Civil Procedure). On the basis of a
general reference to the Code of Civil Procedure, the other codes of procedure contain the same rule. The costs
incurred for translation become part of the litigation costs. The Committee considers these undertakings
fulfilled.
2

The Parties undertake:
a

not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because they
are drafted in a regional or minority language; or

403.
The validity of legal documents is not denied on the grounds that they have been drafted in Low
German. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
1

Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of
regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the
situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

v

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document in
these languages;

404.
According to the information provided by the German Government, the legal basis of this obligation by
the Land of Schleswig-Holstein is Section 82a, para. 2, of the Land Administration Act. This regulation provides
for the general possibility to submit applications, petitions, etc., in a “foreign language”. On the basis of the
information given, the Committee has formed the opinion that in the view of the Land the term German language
also covers Low German. However, the Committee lacks practical information to be able to conclude that this
undertaking is fulfilled.
c

to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in a regional or minority
language.

405.
The Committee considers that in order to make it clear to the speakers of Low German that they may
submit applications in this language and to ensure that the administration is aware of this, it would be advisable
that corresponding instructions (or, when necessary, formal legal rules) are issued to the authorities and made
public. The Committee considers that this undertaking is only formally fulfilled.
2

In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who
are users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below,
the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
a

the use of regional or minority languages within the framework of the regional or local
authority;

406.
There is a will to improve the situation concerning multilingualism within the administration and several
measures have already been taken. The municipality bears the costs of language courses that are proposed to
staff members, especially to those whose work implies activities within the cultural field. The practice of putting
signs on the doors showing the language competences of the civil servants of the municipality has also been
introduced (there are presently 58 signs for Low German). However, competences in minority languages are not
among the criteria that are taken into consideration by the municipality when recruiting its staff. The status of
Low German has considerably improved in recent years, as it is no longer perceived as the “rural areas
language”. Some measures are contributing to this phenomenon. They may be of a practical nature (such as
door-signs) or purely symbolic (for instance, the stamp of the letters of the Land’s Minister-President contains a
sentence in Low German). The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.

92

b

the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written
applications in these languages;

407.
The Committee considers that in order to make it clear to the speakers of Low German that they may
submit requests in this language and to ensure that the public services concerned are aware of this, it would be
advisable that corresponding instructions (or, where necessary, formal legal rules) are issued to the authorities
and made public. The Committee considers that this undertaking is only formally fulfilled.
f

the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their assemblies,
without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

408.
There seems to be a practice to the effect that debates can take place in Low German insofar as
nobody objects to this. According to the information given, Low German is used from time to time in meetings
of the local authorities. In these conditions this obligation can be considered as being fulfilled.
4

With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them,
the Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
c

compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a
knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that
language is used.

409.
An announcement to this effect was made at the Personalreferentenkonferenz (PRK - Conference of
Personnel Officers). If a staff member within the Land Administration expresses a wish regarding such an appointment, the scope for complying with the request will be examined. While acknowledging the positive
approach of the authorities, the Committee has not received any information on a positive practice or a
structural approach with regard to this undertaking. Therefore, the information provided does not make it
possible to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
Article 11 – Media
1

The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories
in which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent
that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this
field, and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
b

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;

410.
Radio programmes in Low German are regularly broadcast on the basis of legal regulations governing
the radio sector. Furthermore the minister-president of the Land has encouraged the radio broadcasters to take
initiatives wherever possible with a view to reflecting the linguistic situation in the Land, i.a. the strong presence
of Low German speakers. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
c

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the regional
or minority languages on a regular basis;

411.
The Committee notes that television programmes in Low German have been decreasing. At present,
the only remaining television programme is one based on interviews broadcast every four weeks. The
Committee is not aware of any active measures to facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in Low
German. The undertaking does not seem to be fulfilled.

93

The authorities are encouraged to take positive measures to encourage and/or facilitate the
broadcasting of television programmes in Low German.

d

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in the regional or minority languages;

412.
Productions in Low German can receive financial support. Promotional and subsidising schemes are
available for audiovisual works in Low German. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
e

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the publication of newspaper articles in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;

413.
According to the information provided by the Government, articles in Low German appear regularly in
the printed media. Furthermore, the minister-president of the Land in a letter to the Schleswig-Holstein
Association of Newspaper Publishers has encouraged the integration of “linguistic particularities … determining
the specificity of the Land”. According to users of Low German, however, the articles in Low German actually
appearing in the press do not contribute to raising the profile of this language, as they are usually limited to
humoristic comments or to matters without importance. A more serious magazine was launched but the
acceptance was not as wide as expected (probably due to a lack of quality) and it disappeared. It can be
considered that this undertaking is fulfilled although there seems to be scope for further action from the Land
authorities.
f

ii

to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions in the
regional or minority languages;

414.
Productions in Low German can receive financial support. Existing schemes for promoting and
subsidising are available, i.a. for audiovisual productions, in Low German. The Committee considers this
undertaking formally fulfilled and would welcome examples of cases where financial assistance has been
provided to works in Low German.

2

The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a
regional or minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure
that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of
information in the written press in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or
minority language. The exercise of the above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties
and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as
are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national
security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for
preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the authority
and impartiality of the judiciary.

415.
Free reception of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries is guaranteed by the
Basic Law. Therefore, the Committee concludes that this undertaking is fulfilled.

94

Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
1

With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural
centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film
production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries,
including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have
power or play a role in this field:
a

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority languages
and foster the different means of access to works produced in these languages;

416.
A number of institutions and associations active in the field are regularly sponsored. The Committee
considers this undertaking fulfilled.
b

to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in regional or
minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation
and subtitling activities;

417.
Low German institutions can use promotional funds provided by Schleswig-Holstein Land for the
translation, dubbing, post-synchronization and subtitling of works into, or in, Low German. The Committee
would welcome further information concerning specific steps taken by the authorities in this area.
c

to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages by
aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;

418.
See para. 417 above. It can be added that the Institut für Niederdeutsche Sprache (INS - Institute for
the Low German Language) in Bremen, which is subsidized also by the Land of Schleswig-Holstein, published
a Standard German/Low German Dictionary. The Committee would welcome further information concerning
specific steps taken by the authorities in this area.
d

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of
various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of
regional or minority languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for
which they provide backing;

419.
With subsidies provided by Schleswig-Holstein, the institutions of the speakers of Low German ensure
that appropriate provision is made for incorporating the knowledge and use of the Low German language and
culture in their cultural activities. The Committee assumes that this situation is in line with the requirements of
this undertaking but would welcome more detailed information on the institutions and their activities.
f

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or
minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

420.
An association which supports Low German has been given the functions of the executive secretariat of
a major Low German cultural event. The Committee would welcome further information concerning the degree
of direct participation by representatives of the users of Low German in Schleswig-Holstein in providing facilities
and planning cultural activities. On the basis of the information provided the Committee is not in a position to
conclude whether this undertaking is fulfilled.
g

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for collecting,
keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the regional or minority
languages;

421.
Schleswig-Holsteinische Landesbibliothek is in charge of this task. This undertaking is therefore
fulfilled.

95

3

The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad,
for regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.

422.
Low German is reflected in many ways in the cultural foreign policy of the Land. For example, the Land
authorities have carried out projects aimed at furthering ties and developing cultural activities with the
descendants of the immigrants who settled in the Americas and who still speak German/Low German.
However, according to the information received by the Committee, the federal authorities, in pursuing their
cultural policy abroad, do not make any special provision for Low German culture in Schleswig-Holstein. Thus
the Committee considers this undertaking partly fulfilled.
Article 13 – Economic and social life
1

With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole
country:
a

to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without justifiable
reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to economic or
social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical documents such as
instructions for the use of products or installations;

423.
The Committee has not received any information pointing to the existence of legislation which prohibits
or limits the use of the minority language and considers this obligation fulfilled.
b

to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of companies and private documents of
any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or minority languages, at least
between users of the same language;

c

to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority languages in
connection with economic or social activities;

424.
The Committee has not received any information in this respect. This undertaking can therefore not be
considered as being fulfilled.
d

to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by means other
than those specified in the above sub-paragraphs.

425.
The Committee has not received any information in this respect. This undertaking can therefore not be
considered as being fulfilled.
2

With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the public
authorities are competent, within the territory in which the regional or minority languages are
used, and as far as this is reasonably possible:
c

to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and hostels offer the
possibility of receiving and treating in their own language persons using a regional or
minority language who are in need of care on grounds of ill-health, old age or for other
reasons;

426.
The Committee has been informed that in such social care facilities there are staff members who have
a command of Low German. According to the Government there have so far not been any cases of suggesting
the necessity to provide staff with a command of Low German systematically. However, in the view of the
Committee, such a systematic approach is necessary to fulfil the undertaking, which accordingly cannot be
considered as fulfilled.

96

2.3.5 Upper Sorbian
Article 8 –Education
1 With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages
are used, according to the situation of each these languages, and without prejudice to the
teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
a

i

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages,
or

ii

to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant regional or
minority languages, or

iii

to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those pupils
whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient.

427.
Under the existing system of pre-school education, if there are a certain number of parents wishing to
set up a pre-school institution in Upper Sorbian, the authorities are obliged, after a certain period, to support the
institution. In the core language area, the pre-school institutions are predominantly run in Upper Sorbian. In
other parts of the traditional speech area, pre-school institutions take part in the Witaj project. In Saxony, 12
day-care centres run under the Witaj project. The Witaj project pursues a bilingual approach for children in
nurseries and plays a very important role in the improvement of the presence of Sorbian in pre-schools. It has
been very successful, despite the generation gap, but it is nevertheless facing difficulties due to the lack of
resources and qualified teachers. The first eight “Witaj children” have now reached primary school. In addition to
the Witaj nurseries, there are 13 German–Sorbian day care centres, and 54 day-care centres which maintain
the Sorbian culture.
428.
The Committee acknowledges the efforts made by the authorities to support pre-school in Upper
Sorbian but is concerned by the lack of resources and of trained teachers that may jeopardize the fulfilment of
the obligation.

The Committee encourages the establishment of a legal framework and the allocation of
adequate resources to secure the implementation of this undertaking.

b

i

to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of primary education in the relevant regional or
minority languages; or

iii

to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or minority
languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

iv

to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils whose
families so request and whose number is considered sufficient;

429.
Upper Sorbian is taught as a mother tongue at six elementary schools, at four as a secondary
language (i.e. for pupils from bilingual families or from a bilingual setting), and at another twenty-nine as a
foreign language (i.e. for pupils from German-speaking families or from a German-speaking setting in the
Sorbian settlement area). The teaching material available for primary schools is very rich and renewed
constantly. The system seems to function well in the core language area. However, in the surrounding areas ,
there seem to be no guarantees to provide education in Upper Sorbian for families who so wish. In particular,
there is no systematic follow-up for pupils completing pre-school education within the Witaj project. The
Committee considers that the obligation is thus only partly fulfilled.

97

The authorities are encouraged to ensure that pupils who have completed their pre-school
education within the Witaj project are given the possibility to continue to have an education in
Upper Sorbian.
c

i

to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of secondary education in the relevant regional
or minority languages; or

iii to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
iv to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils
who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered sufficient;
430.
There are six Upper Sorbian technical secondary schools. Four of these schools have classes with
either Upper Sorbian as mother tongue or Upper Sorbian as a second language. Sorbian is also offered as a
foreign language in six other schools. The Sorbisches Gymnasium in Bautzen provides complete linguistic
education in Upper Sorbian. In addition, two grammar schools within the area of the Bautzen Regional
Education Office offer language instruction in Upper Sorbian as a foreign language. Overall, Upper Sorbian
instruction, including Upper Sorbian as an encounter language, was given at 50 schools in Saxony in the 19992000 school year. However, there is a lack of material covering several subjects of secondary education.
431.
The traditional Sorbian territory has seen a drastic decrease of population (50%) over the last decade.
This has had repercussions on the education system. More than 300 schools have had to be closed over the
last three years and many teachers have lost their jobs or had to work only part-time. The Committee is aware
of the efforts made by the authorities to grant exceptions to usual minimum numbers. The recent closing of a
Sorbian class in Crostwitz was the subject of much debate. The Ministry of Culture decided to close a five
grade class at ”Jury Chezka” secondary school on the grounds that the legally fixed number of twenty pupils
would not be reached, although seventeen pupils registered. The authorities have pointed out that due to the
demographic change there is a need to rationalise the existing resources. The Committee is concerned that
this type of rationalisation of resources tends to have a greater impact on minority languages than on majority
languages and encourages the authorities to take this into consideration.
432.
Generally the Committee has observed in most other State parties to the Charter a lower minimum
number applied to education in regional or minority languages than the minimum number applied to majority
languages. The German authorities might consider introducing similar schemes in Germany. The Committee
considers that the adoption of the same numerical criteria for minority languages as for official languages does
not always lead to the best results and encourages the authorities to continue with the flexible approach in
implementing legal requirements. The Committee considers that under the present circumstances this
obligation is fulfilled.
d

i

to make available technical and vocational education in the relevant regional or
minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of technical and vocational education in the
relevant regional or minority languages; or

iii to provide, within technical and vocational education, for the teaching of the relevant
regional or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
iv to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils
who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered sufficient;

98

433.
At present, only the Bautzen Sorbische Fachschule für Sozialpedagogik offers the education provided
for under Article 8.1.d. There seems to be no teaching of Upper Sorbian in the other technical or vocational
institutions relating to professions or vocations other than social work. The obligation has been only partly
fulfilled.
e

ii

to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher education
subjects;

434.
The university of Leipzig offers Sorbian Studies. The activities of the Institute of Sorabistic studies are
traditionally concentrated on Upper Sorbian language and culture. The Committee considers this undertaking
fulfilled.
f

iii if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult education, to
favour and/or encourage the offering of such languages as subjects of adult and
continuing education;

435.
According to the Government, courses in Sorbian are offered by the adult education centres in the
Sorbian area and, upon request, they are subsidized by the Foundation for the Sorbian People. The Committee
considers this undertaking fulfilled.
g

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is
reflected by the regional or minority language;

436.
The German Government has informed the Committee that according to Section 2 of the Saxon
Schools Act, culture and history of the Sorbian people have been included in the school curricula. The
Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
h

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of
paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;

437.
There seems to be a shortage of trained teachers in Upper Sorbian. There exists an offer for basic
training of teachers at the University of Leipzig, but few students enrol in that programme. However, the
Committee is aware of the efforts being made by the authorities to recruit students in this field. Regarding
further teacher-training, some courses exist, but they have to be followed outside normal working hours. The
question of teacher-training is a good example of the lack of consistency in the language policy of the different
authorities. Although there is a lack of qualified teachers and in spite of the efforts and resources invested to
train a few of them, their qualifications in Upper Sorbian are not taken into consideration for the purposes of
recruitment or when teachers have to be made redundant. The employment office does not offer Upper Sorbian
training courses for teachers nor does it support attendance of such courses. The undertaking is fulfilled
regarding basic training but more efforts are needed to provide further training of teachers.

The authorities are encouraged to take the necessary measures in order to provide further
training of teachers.

i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken and
progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority
languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.

438.
According to the information gathered by the Committee, there is no supervisory body specifically
entrusted with the task of monitoring the measures taken and the progress achieved in developing the teaching
of Low German, nor are there any public reports on the findings of such a body. The Committee therefore
concludes that the obligation is not fulfilled.
The Committee encourages the authorities to establish a supervisory body designed to monitor the
measures taken in developing education in Upper Sorbian and to draw up periodic reports.
99

2

With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the regional or
minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a
regional or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the
regional or minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.

439.
The Committee is aware of the existence of certain courses arranged by Sorbisches Kultur und
Informationzentrum in Berlin. However, given the high rate of internal migration of Upper Sorbian speakers to
large cities outside their traditional speech area, the Committee has noted that no teaching in or of Upper
Sorbian at all appropriate stages of education is provided for outside the speech area. The Committee does not
have sufficient information to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
Article 9 – Judicial authorities
1

The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents
using the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to
the situation of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded
by the present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of
justice:
a

in criminal proceedings:
ii

to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or minority language; and/or

iii to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not be considered
inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a regional or minority language;
and/or
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations involving no extra expense for the
persons concerned ;
b

in civil proceedings:
ii

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she may
use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional
expense; and/or

iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;
440.
The codes of judicial procedures provide that legal documents shall be submitted in the original. If the
court does not understand the language in which a given legal document is drafted, it may, at its complete
discretion, order a translation to be produced (Section 142 (3) of the Code of Civil Procedure). On the basis of a
general reference to the Code of Civil Procedure, the other codes of procedure contain the same rule.
Documents and evidence drafted in Upper Sorbian are allowed. The costs incurred for translation become part
of the litigation costs, the only exception being the social court, where payment is never required.
441.
These undertakings are rarely put into practice owing to implementation obstacles. There is a lack of a
dictionary specialising in terms used within the judicial system and of staff competent to use Upper Sorbian.

100

442.
Although the use of Upper Sorbian is a legally secured right in court procedures, there are too many
obstacles to rely on Sorbian in reality. The speakers of Upper Sorbian are bilingual, they speak German to
accelerate the procedures and to avoid being seen as “trouble-makers”. Judges are not encouraged to speak
Upper Sorbian, and knowledge of it is not seen as an advantage. The problem is the lack of implementation or
encouraging measures. The status of Upper Sorbian as a private-life language has made its effective official use
in court procedures very difficult. There are no special courses for civil servants, who are not even encouraged to
attend the adult courses offered by the Volkhochschule, for instance.
443.

The Committee considers that these undertakings are formally fulfilled.
c

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
ii

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she may
use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional
expense; and/or

iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;
444.
The same findings as under paragraphs 440-443 above also apply here and the Committee therefore
considers that this undertaking is formally fulfilled.
d

to take steps to ensure that the application of sub-paragraphs i and iii of paragraphs b and c
above and any necessary use of interpreters and translations does not involve extra expense
for the persons concerned.

445.
The Committee has been informed that the costs incurred for any required services of interpreters or
translators are part of the regular costs of the proceedings and thus are not charged as an extra item. The
Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
2

The Parties undertake:
a not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because
they are drafted in a regional or minority language;

446.
The Committee has been informed that no provision of law excludes the validity of documents drawn up
in Upper Sorbian. Although the use of documents in Sorbian seems to be almost non-existent, the Committee
nevertheless concludes that the undertaking is formally fulfilled.
The authorities are encouraged to take positive measures aimed at encouraging and
facilitating the use of Upper Sorbian in court procedures.

Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
1

Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of
regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the
situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

iv to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written
applications in these languages; or
v

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document in
these languages;

101

2

In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who
are users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below,
the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
a

the use of regional or minority languages within the framework of the regional or local
authority;

447.
The legal framework, namely Sections 9 and 11 of the Saxon Sorbs Act, provides for the general
possibility to use Upper Sorbian in dealings with administrative authorities. However, in reality there are too
many obstacles for this to be operational. The speakers of Sorbian are bilingual, they speak German to
accelerate the procedures and to avoid being seen as “trouble-makers”. Staff in public services are not
encouraged to speak Sorbian, and knowledge of it is not seen as an advantage.
448.
In each municipality, there is a representative of the Sorbian Council. However, the Committee has not
been informed of any encouragement for other employees to learn Sorbian. The lack of trained teachers would
also make the organisation of language courses difficult. The existing legislative framework, in principle very
favourable to the use of Sorbian in justice and administration, is not operational because of the lack of
implementation or encouraging measures. The lack of staff with a command of Sorbian in those fields and the
absence of practical measures encouraging the use of Sorbian have contributed to a situation where Sorbian is
practically excluded from administrative life.
449.
The Committee considers that in practice the implementation of the above provisions is not actually
encouraged. The undertakings are only formally fulfilled.
b

the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written
applications in these languages;

450.
This undertaking seems to be implemented in the core area. In particular, the Committee has been
informed that in each municipality there is a representative of the Sorbian Council who may act as a facilitator.
However, no information regarding implementation outside the core area has been received by the Committee.
Therefore, the Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled in the core area but is not in a position to conclude
that the undertaking is fulfilled outside the core area.
g

the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official language(s), of
traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or minority languages.

451.
Local and regional authorities allow the use of place names in Lower Sorbian. Municipalities which fall
under the category of “municipality within the traditional settlement area” are obliged to use bilingual signs to
identify places, streets, bridges, public buildings and institutions. However, the municipalities have the
possibility to avoid being included in this category. Since the municipalities must bear the extra-costs of
bilingual signs, municipalities are not encouraged to become a part of the Sorbian area as defined by section 3,
par 2 of the Sorben (Wenden)- Gesetz. The Committee underlines that the implementation of this undertaking
might be hampered by the obstacles mentioned. Therefore, the Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled
but encourages the authorities to take positive steps to facilitate the implementation of this provision.
3

With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting
on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which regional or minority
languages are used, in accordance with the situation of each language and as far as this is
reasonably possible:
b

to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request and receive a reply in
these languages; or

102

452.
In its initial report the Government admits that even where staff of regional and local authorities are
proficient in Sorbian, this opportunity is seldom used by the Sorbian-speaking population. In fact, the latter
prefers to use German in order to avoid any misunderstandings in the dealings with the administration.
However, no measures appear to have been taken with a view to encouraging the Sorbian speakers to overcome
such hesitations. The Committee considers this undertaking only formally fulfilled.

The authorities are encouraged to launch measures to facilitate the use of Upper Sorbian in
administrative procedures.

c

to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request in these languages.

453.
This obligation is included in paragraph 3 and the Charter provides that it may be chosen as an
alternative to the other options of Article 10.3 but not in addition to them. It is therefore redundant to the
undertakings of Germany.
4

With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them,
the Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
c

compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a
knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that
language is used.

454.
The Land Government and Land Administration have striven to meet any wishes expressed by Land
public officials with regard to their employment. The Committee has been assured that there has never been a
case of non-compliance with a request from a public official having a command of the Sorbian/Wendish
language to be appointed in the traditional settlement area of the Sorbian people. However, so far no pertinent
Land legislation has been enacted. In any event, the information available to the Committee is not sufficient to
conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
5

The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or minority
languages, at the request of those concerned.

455.
The Committee has been informed that under German law persons may assume the minority-language
version of their names by making a declaration before the Registrar. The Committee considers this undertaking
fulfilled.
Article 11 – Media
1

The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories
in which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent
that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this
field, and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
b

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;

456.
There are frequent transmissions of radio programmes in Upper Sorbian on public service broadcasting.
The Committee considers that a commendable effort is made in the public sector. However, taking into account
the nature of the option chosen by the Government, the Committee does not have any information as to
measures of encouragement for the broadcasting of radio programmes in Upper Sorbian by private stations. The
Committee is therefore not in a position to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
c

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the regional
or minority languages on a regular basis;

103

457.
Some television programmes are transmitted in Upper Sorbian on public service broadcasting. However,
the Committee has received insufficient information to be able to conclude that the undertaking is fulfilled with
regard to private television programmes.
d

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in the regional or minority languages;

458.
The Committee has been informed that there is production and distribution of videos, music and
cassettes in Sorbian, facilitated by public funding through the Foundation for the Sorbian People, which is a
public body. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
e

i

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one newspaper
in the regional or minority languages; or

459.
There are a number of newspapers published in Upper Sorbian, which are supported through public
funding. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
f

ii to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions in the
regional or minority languages;

460.
A scheme exists but it is not clear whether it also applies to Upper Sorbian. The Committee considers
this undertaking formally fulfilled and would welcome examples of cases where financial assistance has been
provided to audiovisual productions in Upper Sorbian.
2

The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a
regional or minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure
that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of
information in the written press in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or
minority language. The exercise of the above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties
and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as
are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national
security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for
preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the authority
and impartiality of the judiciary.

461.
The Basic Law guarantees freedom of information, including the free reception of radio and television
broadcasts from the neighbouring countries. In particular, according to the information provided by the
Government, Polish and Czech radio and television broadcasts can be received in the Sorbs’ settlement areas
within the limits of technical feasibility (in fact, such areas are close to the borders with Poland and the Czech
Republic and Sorbian, as a Slavic language, is related to Polish and Czech). The Committee considers this
undertaking fulfilled.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
1

With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural
centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film
production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries,
including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have
power or play a role in this field:
a

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority languages
and foster the different means of access to works produced in these languages;

104

b

to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in regional or
minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation
and subtitling activities;

c

to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages by
aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;

d

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of
various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of
regional or minority languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for
which they provide backing;

e

to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting
cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of the regional or
minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest of the population;

f

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or
minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

g

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for collecting,
keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the regional or minority
languages;

h

if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and terminological research
services, particularly with a view to maintaining and developing appropriate administrative,
commercial, economic, social, technical or legal terminology in each regional or minority
language.

462.
According to the initial periodical report, the two Länder concerned with the protection of Sorbian (the
Free State of Saxony for Upper Sorbian and the Land of Brandenburg for Lower Sorbian) pursue a common
promotion policy through the Foundation for the Sorbian People (whose staff has a command of the Sorbian
language). The Foundation subsidizes the German-Sorbian Folk Theatre (Deutsch-Sorbisches Volkstheater),
promotes the organisation of traditional festivals by Sorbian associations and supports the Domowina
Publishing House. Furthermore, the Sorbian Institute (Sorbisches Institut) aims at preserving the linguistic
heritage but also developing the contemporary Sorbian language (namely by providing for the translatability of
Sorbian texts, as regards also technical terms in various fields). Finally, under the Saxon Sorbs Act and the
Brandenburg Act on the specification of the Rights of the Sorbs (Wends), the local authorities are required to
take account of the Sorbian language and culture in their cultural policy/project planning. The Committee
considers these obligations fulfilled.
2

In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are
traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority
language justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and
facilities in accordance with the preceding paragraph.

463.
The Committee has not received sufficient information to be able to conclude that the present
undertaking is fulfilled.
3

The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad,
for regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.

464.
According to the information received by the Committee, the Land authorities include Sorbian when
pursuing their cultural policy abroad. However, according to the information received by the Committee, the
federal authorities, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, do not make any special provision for Upper Sorbian.
Thus the Committee considers this undertaking partly fulfilled.

105

Article 13 – Economic and social life
1

With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole country:
a

to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without justifiable
reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to economic or
social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical documents such as
instructions for the use of products or installations;

465.
The Committee has not received any information indicating the existence of legislation which prohibits
or limits the use of the minority language and considers this obligation fulfilled.
c

to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority languages in
connection with economic or social activities;

466.
The Committee has not been informed of any policies designed to discourage the use of regional or
minority languages in connection with economic or social activities, although it is well aware of the current
debate on this issue. However, in the present conditions the Committee cannot conclude that this undertaking
is fulfilled.
d

to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by means other
than those specified in the above sub-paragraphs.

467.
The Committee has not received sufficient information which allows to conclude that this undertaking is
fulfilled.
2

With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the public
authorities are competent, within the territory in which the regional or minority languages are
used, and as far as this is reasonably possible:
c

to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and hostels offer the
possibility of receiving and treating in their own language persons using a regional or
minority language who are in need of care on grounds of ill-health, old age or for other
reasons;

468.
One Sorbian hospital providing 80% of its services in Upper Sorbian had to be closed. Part of its
services were transferred to another bigger hospital. The share of services provided in Sorbian could be
estimated at 50%. This case represents however an exception, as the availability of services in Upper Sorbian
very much depends on chance, and not on a special policy. The traditional “Sorbian” institutions maintain their
status quo. In the other institutions, the recruitment of bilingual staff is not pursued expressly by social care
facilities. The obligation is thus only partly fulfilled.
The Committee encourages the authorities to take the necessary measures to increase and
make more systematic the possibility for the persons concerned to be received and treated in
Upper Sorbian in social care facilities. This may include a bilingual human resources policy.
2.3.6.

Lower Sorbian in the Lower Sorbian language area in Brandenburg

Article 8 – Education
1

With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages
are used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the
teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
a

i

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or

106

ii

to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant regional
or minority languages; or

iii to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those pupils
whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient; or
iv if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school education,
to favour and/or encourage the application of the measures referred to under i to iii
above;
469.
In twelve day-care centres within the Witaj programme, a priority activity is the imparting of Lower
Sorbian and in other centres Lower Sorbian is used as a part of the activity. The Witaj programme has been
very successful and parents' demand is increasing, but financial constraints are creating difficulties. There is
also a lack of teaching materials. In pre-schools, the presence of Lower Sorbian very much depends on the
motivation of the parents, teachers and schools. Since 1998, part of the efforts in the field of education are
concentrated on the Witaj project, which has proved to be very successful in spite of the generation gap in the
use of the language. The project started with 19 pre-school children and embraces today 55 pupils and a
waiting list of 30 children. In 2002, for the first time an existing German nursery school will start a Witaj project
to progressively become a Lower Sorbian nursery school. In the origins of Witaj, the municipalities funded the
small classes run by the project. Nowadays, these classes have become very large and the authorities do not
pay for all the children. Pre-schools are the responsibility of the municipalities, but are financed by different
sources, depending on the institution and the programme run. It would be necessary to secure a common
budgetary framework for all pre-schools. The Committee appreciates the efforts made to make available preschool education in Lower Sorbian but realizes that more financial support is needed to the complete fulfilment
of the obligation. The Committee considers that the undertaking is partly fulfilled.
The Committee encourages the establishment of a legal framework and the allocation of
adequate resources to secure the implementation of this undertaking.

b

i

to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of primary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or

iii

to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or minority
languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

iv to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils
whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient;
470.
Primary schools cannot offer bilingual education for the time being, but Lower Sorbian is taught in a
number of schools as a regular subject and participation in Lower Sorbian primary school classes has
increased over the past few years. Paragraph 1 of the Sorben/Wenden Schulverordnung of the Land
Brandenburg establishes a right to receive teaching of Lower Sorbian in those municipalities which are officially
qualified as a “municipalities in the traditional settlement area”. At present, a thousand pupils at 23 primary
schools are taught Lower Sorbian as a subject, added to the ordinary curriculum. However, problems may arise
in those municipalities not officially qualified as “Sorbian municipalities” due to the fact that the statutory
framework does not accord a subjective right to families to obtain teaching of their children in Lower Sorbian in
these municipalities.
471.
The Committee encourages the Land authorities to create clear legal entitlements to families in all
places where there are sufficient numbers for their children to receive education in/of Lower Sorbian. This is
especially important in those areas where Witaj projects are run at pre-school level, as the first Witaj children
have now reached primary school.

107

472.
The Committee acknowledges the efforts made to strengthen further the Lower Sorbian profile in
primary schools and encourages the authorities to include teaching of Lower Sorbian as an integral part of the
curriculum.
473.

The Committee therefore considers that this undertaking has been only partially fulfilled.

The authorities are encouraged to ensure that pupils who have completed their pre-school
education within the Witaj project are given the possibility to continue to have an education in
Lower Sorbian.
c

i

to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of secondary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or

iii

to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or minority
languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

iv to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils
who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered sufficient;
474.
According to the initial periodical report, some five hundred pupils receive instruction in Lower Sorbian
as a second language and the Niedersorbisches Gymnasium in Cottbus provides in-depth education in Lower
Sorbian. Paragraph 1 of the Sorben/Wenden Schulverordnung of the Land Brandenburg establishes a right to
receive teaching of Lower Sorbian in those municipalities which are officially qualified as a “municipalities in the
traditional settlement area”. However, problems seem to arise in those municipalities not officially qualified as
“Sorbian municipalities”.
475.
The Committee encourages the Land authorities to create clear legal entitlements to families in all
places where there are sufficient numbers for their children to receive education in/of Lower Sorbian, whether or
not officially classified as Sorbian municipalities.
476.
The Committee acknowledges the efforts made to further strengthen the Lower Sorbian profile in
secondary schools and encourages the authorities to include teaching of Lower Sorbian in the ordinary
curriculum in all cases.
477.

Therefore, the Committee considers this undertaking partly fulfilled.
e

i

to make available university and other higher education in regional or minority languages; or

ii

to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher education
subjects; or

iii if, by reason of the role of the State in relation to higher education institutions, subparagraphs i and ii cannot be applied, to encourage and/or allow the provision of
university or other forms of higher education in regional or minority languages or of
facilities for the study of these languages as university or higher education subjects;

108

478.
The Committee very much welcomes the fact that the State of Brandenburg has enabled the Institute of
Slavonic Studies of the University of Potsdam to set up a programme for the study of Lower Sorbian. However,
the Committee has been informed of the decision of the Land to terminate the programme of research and
teacher training in Lower Sorbian at the University of Potsdam. When this offer is terminated, there will not be
any other offer of university or higher education in respect of Lower Sorbian. The Committee does not consider
the undertaking fulfilled, since the Sorbian studies programme at Leipzig University does not secure an
adequate level of university education in Lower Sorbian, particularly as far as the training of teachers is
concerned.
f

iii if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult education, to
favour and/or encourage the offering of such languages as subjects of adult and
continuing education;

479.
The offer of Sorbian in adult education has been developed, as there is an increasing demand for this
kind of course. In 1991, 88 persons followed the courses offered by the Volkshochschule of Cottbus. They were
2.284 in 2000. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
g

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is
reflected by the regional or minority language;

480.
According to the Initial Report, in order to be able to take adequate account of the history and culture of
the Sorbs at schools in the traditional settlement area of the Sorbian people, as well as at schools outside that
area, teachers are offered courses regarding the history and culture of the Sorbs. In addition, the framework
curricula of Brandenburg provide for the inclusion of the history and culture of the Sorbs in a number of subjects.
The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
h

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of
paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;

481.
In 1998, an education programme for secondary-school teachers was launched by Potsdam University,
the objective being to revitalise the language and to secure the continuity of its role through the education
system. Twenty teachers have been trained during the last two years. The Committee has been informed that
this, the only programme designed to meet the need for Lower Sorbian teachers is being terminated.
482.
There is a lack of trained teachers and different measures are now being considered. One would be the
establishment of a continuous training (1 day per week) out of the normal school hours (the teachers would be
relieved of other tasks). A six-month training programme has been launched and can be followed by any
teacher, but it is difficult to find “volunteers”. Knowledge of Lower Sorbian is not seen as an advantage or a
criterion when teachers are recruited or made redundant.
483.
The six-month training programme can only be followed if the municipality financially assumes the
replacement of the teacher. This is always subject to negotiation; the city of Cottbus has already financed the
training of several teachers. But these efforts may be lost due to the absence of a real policy for the promotion
of Lower Sorbian. The Committee encourages the authorities to facilitate the participation of teachers in such
training courses, for example by earmarking special funds.
484.
The Committee has been informed that the employment office does not recognise a competence in
Sorbian as a desirable qualification and does not finance unemployed teachers in following the six-month
training programme. The Committee encourages the federal authorities to make appropriate provisions to
ensure that attainment of a qualification in Sorbian becomes eligible for funding by the employment
administration. Lower Sorbian should also be listed as a criterion for recruitment policy. This should also extend
to the criteria used when making teachers redundant.
485.
The Committee therefore considers that due to these obstacles to its implementation, this undertaking
is only partly fulfilled.

109

The Committee encourages the authorities to ensure that appropriate facilities for teacher
training are in place to meet the needs for education in Lower Sorbian.

i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken and
progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority
languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.

486.
According to the information gathered by the Committee, there is no supervisory body specifically
entrusted with the task of monitoring the measures taken and the progress achieved in developing the teaching
of Lower Sorbian, nor are there any public reports on the findings of such a body. The Committee therefore
concludes that the obligation is not fulfilled.
The Committee encourages the authorities to establish a supervisory body designed to monitor the
measures taken in developing education in Lower Sorbian and to draw up periodic reports.
Article 9 – Judicial authorities
1

The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents
using the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to
the situation of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded
by the present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of
justice:
a

in criminal proceedings:
ii

to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or minority language; and/or

iii to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not be considered
inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a regional or minority language;
and/or
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations involving no extra expense for the
persons concerned;
487.
These undertakings are rarely put into practice owing to implementation obstacles. In particular, there
is a legal framework but the latter is seldom made use of in practice, owing also to the lack of a dictionary
specialising in terms used within the judicial system. Furthermore, there is a lack of staff competent to use
Lower Sorbian.
488.
Although the use of Lower Sorbian is a legally secured right in court procedures there are too many
obstacles to relying on Sorbian in reality. The speakers of Lower Sorbian are bilingual, they speak German to
accelerate the procedures and to avoid being seen as “trouble-makers”. Judges are not encouraged to speak
Lower Sorbian, its knowledge is not seen as an advantage. The problem is the lack of implementation or
encouraging measures. The real status of the language (as a private-life language) itself has made its effective
official use in court procedures very difficult. There are no special courses for civil servants, who are not even
encouraged to attend the adult courses offered by the Volkshochschule, for instance.
489.

The Committee considers that these undertakings are formally fulfilled.
b

in civil proceedings:
iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

110

c

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

490.
The codes of judicial procedures provide that legal documents shall be submitted in the original. If the
court does not understand the language in which a given legal document is drafted, it may, at its complete
discretion, order a translation to be produced (Section 142 (3) of the Code of Civil Procedure). On the basis of a
general reference to the Code of Civil Procedure, the other codes of procedure contain the same rule.
Documents and evidence drafted in Lower Sorbian are allowed. The costs incurred for translation become part
of the litigation costs, the only exception being the social court, where payment is never required.
491.
However, although the use of Lower Sorbian is a legally secured right in court procedures, there are too
many obstacles to relying on Sorbian in reality. The speakers of Lower Sorbian are bilingual, they speak
German to accelerate the procedures and to avoid being seen as “trouble-makers”. Judges are not encouraged
to speak Lower Sorbian, its knowledge is not seen as an advantage. The problem is the lack of implementation
or encouraging measures. The status of Lower Sorbian as a private-life language has made its effective official
use in court procedures very difficult.
492.

The Committee considers these undertakings formally fulfilled.
2

The Parties undertake:
a

not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because they
are drafted in a regional or minority language;

493.
The Committee has been informed that no provision of law excludes the validity of documents drawn up
in Sorbian. The Committee therefore considers this undertaking fulfilled.
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
1

Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of
regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the
situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

iv to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written
applications in these languages; or

494.
A clear legal basis secures the use of Lower Sorbian before the administration. In practice, however,
there are many obstacles to this. The speakers of Lower Sorbian are bilingual, they speak German to
accelerate the procedures and to avoid being seen as “trouble-makers”. Staff in public services are not
encouraged to speak Lower Sorbian, its knowledge is not seen as an advantage. The existing legislative
framework, in principle favourable to the use of Lower Sorbian in the courts and administration, is not
operational because of the lack of implementation or encouraging measures. The lack of staff with a command
of Lower Sorbian in those fields and the absence of practical measures encouraging the use of Lower Sorbian
have contributed to a status quo in which Lower Sorbian is practically excluded from administrative life. The
Committee therefore must conclude that the undertaking is formally fulfilled regarding written applications, but
not fulfilled in practice regarding oral applications.
v

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document in
these languages;

495.
This obligation is included in paragraph 1.a and the Charter provides that it may be chosen as an
alternative to the other options of Article 10 para. 1 (a) but not in addition to them. It is therefore redundant to
the undertakings of Germany.

111

2

In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who
are users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below,
the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
b

the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written
applications in these languages;

496.
The statutory provision of Section 23 of the Administrative Procedure Act of the Land Brandenburg
guarantees the right to submit oral and written applications in Lower Sorbian to regional and local
administrations. However, there is a strong need to take positive measures likely to encourage the use of
Lower Sorbian in administrative matters at the local and regional level. The Committee concludes that the
undertaking is only formally fulfilled.
g

the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official language(s), of
traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or minority languages

497.
Local and regional authorities allow the use of place names in Lower Sorbian. Municipalities which fall
under the category of “ municipality within the traditional settlement area” are obliged to use bilingual signs to
identify places, streets, bridges, public buildings and institutions. However, the municipalities have the
possibility to avoid being included in this category. Since the municipalities must bear the extra-costs of
bilingual signs, municipalities are not encouraged to become a part of the Sorbian area as defined by section 3,
para. 2 of the Sorben (Wenden)- Gesetz .
498.
The Committee acknowledges the efforts made by the Brandenburg authorities to provide for bilingual
signs and considers the undertaking fulfilled, but realizes that the implementation might be hampered by the
obstacles mentioned. Therefore, the Committee encourages the authorities to take positive steps to facilitate
the implementation of this provision.
3

With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting
on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which regional or minority
languages are used, in accordance with the situation of each language and as far as this is
reasonably possible:
b

499.

to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request and receive a reply in
these languages; or

The Committee has not received enough information to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
c

to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request in these languages.

500.
This obligation is included in paragraph 3 (b) and the Charter provides that it may be chosen as an
alternative to the other options of Article 10 para. 3 but not in addition to them. It is therefore redundant to the
undertakings of Germany.
4

With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them,
the Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
a

translation or interpretation as may be required;

501.
The Government refers to the measures taken to implement the undertaking under Article 10 para. 1 (a)
(iv), which provide that the translation of the applications mentioned therein is taken care of by the authority
concerned. The Committee considers this undertaking partly fulfilled and needs further information on how
translation or interpretation is made available, where required, also in respect of the other undertakings
accepted under Article 10 paras. 1, 2 and 3.

112

c

compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a
knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that
language is used.

502.
The Land Government and Land Administration have striven to meet any wishes expressed by Land
public officials as regards their employment. The Committee has been assured that it has never occurred that
the wish of a public official having a command of the Sorbian/Wendish language to be appointed in the
traditional settlement area of the Sorbian people was not complied with. However, no pertinent Land legislation
has been so far enacted. In any event, the information available to the Committee is not sufficient to conclude
that this undertaking is fulfilled.
5

The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or minority
languages, at the request of those concerned.

503.
The Committee has been informed that under German law persons may assume the minority-language
version of their names by making a declaration before the Registrar. The Committee considers this undertaking
fulfilled.
Article 11 – Media
1

The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories
in which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent
that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this
field, and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
b

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;

504.
There are frequent transmissions of radio programmes in Lower Sorbian on public service broadcasting.
The Committee considers that a commendable effort is made in the public sector. However, taking into account
the nature of the option chosen by the Government, the Committee does not have any information as to
measures of encouragement for the broadcasting of radio programmes in Lower Sorbian by private stations. The
Committee is therefore not in a position to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
c

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the regional
or minority languages on a regular basis;

505.
Some television programmes are transmitted in Lower Sorbian on public service broadcasting. The
Committee considers that a commendable effort is made in the public sector. However, taking into account the
nature of the option chosen by the Government, the Committee does not have any information as to measures
of encouragement for the broadcasting of television programmes in Lower Sorbian by private stations. The
Committee is therefore not in a position to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.
d

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in the regional or minority languages;

506.
The Committee has been informed that there is production and distribution of videos, music and
cassettes in Lower Sorbian with partial funding by public authorities (Foundation for the Sorbian People). The
Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
e

i

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one newspaper
in the regional or minority languages; or

507.
There are a number of newspapers published in Lower Sorbian which receive public funding. The
Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.

113

2

508.

The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a
regional or minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure
that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of
information in the written press in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or
minority language. The exercise of the above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties
and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as
are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national
security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for
preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the authority
and impartiality of the judiciary.
See para. 461 above. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.

Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
1

With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural
centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film
production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries,
including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have
power or play a role in this field:
a

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority languages
and foster the different means of access to works produced in these languages;

b

to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in regional or
minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation
and subtitling activities;

c

to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages by
aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;

d

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of
various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of
regional or minority languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for
which they provide backing;

e

to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting
cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of the regional or
minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest of the population;

f

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or
minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

g

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for collecting,
keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the regional or minority
languages;

h

if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and terminological research
services, particularly with a view to maintaining and developing appropriate administrative,
commercial, economic, social, technical or legal terminology in each regional or minority
language.

114

509.
See para. 462 above. As far as Lower Sorbian in particular is concerned, it should also be mentioned
that the Sorbian Institute operates a branch in Cottbus (Brandenburg), which deals specifically with Lower
Sorbian. The Committee considers these obligations fulfilled.
2

In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are
traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority
language justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and
facilities in accordance with the preceding paragraph.

510.
The Committee has not received sufficient information to be able to conclude that the present
undertaking is fulfilled.
3

The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad,
for regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.

511.
According to the information received by the Committee, the Land includes Sorbian in presenting its
culture abroad. However, according to the information received by the Committee, the federal authorities, in
pursuing their cultural policy abroad, do not make any special provision for Lower Sorbian. Thus the Committee
considers this undertaking partly fulfilled.
Article 13 – Economic and social life
1

With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole country:
a

to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without justifiable
reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to economic or
social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical documents such as
instructions for the use of products or installations;

512.
The Committee has not received any information pointing to the existence of legislation which prohibits
or limits the use of the minority language and considers this obligation fulfilled.
c

to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority languages in
connection with economic or social activities;

513. The Committee has not been informed of any policies designed to discourage the use of regional or
minority languages in connection with economic or social activities, although it is well aware of the current
debate on this issue. However, in the present conditions the Committee cannot conclude that this undertaking
is fulfilled.
d

514.

to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by means other
than those specified in the above sub-paragraphs.

The Committee has not received sufficient information to conclude that this undertaking is fulfilled.

115

Chapter 3

Findings of the Committee

The Committee hereby presents its general findings on the application of the Charter in Germany.
A.
The Committee compliments Germany on making a ratification which reflects the complex linguistic
situation and the different levels of responsibility which exist in a federal state. The ratification has also taken
into account the different situations of the languages covered and the different conditions in the various Länder.
The German report deserves credit for its comprehensive presentation of how the undertakings have been dealt
with. The Committee also commends the German authorities for the procedure chosen in the production of their
report, especially the co-operation which took place with representatives of the regional or minority languages in
the various Länder and at federal level.
B.
The German ratification is ambitious in the sense that it paves the way for future positive developments
in the protection and promotion of regional or minority languages in Germany. This is in full conformity with the
spirit and the dynamic character of the Charter. The Committee sees this approach as evidence of a political
commitment to the protection and the promotion of regional or minority languages in Germany and looks
forward to learning of more concrete results of this commitment in the next periodical report.
The Committee commends the ambition which lies behind the German Government's decision to apply certain
Part III undertakings to Part II languages. In the case of non-territorial languages, this is a positive way of giving
concrete effect to Article 7 obligations. In the case of territorial languages, however, the Committee regards
this approach as acceptable only if there is an underlying intention to progress to full Part III protection.
C.
The Committee views positively the protection afforded to Romany under the Charter, which the
German authorities have developed in co-operation with representatives of the Romany language. The
Committee praises the efforts of co-operation deployed by the authorities in this area but notes that the
speakers of Romany have different approaches as to the protection and promotion of their language by the
authorities. In the Committee’s opinion, the authorities should continue the dialogue with a view to improving cooperation and developing a policy in relation to this language.
D.
The German authorities work on the assumption that the Charter, as an international treaty, contains
provisions of a self-executing nature. But even if the national law provides that the provisions of the Charter are
self-executing, many of the undertakings accepted under the Charter need specific implementing legal
provisions in order to become operational in practice. Owing to the lack of such provisions, the Committee has
not always been in a position to conclude that undertakings have been fulfilled. Furthermore, it is the opinion of
the Committee that it is precisely the lack of specific legal provisions that in many cases hinders an effective
implementation of the undertakings.
E.
Education is the fundamental basis of the protection and promotion of regional or minority languages. In
general terms, more precise planning seems to be needed in this area. Furthermore, bearing in mind the
increased interest in and demand for regional or minority language education, the Committee has observed that
there is a real need to develop basic and further teacher-training designed to address that demand on a more
continuous and regular basis.
F.
The position of the Danish language is generally satisfactory in pre-school, primary and secondary
education.
G.
Despite its recognition as a regional language in the ratification instrument, Low German is in practice
still treated as a variant of German and not as a language in its own right. This leads to serious structural
impediments to granting Low German the status in education which is required by the provisions chosen by
Germany. Since the legal regulation of school education leaves it to the discretion of teachers and heads of
schools to decide whether and to what degree Low German is taken up as a subject of teaching, education in
Low German is largely available on an arbitrary basis leaving the decision to the educators and not to the
parents or the children.

116

H.
Education in the Upper Sorbian language is relatively well developed. However, the rationalisation
programme in rural schools in the Upper Sorbian territory may be havi ng an adverse effect on the maintenance
of the language and the ability of children to benefit from education in Upper Sorbian. The authorities have
shown sensitivity to the issue through a certain flexibility on the minimum number of pupils required to maintain
a class or a school, but the Committee is concerned about the impact of such rationalisations, which tends to
be greater on minority languages than on majority languages.
I.
The Committee finds that Lower Sorbian, North Frisian and Sater Frisian are particularly endangered.
There have been commendable individual initiatives in respect of these languages, such as the Witaj
kindergartens in the case of Lower Sorbian. However, these have all been voluntary initiatives and there has
been a lack of Land involvement.
These three languages are particularly endangered since there are few speakers of them in the younger
generations. The problem is exacerbated by the fact that there is no planned and systematic approach in
education. The presence of Lower Sorbian, North Frisian and Sater Frisian in pre-school, primary and
secondary education depends on the available funding as well as on the motivation of the children, parents and
teachers, as the courses are usually given outside regular school hours. Furthermore, it is not satisfactory that
in practice there is often no continuity in the education in these endangered languages. The Committee has
also found that there is no legal framework nor allocation of adequate resources to secure the implementation of
many of the provisions chosen by Germany in this area and that there is a shortage or total absence of proper
research and teacher training.
The Committee expresses its concern and stresses the need for immediate action in the field of education in
respect of Lower Sorbian, North Frisian and Sater Frisian.
J.
The Committee has noted that Germany has not chosen any obligations pertaining to primary and
secondary school education in respect of Sater Frisian and Low German in Lower Saxony. However, bearing in
mind the above-mentioned increased interest in and demand for regional and minority language education and
the indispensable role of education in language preservation, the Committee has noted the need to strengthen
or introduce primary and secondary education also in respect of Sater Frisian and Low German in Lower
Saxony, and would in this respect refer to the obligations derived from Article 7 paragraph 1 (f).
K.
With regard to the supervisory bodies referred to in Article 8 para. 1 (i), the Committee notes that in
most cases no supervisory body exists that is specifically entrusted with the task of monitoring the measures
taken and the progress achieved in developing the teaching of the language, whereas in other cases the
monitoring tasks are not clearly defined. Nor are there any public reports on the findings of such a body. This is
particularly important in relation to Lower Sorbian, North Frisian and Sater Frisian: taking account of their
critical situation and the need for close monitoring, immediate action is needed to set up supervisory bodies
entrusted with the said special monitoring responsibilities.
L.
In the fields of justice and administration the Committee has found that there are social and practical
obstacles which hamper the fulfilment of many of the undertakings under Articles 9 and 10 of the Charter. In the
first place, the lack of specific legal provisions implementing the undertakings and the lack of adequate
information make it difficult for the authorities to live up to the standards embodied in the various obligations.
The Committee has also observed a lack of linguistic competence in regional or minority languages within the
courts and the administrations concerned. Secondly, the users of the regional or minority languages are not
made aware of the possibility to avail themselves of the rights to use their language. Even where they are
sufficiently informed, since the users of the regional or minority languages also speak German they are often
afraid of causing what may be considered unnecessary trouble for the courts or the authorities, especially in
cases when they are in a "client" position. These problems have been dealt with in detail in the report.
M.
As far as court proceedings are concerned, positive measures are needed in order to promote in
particular the use of Sorbian, given the particular undertakings entered into under Article 9 of the Charter with
regard to this language.

117

N.
Financial support schemes and legal regulations which could be and are sometimes used for favouring
the use of regional or minority languages in the media exist in Germany. In the Committee's view, the use of
such measures to promote the presence of regional or minority languages in the media would not constitute
undue interference with editorial freedom. The Committee considers that not enough use is made of these
measures in respect of regional and minority languages.
O.
The German authorities have undertaken to encourage and/or facilitate broadcasting of radio and
television programmes in regional or minority languages on a regular basis in accordance with Article 11 para. 1
(b) (ii) of the Charter, which would entail measures to support regional or minority languages on private stations.
However, the authorities have provided very little information with regard to the fulfilment of this undertaking.
In some cases information is provided concerning measures applied in relation to the use of regional or minority
languages in public service broadcasting. In the light of the extent of these measures, the Committee wonders
whether it would not be appropriate for the German authorities also to ratify Article 11 para. 1 (a) (iii).
P.
The conditions for the use of the languages in the field of culture are generally favourable, and the initial
German report reflects a number of activities. As for the pursuit of German culture policy abroad by the federal
authorities, the regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect have no representation.
Q.
In the various Länder there are cultural funds of a general nature from which projects relating to regional
or minority languages may receive support. However, there seem to be few such projects that receive support
from these funds. Especially in the case of Frisian and Low German, which do not have established institutions,
it is difficult to base the cultural activity on mere project funding.

The German government was invited to comment on the content of this report in accordance with Article 16.3 of
the Charter. The comments received are attached in Appendix II.
On the basis of this report and its findings the Committee of Experts submitted its proposals to the Committee
of Ministers for recommendations to be addressed to Germany. At the same time it emphasised the need for
the German authorities to take into account, in addition to these general recommendations, the more detailed
observations contained in the body of the report.
At its 820th meeting on 4 December 2002, the Committee of Ministers adopted its Recommendation addressed
to Germany, which is set out in Part B of this document.

118

APPENDIX I: INSTRUMENT OF RATIFICATION

Germany
:

Declaration transmitted by a letter from the Deputy Permanent Representative of Germany, dated
23 January 1998, registered at the Secretariat General on 23 January 1998 - Or. Engl./Ger.
Declaration from the Federal Republic of Germany for the preparation of the ratification of the
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
Minority languages within the meaning of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages in the
Federal Republic of Germany shall be the Danish, Upper Sorbian, Lower Sorbian, North Frisian and Sater
Frisian languages and the Romany language of the German Sinti and Roma; a regional language within the
meaning of the Charter in the Federal Republic shall be the Low German language.
Pursuant to Article 3, paragraph 1, of the Charter, the Federal Republic of Germany shall specify the regional or
minority languages to which the provisions selected pursuant to Article 2, paragraph 2, of the Charter shall
apply upon the entry into force of the Charter in the Federal Republic of Germany:
Danish in the Danish language area in Land Schleswig-Holstein:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a iv; b iv; c iii/iv; d iii; e ii; f ii/iii; g; h; i; paragraph 2;
Article 9, paragraph 1 b iii; c iii; paragraph 2 a;
Article 10, paragraph 1 a v; paragraph 4 c; paragraph 5;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii; d; e ii; f ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 c; d; e; f; g; paragraph 2; paragraph 3;
Article 13, paragraph 1 a; c; d; paragraph 2 c;
Article 14 a; b.
Upper Sorbian in the Upper Sorbian language area in the Free State of Saxony:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a iii; b iv; c iv; d iv; e ii; f iii; g; h; i; paragraph 2;
Article 9 paragraph 1 a ii; a iii; b ii; b iii; c ii; c iii; d; paragraph 2 a;
Article 10, paragraph 1 a iv/v; paragraph 2 a; b; g; paragraph 3 b/c; paragraph 4 c; paragraph 5;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii; d; e i; f ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; b; c; d; e; f; g; h; paragraph 2, paragraph 3;
Article 13, paragraph 1 a; c; d; paragraph 2 c.
Lower Sorbian in the Lower Sorbian language area in Land Brandenburg:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a iv; b iv; c iv; e iii; f iii; g; h; i;
Article 9, paragraph 1 a ii; a iii; b iii; c iii; paragraph 2 a;
Article 10, paragraph 1 a iv/v; paragraph 2 b; g; paragraph 3 b/c; paragraph 4 a; c; paragraph 5;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii; d; e i; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; b; c; d; e; f; g; h; paragraph 2; paragraph 3;
Article 13, paragraph 1 a; c; d.
North Frisian in the North Frisian language area in Land Schleswig-Holstein:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a iii/iv; b iv; c iv; e ii; f iii; g; h; i; paragraph 2;
Article 9, paragraph 1 b iii; c iii; paragraph 2 a;
Article 10, paragraph 1 a v; paragraph 4 c; paragraph 5;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii; d; e ii; f ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; b; c; d; e; f; g; h; paragraph 2; paragraph 3;

Article 13, paragraph 1 a; c; d;
Article 14 a.

120

Sater Frisian in the Sater Frisian language area in Land Lower Saxony:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a iv; e ii; f iii; g; i;
Article 9, paragraph 1 b iii; c iii; paragraph 2 a;
Article 10, paragraph 1 a v; c; paragraph 2 a; b; c; d; e; f; paragraph 4 a; c; paragraph 5;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii; d; e ii; f ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; b; c; d; e; f; g; paragraph 2; paragraph 3;
Article 13, paragraph 1 a; c; d.
Low German in the Länder Free Hanseatic City of Bremen, Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg, MecklenburgWestern Pomerania, Lower Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein:
Obligations regarding Low German in the territory of the Länder Free Hanseatic City of Bremen, Free and
Hanseatic City of Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Lower Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a iv; e ii; g;
Article 9, paragraph 1 b iii; c iii; paragraph 2 a;
Article 10, paragraph 1 a v; c; paragraph 2 a; b; f;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii; d; e ii; f ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; d; f; paragraph 3;
Article 13, paragraph 1 a; c;
and additionally:
- in the Free Hanseatic City of Bremen:
Article 8, paragraph 1 b iii; c iii; f i; h;
Article 10, paragraph 2 c; d; e;
Article 11, paragraph 1 g;
Article 12, paragraph 1 b; c; e; g;
Article 13, paragraph 2 c;
- in the Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg:
Article 8, paragraph 1 b iii; c iii; d iii; f ii; h; i;
Article 10, paragraph 2 e; paragraph 4 c;
Article 11, paragraph 1 g;
Article 12, paragraph 1 g;
Article 13, paragraph 1 d; paragraph 2 c;
- in Land Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania:
Article 8, paragraph 1 b iii; c iii; d iii; h; i;
Article 10, paragraph 4 c;
Article 12, paragraph 1 b; c; e; h;
Article 13, paragraph 1 d, paragraph 2 c;
- in Land Lower Saxony:
Article 8, paragraph 1 f iii; i;
Article 10, paragraph 2 c; d; e; paragraph 4 a; c;
Article 12, paragraph 1 b; c; e; g; paragraph 2;
Article 13, paragraph 1 d;
Article 14 a; b;
- in Land Schleswig-Holstein:
Article 8, paragraph 1 b iii; c iii; f iii; h; i; paragraph 2;
Article 10, paragraph 4 c;
Article 12, paragraph 1 b; c; g;
Article 13, paragraph 1 d; paragraph 2 c.
The separate specification of these provisions for the territories of each individual Land is in keeping with the
121

federal structure of the Federal Republic of Germany and takes into account the situation of each of these
languages in the Land in question.

122

The Romany language of the German Sinti and Roma in the territory of the Federal Republic of Germany and
Low German language in the territory of the Länder Brandenburg, North-Rhine/Westphalia and Saxony-Anhalt
shall be protected pursuant to Part II of the Charter.
Period covered: 01/01/99 The preceding statement concerns Article(s): 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 2, 3, 8, 9
Declaration transmitted by a letter from the Deputy Permanent Representative of Germany, dated
26 January 1998, registered at the Secretariat General on 26 January 1998 - Or. Engl./Ger.
Declaration from the Federal Republic of Germany for the fulfilment of the obligations of the
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages concerning Part II.
Part II of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages shall be applied to Romany, the minority
language of the German Sinti and Roma in the territory of the Federal Republic of Germany, and to the regional
language Low German in the territory of the Länder Brandenburg, North-Rhine/Westphalia and Saxony-Anhalt
upon its entry into force in the Federal Republic of Germany in accordance with the declaration of the Federal
Republic of Germany of 23 January 1998. The objectives and principles laid down in Article 7 of the Charter
shall form the bases with regard to these languages. At the same time, German law and Germany's
administrative practice thus meet individual requirements laid down in Part III of the Charter:
With regard to Romany:
for the territory of the Federal Republic of Germany:
Article 8, paragraph 1 f iii; g; h;
Article 9, paragraph 1 b iii; c iii; paragraph 2 a;
Article 10, paragraph 5;
Article 11, paragraph 1 d; e ii; f ii; g; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 g; paragraph 3;
Article 13, paragraph 1 a; c; d;
Article 14 a;
and additionally:
- in Land Baden-Württemberg:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a iv;
Article 10, paragraph 4 c;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a;
- in Land Berlin:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a i/ii; b i/ii/iii/iv; e i/ii/iii; i; paragraph 2;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b i/ii: c ii; e i/ii;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; d; f;
- in the Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg:
Article 8, paragraph 1 b iv; c iv;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; d; f;
- in Land Hesse:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a iii/iv; b iv; c iv; d iv; e iii; i; paragraph 2;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii; e i;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; d; f; paragraph 2;
- in Land North-Rhine/Westphalia:
123

Article 8,paragraph 1 e iii; paragraph 2;

124

Article 12, paragraph 1 a; d; f; paragraph 2;
- in Land Lower Saxony:
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; d; f;
- in Land Rhineland-Palatinate:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a iv; e iii;
Article 11, paragraph 1 c ii;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; d; f;
- in Land Schleswig-Holstein:
Article 10, paragraph 1 a v; paragraph 2 b; paragraph 4 c;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; d; f; paragraph 2.
With regard to Low German:
- in Land Brandenburg:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a iv; b iv; c iv; f iii; g;
Article 9, paragraph 2 a;
Article 10, paragraph 2 b; paragraph 3 c;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii; d; e ii; f ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; f; g;
- in Land North-Rhine/Westphalia:
Article 8, paragraph 1 e iii; g; h; paragraph 2;
Article 9, paragraph 1 b iii; c iii; paragraph 2 a;
Article 11, paragraph 1 d; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; d; e; f; g; h; paragraph 2;
Article 13, paragraph 1 a; c; d;
- in Land Saxony-Anhalt:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a iv; b iv; c iv; g; h;
Article 9, paragraph 2 a;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii; e ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; f; g; h.
The separate specification of these provisions for the territory of each individual Land is in keeping with the
federal structure of the Federal Republic of Germany and takes into account the situation of each of these
languages in the Land in question.
In accordance with the national distribution of competencies, the way in which the above-mentioned provisions
of Part III of the Charter are implemented through legal regulations and Germany's administrative practice with
due regard to the objectives and principles specified in Article 7 of the Charter shall be the responsibility of
either the Federation or the competent Land. Details will be provided in the procedure for implementing the
federal act with which the legislature consents to the Charter as laid down in the Memorandum to the Charter.
Period covered: 01/01/99 The preceding statement concerns Article(s): 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 2, 3, 7, 8, 9

125

Declarations contained in a letter from the Permanent Representation of Germany, dated
16 September 1998, handed to the Secretary General at the time of deposit of the instrument of
ratification, on 16 September 1998 – Or. Engl./Germ.
Minority languages within the meaning of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages in the
Federal Republic of Germany shall be the Danish, Upper Sorbian, Lower Sorbian, North Frisian and Sater
Frisian languages and the Romany language of the German Sinti and Roma; a regional language within the
meaning of the Charter in the Federal Republic shall be the Low German language.
Pursuant to Article 3, paragraph 1, of the Charter, the Federal Republic of Germany specifies the regional or
minority languages to which the provisions selected pursuant to Article 2, paragraph 2, of the Charter shall
apply upon the entry into force of the Charter in the Federal Republic of Germany:
Danish in the Danish language area in Land Schleswig-Holstein:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a iv; b iv; c iii/iv; d iii; e ii; f ii/iii; g; h; i; paragraph 2;
Article 9, paragraph 1 b iii; c iii; paragraph 2 a;
Article 10, paragraph 1 a v; paragraph 4 c; paragraph 5;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii; d; e ii; f ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 c; d; e; f; g; paragraph 2; paragraph 3;
Article 13, paragraph 1 a; c; d; paragraph 2 c;
Article 14 a; b.
Upper Sorbian in the Upper Sorbian language area in the Free State of Saxony:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a iii; b iv; c iv; d iv; e ii; f iii; g; h; i; paragraph 2;
Article 9 paragraph 1 a ii; a iii; b ii; b iii; c ii; c iii; d; paragraph 2 a;
Article 10, paragraph 1 a iv/v; paragraph 2 a; b; g; paragraph 3 b/c; paragraph 4 c; paragraph 5;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii; d; e i; f ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; b; c; d; e; f; g; h; paragraph 2, paragraph 3;
Article 13, paragraph 1 a; c; d; paragraph 2 c.
Lower Sorbian in the Lower Sorbian language area in Land Brandenburg:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a iv; b iv; c iv; e iii; f iii; g; h; i;
Article 9, paragraph 1 a ii; a iii; b iii; c iii; paragraph 2 a;
Article 10, paragraph 1 a iv/v; paragraph 2 b; g; paragraph 3 b/c; paragraph 4 a; c; paragraph 5;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii; d; e i; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; b; c; d; e; f; g; h; paragraph 2; paragraph 3;
Article 13, paragraph 1 a; c; d.
North Frisian in the North Frisian language area in Land Schleswig-Holstein:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a iii/iv; b iv; c iv; e ii; f iii; g; h; i; paragraph 2;
Article 9, paragraph 1 b iii; c iii; paragraph 2 a;
Article 10, paragraph 1 a v; paragraph 4 c; paragraph 5;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii; d; e ii; f ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; b; c; d; e; f; g; h; paragraph 2; paragraph 3;
Article 13, paragraph 1 a; c; d;
Article 14 a.
Sater Frisian in the Sater Frisian language area in Land Lower Saxony:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a iv; e ii; f iii; g; i;
Article 9, paragraph 1 b iii; c iii; paragraph 2 a;
Article 10, paragraph 1 a v; c; paragraph 2 a; b; c; d; e; f; paragraph 4 a; c; paragraph 5;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii; d; e ii; f ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; b; c; d; e; f; g; paragraph 2; paragraph 3;
Article 13, paragraph 1 a; c; d.
126

127

Low German in the Länder Free Hanseatic City of Bremen, Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg, MecklenburgWestern Pomerania, Lower Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein:
Obligations regarding Low German in the territory of the Länder Free Hanseatic City of Bremen, Free and
Hanseatic City of Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Lower Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a iv; e ii; g;
Article 9, paragraph 1 b iii; c iii; paragraph 2 a;
Article 10, paragraph 1 a v; c; paragraph 2 a; b; f;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii; d; e ii; f ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; d; f; paragraph 3;
Article 13, paragraph 1 a; c;
and additionally:
- in the Free Hanseatic City of Bremen:
Article 8, paragraph 1 b iii; c iii; f i; h;
Article 10, paragraph 2 c; d; e;
Article 11, paragraph 1 g;
Article 12, paragraph 1 b; c; e; g;
Article 13, paragraph 2 c;
- in the Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg:
Article 8, paragraph 1 b iii; c iii; d iii; f ii; h; i;
Article 10, paragraph 2 e; paragraph 4 c;
Article 11, paragraph 1 g;
Article 12, paragraph 1 g;
Article 13, paragraph 1 d; paragraph 2 c;
- in Land Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania:
Article 8, paragraph 1 b iii; c iii; d iii; h; i;
Article 10, paragraph 4 c;
Article 12, paragraph 1 b; c; e; h;
Article 13, paragraph 1 d, paragraph 2 c;
- in Land Lower Saxony:
Article 8, paragraph 1 f iii; i;
Article 10, paragraph 2 c; d; e; paragraph 4 a; c;
Article 12, paragraph 1 b; c; e; g; paragraph 2;
Article 13, paragraph 1 d;
Article 14 a; b;
- in Land Schleswig-Holstein:
Article 8, paragraph 1 b iii; c iii; f iii; h; i; paragraph 2;
Article 10, paragraph 4 c;
Article 12, paragraph 1 b; c; g;
Article 13, paragraph 1 d; paragraph 2 c.
The separate specification of these provisions for the territories of each individual Land is in keeping with the
federal structure of the Federal Republic of Germany and takes into account the situation of each of these
languages in the Land in question.
The Romany language of the German Sinti and Roma in the territory of the Federal Republic of Germany and
Low German language in the territory of the Länder Brandenburg, North-Rhine/Westphalia and Saxony-Anhalt
shall be protected pursuant to Part II of the Charter.

128

Part II of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages shall be applied to Romany, the minority
language of the German Sinti and Roma in the territory of the Federal Republic of Germany, and to the regional
language Low German in the territory of the Länder Brandenburg, North-Rhine/Westphalia and Saxony-Anhalt
upon its entry into force in the Federal Republic of Germany in accordance with the declaration of the Federal
Republic of Germany of 23 January 1998. The objectives and principles laid down in Article 7 of the Charter
shall form the bases with regard to these languages. At the same time, German law and Germany's
administrative practice thus meet individual requirements laid down in Part III of the Charter:
With regard to Romany
for the territory of the Federal Republic of Germany:
Article 8, paragraph 1 f iii; g; h;
Article 9, paragraph 1 b iii; c iii; paragraph 2 a;
Article 10, paragraph 5;
Article 11, paragraph 1 d; e ii; f ii; g; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 g; paragraph 3;
Article 13, paragraph 1 a; c; d;
Article 14 a;
and additionally:
- in Land Baden-Württemberg:
Article 8, paragraphs 1 a iv, 1 e iii;
Article 10, paragraph 4 c;
Article 12, paragraphs 1 a, 1 d; f; paragraph 2.
- in Land Berlin:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a i/ii; b i/ii/iii/iv; e i/ii/iii; i; paragraph 2;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b i/ii: c ii; e i/ii;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; d; f;
- in the Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg:
Article 8, paragraph 1 b iv; c iv;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; d; f;
- in Land Hesse:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a iii/iv; b iv; c iv; d iv; e iii; i; paragraph 2;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii; e i;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; d; f; paragraph 2;
- in Land North-Rhine/Westphalia:
Article 8,paragraph 1 e iii; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; d; f; paragraph 2;
- in Land Lower Saxony:
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; d; f;
- in Land Rhineland-Palatinate:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a iv; e iii;
Article 11, paragraph 1 c ii;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; d; f;
- in Land Schleswig-Holstein:
Article 10, paragraph 1 a v; paragraph 2 b; paragraph 4 c;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; d; f; paragraph 2.
129

130

With regard to Low German:
- in Land Brandenburg:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a iv; b iv; c iv; f iii; g;
Article 9, paragraph 2 a;
Article 10, paragraph 2 b; paragraph 3 c;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii; d; e ii; f ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; f; g;
- in Land North-Rhine/Westphalia:
Article 8, paragraph 1 e iii; g; h; paragraph 2;
Article 9, paragraph 1 b iii; c iii; paragraph 2 a;
Article 11, paragraph 1 d; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; d; e; f; g; h; paragraph 2;
Article 13, paragraph 1 a; c; d;
- in Land Saxony-Anhalt:
Article 8, paragraph 1 a iv; b iv; c iv; g; h;
Article 9, paragraph 2 a;
Article 11, paragraph 1 b ii; c ii; e ii; paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a; f; g; h.
The separate specification of these provisions for the territory of each individual Land is in keeping with the
federal structure of the Federal Republic of Germany and takes into account the situation of each of these
languages in the Land in question.
In accordance with the national distribution of competencies, the way in which the above-mentioned provisions
of Part III of the Charter are implemented through legal regulations and Germany's administrative practice with
due regard to the objectives and principles specified in Article 7 of the Charter shall be the responsibility of
either the Federation or the competent Land. Details will be provided in the procedure for implementing the
federal act with which the legislature consents to the Charter as laid down in the Memorandum to the Charter.
Period covered: 01/01/99 The preceding statement concerns Article(s): 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 2, 3, 7, 8, 9

131

APPENDIX II : COMMENTS BY THE GERMAN AUTHORITIES

Comments
by the Federal Republic of Germany
on the Report of the Committee of Experts on the German State Report on the Application of the
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages in the Federal Republic of Germany

Federal Ministry of the Interior
October 2002

132

I.

Preliminary Remarks

On 5 July 2002, the Committee of Experts set up under the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages (hereinafter referred to as the "Charter") submitted a Report to the Council of Europe’s Committee of
Ministers on Germany’s implementation of the Charter.
The Report was forwarded to Germany under cover of the letter by the Directorate of Co-operation for Local and
Regional Democracy of 14 August 2002.
The Federal Republic of Germany values the activities of the Committee of Experts in the process of monitoring
the implementation of the Charter and welcomes the efforts made by the Committee of Experts in assessing
the achieved level of compliance with Germany’s obligations arising from the Charter. Germany notes that the
comments of the Committee of Experts show professional examination of the situation of regional and minority
languages in Germany and that the Committee has in fact paid attention to important questions and problems.
Germany considers the fulfilment of the obligations under the Charter and the Committee's Report as a
continued pan-European process aimed at the creation of international standards laying down the foundations
for a legal regulation of relations within a community of citizens in a given State and thus providing for sustained
protection of the existing regional or minority languages.
Germany's State Report on the implementation of the Charter, which serves as the basis of the monitoring
mechanism, is based on the principle of transparency, and Germany considers it important to maintain an open
and constructive dialogue with the bodies responsible for monitoring the implementation of the Charter, i.e. the
Committee of Experts and the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe.
These comments by the Federal Republic of Germany were drawn up by the Federal Ministry of the Interior as
the lead agency and were co-ordinated with the Governments of the Federal Länder which, because of the
federal structure of the Federal Republic of Germany, are to a large extent responsible for the Charter's
implementation.
In view of the volume of the Committee's monitoring report, the necessary translation work and the required coordination with the Länder, and the planned involvement of the respective language groups, the Federal Republic
of Germany is not in a position, within the tightly set time limit, i.e. by 14 October 2002, to submit in-depth
comments on the Report of the Committee of Experts, which would provide adequate answers to the issues
raised and would do justice to the detailed matters brought up in the monitoring report. The Federal Republic of
Germany will, in co-ordination with all bodies and groups concerned, examine the claimed deficits as regards
the Charter's application, and reserves the right to elaborate, in the next State Report to be submitted in the
course of the year 2003, on the findings of this examination and, where relevant, on any supplementary
measures that may have been introduced in the meantime. The additional information on the factual situation,
as requested by the Committee of Experts, will also be provided in the forthcoming State Report. The language
groups will again be involved in the drafting of that Report. Given the little time available, as stated above, such
involvement has not been possible as regards the present comments.
Germany will publish the Report of the Committee of Experts along with the present comments.
Against the background of current events, the Federal Republic of Germany wishes to point out that, due to the
course of the Elbe River, the national flood disaster in Germany in August this year has, in particular, struck
those Länder that cover the settlement areas of the majority of the members of language groups, and that the
damage caused by the disastrous flooding, the extent of which is still incalculable at this time, will in the years
to come have a strong and lasting impact on the use and appropriation of public funds.
In view of the aforesaid and bearing in mind the generally positive nature of the findings in the Committee's
Report on Germany, the Federal Republic of Germany makes the following preliminary comments:

133

II.

Regarding the relationship between the Charter and the Framework Convention

Germany – like an encouragingly large number of other members of the Council of Europe – is among the
countries that have ratified the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities; but it also
belongs to the – regrettably fewer – countries that have ratified the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages. In Germany, the Framework Convention is applied to the national minorities of the Danes, the
Frisians, the Sorbs and the German Sinti and Roma. In German legal practice – both at government agencies
and among national minorities - both Conventions are perceived as legal instruments that are used first and
foremost to protect national minorities and their languages. As both instruments were drawn up by the Council
of Europe and both were ratified by Germany within a short space of time of each other and as both pursue
comparable objectives regarding the languages of national minorities, the two Conventions together represent
the authoritative legal instruments for the benefit of national minorities and their languages. This implies that the
two Conventions will be interpreted and applied concordantly.
On account of the fact that the two Conventions have been formulated according to different legal principles,
difficulties are arising in respect of the concordant application of the two instruments and therefore are also
encountered by the competent committees of the Council of Europe in examining whether they are being
properly applied. Whereas all the Articles of the Framework Convention call for unqualified and uniform
application, the Charter, designed as a so-called "menu convention", in its Part III leaves it to the discretion of
the ratifying States to decide what obligations they undertake, as regards the range, scope and depth of these
obligations as well as their territorial application and their scope of application with respect to the respective
language groups. While Article 11 of the Charter, for instance, allows measures to be taken in respect of
programmes broadcast on TV and/or on the radio in the respective minority or regional language, it gives the
option to broadcast them as a full programme or as occasional programmes in that language; last but not least,
the various options are expressed in the verbs used which are "to ensure", "to facilitate", "to make adequate
provision" and "to encourage".
Both Conventions of the Council of Europe have become part of the German legal system, both as regards the
personal scope of application as designated in the respective ratification document deposited with the Council
of Europe, and in relation to the obligations undertaken under Part III of the Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages with specific reference to language groups and regions.
The identical objectives pursued by both Conventions regarding the languages of national minorities and the
authorship of the Council of Europe in both cases explain why the two instruments in question are interpreted
and applied concordantly in Germany. This can also be of significance in evaluating whether the respective
competent legislative or administrative bodies consider themselves to have met the obligations ensuing from the
Conventions.
Germany suggests that the DH-MIN (Committee of Experts on Issues relating to the Protection of National
Minorities), a body set up to deal with issues of minority law, which regrettably has not been convened in the
past few years, should discuss this matter in depth; it would be appropriate and expedient to have the
Committee of Experts on the Regional/ Minority Language Charter and the Advisory Committee on the
Framework Convention take part in these discussions.
III.

1.

Preliminary Comments on the "Findings and Proposals for Recommendations" of the
Committee of Experts under Chapter III
Under Section 3.1, Lit. B, the voluntary application, by the Federal Republic of Germany, of certain Part III
obligations to Part II languages is, without any detailed explanations being given, seen by the Committee
as a positive approach in the case of non-territorial languages, but is considered acceptable in the case of
territorial languages only if there is an underlying intention to progress to full protection under Part III.

134

In its Declaration of 26 January 1998, the Federal Republic of Germany notified the Romany language - so
far in all of the Länder - and the Low German language - in some of the Länder - for protection under Part II
and, in addition, listed those Part III provisions which are met by the existing administrative practice. This
helped to specify the basis for, and facilitate, monitoring of the implementation measures under Part II.
Thus, this listing only serves to clarify the scope of protection afforded under Part II, and does not imply
any declaration of intent as regards the expansion of the scope of Part III protection to these languages in
the entire respective speech area. The aforementioned Declaration was accepted by the Contracting
Parties without any objection. Apart from the distinction made in this context between territorial and nonterritorial languages - which, at least for Germany, is somewhat hard to understand - the Federal Republic
of Germany does not share the Committee's view that a declaration to this effect would be acceptable only
if the aim is to provide progressively for full Part III protection of the given language. Neither the Declaration
by the Federal Republic of Germany nor the provisions or the overall systematics of the Charter can
provide a rationale for the Committee's view.
2.

Under Section 3.1, Litt. D and L, the Committee of Experts observes that the lack of specific legal
provisions hinders fulfilment of the obligations entered into, especially those under Articles 9 and 10
("Justice" and "Administration"), and therefore, under para. 1 of its "Proposals for Recommendations", the
Committee suggests that specific legal provisions, where these are still lacking, be adopted in order to
implement the accepted undertakings.
In the opinion of the Federal Republic of Germany, the respective national law is the authoritative
reference when answering the question as to the extent and the effects of direct national application of the
accepted undertakings. In this respect, the Federal Republic of Germany once more points out that the
Regional/Minority Language Charter, under the Act ratifying it, ranks in Germany as a federal law which
takes precedence over subordinate law - including Land laws - and, as a matter of principle, is to be
applied as the more specific law overriding other federal laws to the extent that the respective provisions of
the Charter are by themselves self-executing. Thus, the pertinent accepted obligations under the Charter
are directly binding upon the judiciary and the administration and must be complied with in administrative
action. Accordingly, the legality of any specific administrative action must be verified on the basis of the
standards constituted by these obligations.
To give an example of the direct applicability of the provi sions, reference is made to the closing of a
Sorbian class in Crostwitz in the Free State of Saxony as mentioned in para. 431 of the Report of the
Committee of Experts. By a Decision of 16 March 2001, the Ministry of Culture of the Free State of
Saxony had, on account of the lack of pupils registered for that class, revoked the participation of the
Free State of Saxony in the maintenance of the 5th-grade class of the Sorbian secondary technical school
in Crostwitz for the 2001/2002 school year which started on 10 August 2001. The reason given by the
Ministry for this measure was that, under the Schools Act and the School Regulations, in view of ensuring
the required differentiation as regards the relevant educational offers and on account of the resources
required for the purpose, at least two classes per year-group must be established at a given school (in
order to avoid "mini" age-classes). On this basis, a class must as a rule comprise 25 pupils; as a
minimum, however, it must consist of 20 pupils. For the 2001/2002 school year, only a total of 17 pupils
had been registered for the 5th-grade class, instead of the 40 registrations required per age-class at
Mittelschulen (secondary technical schools).
Crostwitz Municipality has taken legal action against that Decision. The Dresden Administrative Court
considered the revocation of the participation in the age-class by the Ministry of Culture to be lawful since
continuation of the school was in contradiction to the Schools Act. For its decision, the Court also
thoroughly weighed the functioning of the public educational system against the particular need for
protection of the national minority of the Sorbs. In particular, the Court also examined the extent to which
the administrative authorities comply with the provision of Article 8, para. 1 (c) (iv), of the
Regional/Minority Language Charter, which applies in the Free State of Saxony; in the last analysis,
however, the Court did not establish any violation of the Charter.

135

In particular, the obligations undertaken under Articles 9 and 10 (e.g. Article 9, para. 1 (b) (iii) - allowing
documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages - or Article 10, para. 3 (c) allowing requests to be submitted in the regional or minority language) are self-executing provisions which
must be complied with by the judiciary and the administration in their action and which establish a definite
legal framework. The Federal Republic of Germany takes the view that further legal regulations would not
provide any additional legal advantages regarding the implementation of the relevant provisions, but
instead, for the major part, would only create redundant rules of law. On this basis, the Federal Republic
of Germany sees only very little scope, if any, for the implementation of the proposal submitted by the
Committee of Experts in para. 1 to the Committee of Ministers for a recommendation regarding adoption
of legal provisions in Germany ("where these are lacking").
Thus, the focus of the process of the Charter's implementation in Germany is not on legal considerations,
but for the major part on practical issues concerning the actual implementation or invocation of the
relevant undertakings - a subject brought up by the Committee of Experts itself in para. 5 of its "Proposals
for Recommendations", i.e. "establish a structural policy for making it practically possible to use regional
or minority languages in dealings with the administration and, where relevant, in the courts". The Federal
Republic of Germany will continue to accord high priority to this implementation process.
IV.

Acceptance of additional obligations by the Federal Republic of Germany

With the Second Act of 18 September 2002 on the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, which
entered into force on 19 September 2002, Germany expanded the scope of protection provided under the
Charter.
With the acceptance of another four undertakings for the territory of the Land of Hesse as regards the Romany
language of the German Sinti and Roma, a total of 35 detailed obligations under the Charter are now guaranteed
for this language as well, and the requirement for its internationally binding notification to the Council of Europe
for protection under Part III of the Charter is met. The obligations newly entered into are:
a)

use of the Romany language in the assemblies of regional authorities (Article 10, para. 2, Lit. e);

b)

use of the Romany language in the assemblies of local authorities (Article 10, para. 2, Lit. f);

c)

allowing the submission of requests in the Romany language to public service providers (Article 10, para.
3, Lit. c); and

d)

taking account of requests from public service employees having the required linguistic competence to be
appointed in the territory in which that language is used (Article 10, para. 4, Lit. c).

For Frisian, the additional obligation under Article 10, para. 2 (g), is accepted for the territories of the Länder of
Schleswig-Holstein and Lower Saxony, respectively, i.e. to allow the use of place names also in the minority
language (German/North Frisian or German/Sater Frisian, respectively), which may be an option, in particular,
as regards bilingual place-name signs to be put up in Nordfriesland and/or in Saterland Gemeinde. Frisian is
already afforded protection under Part III of the Charter.

136

European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

B. Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers
of the Council of Europe on the application of the Charter
by Germany

(Adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 4 December 2002
at the 820th meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies)

COUNCIL OF EUROPE
COMMITTEE OF MINISTERS
Recommendation RecChL(2002) 1
of the Committee of Ministers
on the application of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages by Germany
(Adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 4 December 2002
at the 820th meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies)

The Committee of Ministers,
In accordance with Article 16 of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages;
Having regard to the instrument of ratification submitted by Germany on 16 September 1998;
Having taken note of the evaluation made by the Committee of Experts on the Charter with respect to the
application of the Charter by Germany;
Having taken note of the comments made by the German authorities on the contents of the Committee of
Experts' report;
Bearing in mind that this evaluation is based on information submitted by Germany in its initial periodical report,
supplementary information given by the German authorities, information submitted by bodies and associations
legally established in Germany and on the information obtained by the Committee of Experts during its “on-thespot” visit,
Recommends that the German authorities take account of all the observations of the Committee of Experts
and, as a matter of priority:
1.
adopt specific legal provisions, where these are still lacking, in order to implement the undertakings
which Germany has entered into under the Charter;
2.
establish specific planning and monitoring mechanisms and ensure adequate resource allocation in the
field of education ;
3.
take urgent action to strengthen education in North Frisian, Sater Frisian and Lower Sorbian, whose
survival is particularly endangered, and in particular ensure continuity in educational provision in these
languages throughout the school system ;
4.

improve basic and further teacher training for all regional and minority languages;

5.
establish a structural policy for making it practically possible to use regional or minority languages in
dealings with the administration and, where relevant, in the courts;
6.
make the speakers of the regional or minority languages more aware that they have the possibility to
avail themselves of the right to use their language before administrative and, where relevant, judicial authorities;
7.
take a more active approach towards promoting the presence of the regional or minority languages in
the media.

138

