Fourth Report
of the Federal Republic of Germany
in accordance with Article 15 (1)
of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

2010

1

Contents
No.

Part A
Part B
Part C

Part D

D.1
D.2.1 Danish

D.2.2 Sorbian

D.2.3 North
Frisian

Introduction
General situation and general framework
Recommendations of the Committee of
Ministers
Protection of regional or minority
languages under Part II (Article 7) of the
Charter
Implementation of the obligations
undertaken with regard to the various
languages
General policy remarks regarding the
various articles of the Charter
Danish in the Danish language area in
Schleswig-Holstein
Art. 8
Art. 9
Art. 10
Art. 11
Art. 12
Art. 13
Art. 14
Sorbian (Upper and Lower Sorbian) in the
Sorbian language area in Brandenburg and
Saxony
Art. 8
Art. 9
Art. 10
Art. 11
Art. 12
Art. 13
North Frisian in the North Frisian language
area in Schleswig-Holstein
Art. 8

00101-00122
00200-00401
00701-00793

00800–61400

00800-01400
10801-11404
10801-10838
10901-10904
11001-11005
11101-11126
11201-11210
11301-11303
11401-11404
20000-21313

20801-20869
20901-20925
21001-21037
21101-21125
21201-21206
21301-21313
30801-31403
30801-30834

2

D.2.4 Sater
Frisian

D.2.5 Romani

D.2.6 Low
German

Part E
Annex

Art. 9
Art. 10
Art. 11
Art. 12
Art. 13
Art. 14
Sater Frisian in the Sater Frisian language
area in Lower Saxony
Art. 8
Art. 9
Art. 10
Art. 11
Art. 12
Art. 13
Romani in the language area of the
Federal Republic and of the various Länder
Art. 8
Art. 9
Art. 10
Art. 11
Art. 12
Art. 13
Art. 14
Low German in the various Länder

30901-30903
31001-31009
31101-31115
31201-31217
31301
31401-31403

Art. 8
Art. 9
Art. 10
Art. 11
Art. 12
Art. 13
Art. 14
Comments by the minorities/language
groups

60801-60887
60901-60903
61000-61032
61100-61147
61200-61251
61300-61315
61400

40801-41302
40801-40825
40901-40903
41001-41025
41101-41120
41201-41212
41301-41302
50801-51403
50001-50847
50901-50903
51001-51013
51101-51117
51201-51218
51301-51303
51401-51402
60000-61400

Recent legislation, agreements and other regulations,
publications and comments relevant to the implementation of the
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages and not yet
included in any State Report

3

4

Introduction:
Like the previous reports, this report was produced by the Federal Ministry of the
Interior in cooperation with the responsible Land authorities and federal associations
of the speakers of the languages protected by the Charter. An implementation
conference held in Berlin on 3–4 December 2009 facilitated cooperation and
participation. The federal associations were given another opportunity to express
their views on the protection of their languages, which do not have to correspond to
the views of federal and state authorities. Section E of this report includes their
comments.

Part A

General situation and general framework

A.1 General situation
00101 For information about the general situation, please refer to the Third Report
of the Federal Republic of Germany in accordance with Article 15 (1) of the European
Charter for Regional or Minority Languages (Third State Report), Nos. 1 – 4.
A.2 The Charter’s scope of application in Germany; reporting requirements
00102 The Second State Report, Nos. 5 to 16, already explained that Germany has
limited the Charter’s scope to the regional language Low German and the languages
of its national minorities, i.e. autochthonous groups (the Danish minority, the Frisian
ethnic group, the Sorbian people, and the German Sinti and Roma).
A.3 Detailed information on the individual languages:
00103 See the Second State Report, Nos. 17 to 45, for an overview of the Low
German regional language and the minority languages Danish, Sorbian (Upper and
Lower Sorbian), Frisian (North Frisian and Sater Frisian) and Romani of the German
Sinti and Roma.
A.4 Bodies at federal and Länder level
A.4.1

Government agencies, other public authorities and commissioners

5
00104 For information on the responsibilities of the federal ministries, in particular
of the Federal Ministry of the Interior and the Federal Ministry of Justice, and on the
tasks of the Federal Government Commissioner for Matters Related to Repatriates
and National Minorities, see Nos. 46 to 50 in the Second State Report; for the
responsibilities of government agencies in the Länder see Nos. 51 to 58 in the
Second State Report. The following changes were indicated in No. 4 in the Third
State Report:
- in the State Chancellery of Hesse, a coordination office is responsible for
relations with the Sinti and Roma. The head of unit chairs a coordination group
made up of representatives of Hesse’s ministry for social and cultural affairs and
education to ensure that requests are addressed by the responsible ministry; and
- in Schleswig-Holstein, effective 2010 the title is Minister-President’s
Commissioner for Minorities.
A.4.2

Councils, institutions, and/or round tables at federal level

00105 Federal associations of language communities are involved in government
decision-making through conferences on implementing the Framework Convention
for the Protection of National Minorities (Framework Convention) and the Charter
referred to here. They also participate through advisory committees at the Federal
Ministry of the Interior for the Danish minority, the Sorbian people, the Frisians and
speakers of Low German and through the Foundation for the Sorbian People. The
German Bundestag may convene an ad hoc discussion group on national minorities
as needed (cf. Nos. 59 ff. and 68 to 75 in the Second State Report as well as Nos. 5
and 6 in the Third State Report).
00106
00107 For the German Sinti and Roma, no similar bodies are planned. Although the
Sinti Alliance Germany has repeatedly expressed its willingness to work with the
other umbrella organization of the ethnic group in such a body, it is not clear how the
Central Council of German Sinti and Roma and the Sinti Alliance of Germany could
cooperate productively.
In any case, the two organizations regularly have the opportunity to discuss their
concerns with the president of the German Bundestag and representatives of the
Länder governments. Since 1994, the last plenary session of the Bundesrat before
the Christmas break each year is devoted to remembering the Sinti and Roma
victims of Nazi persecution. Following this session, separate meetings chaired by the
president of the Bundestag are held with the Central Council of German Sinti and
Roma and the Sinti Alliance of Germany.

6

A.4.3 Bodies established for the various languages (Land bodies and
organizations)
A.4.3.1

The Danish language

00108 Information about Danish minority organizations and speakers of Danish can
be found in Nos. 60 to 67 of the Second State Report. Most of this information
remains applicable; any relevant changes are noted in Part D.
00109 In No. 40 of its Third Evaluation Report, the Committee of Experts
commented in particular on the “Day of the Danish Language” referred to in No. 1023
of the Third State Report. This event was held in the cities of Flensburg, Husum,
Leck and Schleswig on 9 February 2006 under the patronage of the president of the
Land parliament and offered the public a wide range of offerings to become
acquainted with the Danish language.
A.4.3.2

The Sorbian language

00109 Information about the Council for Sorbian Affairs in Saxony and
Brandenburg and about the Foundation for the Sorbian People, in particular its legal
and financial situation, tasks and institutions it funds, can be found in Nos. 68 – 75 of
the Second State Report. For information about funding agreements, see No. 00729.
A.4.3.3

The Frisian language

00110 The umbrella organizations of the three Friesland regions
- North (in Schleswig-Holstein),
- East (in Lower Saxony), and
- West (in the Netherlands),
work together in the Inter-Frisian Council. For a description, see No. 77 in the
Second State Report.
00111 Information about the organizations of the Frisian ethnic group in SchleswigHolstein and Lower Saxony is provided in Nos. 76, 78, and 80 – 84 of the Second
State Report. Most of this information remains applicable; any relevant changes are
noted in Part D.
A.4.3.4

The Romani language

7

00112 In its Nos. 85 to 93, the Second State Report notes that the responsible
authorities are aware of two umbrella organizations currently representing German
Sinti and Roma: the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma, which includes
several associations at Land level and receives federal institutional funding (Federal
Government Commissioner for Culture and the Media); and the Sinti Alliance of
Germany.
Nos. 12 and 13 of the Third State Report also noted that there are no bodies to
protect and promote the Romani language because these two organizations have
sometimes very different ideas about how their ethnic groups and their history should
be represented.
00113

For further information, see No. 13 in the Third State Report.

00114 A third group mentioned in the Third State Report is no longer active in
public: This group, which described itself as mainly composed of German Sinti, in
2006 filed a petition with the Federal Ministry of the Interior. Bearing 400 signatures,
the petition argued that the Romani spoken by German Sinti was internal to their
culture and should not be protected by the Charter or taught at public schools. The
petition asked that young German Sinti should receive remedial German language
tuition instead in order to overcome general education deficits.
00115 This introduction can only note that the difficulties, described in No. 15a of
the Third State Report, of meeting Charter requirements when speakers want to
preserve their language in its unwritten form for exclusive use within the group
continue to exist, and that the 2005 framework agreement concluded between the
government of Rhineland-Palatinate and the Rhineland-Palatinate Land association
of German Sinti and Roma continues to be used to take advantage of the limited
possibilities to meet these requirements.
A.4.3.5

The Low German language

00116 As stated in Nos. 94 to 97 of the Second State Report, the bodies to
coordinate the promotion of Low German include Low German consultative councils
(in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania chaired by the Minister for Education, Scientific
and Cultural Affairs; in Schleswig-Holstein at the Land parliament chaired by the
Land parliament’s president), the Schleswig-Holstein Minister-President’s
Commissioner for Minorities and the working group for the implementation of the
Charter at the Niedersächsischer Heimatbund composed of representatives from

8
various ministries and parliamentary groups. The working group met only once during
the last two years but is to meet on a more regular basis soon.
In Lower Saxony, the foundation Plattdüütsch Stiftung Neddersassen was founded in
October 2007 with the patronage of the minister-president of Lower Saxony. The
foundation's aim is to promote the preservation, research, teaching and use of Low
German.
In Saxony-Anhalt, activities are coordinated by the Working Group on Low German at
the Ministry for Education and Culture. The group is composed of representatives
from the language groups in different areas (Harz, Börde, Altmark), from the Ministry
for Education and Culture, the Landesheimatbundes Sachsen-Anhalt, the
Arbeitsstelle Niederdeutsch at the Germanistisches Institut of Otto von Guericke
University in Magdeburg and from the broadcaster Mitteldeutscher Rundfunk’s Studio
Stendal.
00117 There are currently four university chairs in Low German language and
literature: Kiel, Hamburg, Rostock and Oldenburg, which are usually set up as chairs
in the departments of German language and literature with a concentration on Low
German (Kiel, Hamburg, Oldenburg and Rostock). The university chair in Oldenburg
is a chair for German linguistics, linguistic pragmatics and socio-linguistics/Low
German. This position has existed since 16 December 2007 and is initially limited to
a five-year term, after which it will be evaluated.
The universities in Bielefeld, Bochum, Bremen, Magdeburg, Paderborn, Flensburg,
Göttingen and Greifswald also offer classes in Low German, which are usually taught
on the basis of temporary contracts.
General issues related to regional and minority language teaching in higher
education under the terms of the Bologna Process and in a federally organized
system of higher education are described in No. 00771 ff. The current situation of
Low German at universities is described in more detail in No. 60845 ff. At their
annual meeting in Bremen in 2008, the federal and Land desk officers for Lower
German discussed the issue of Low German in higher education as a priority. The
institutional framework of this annual meeting was chosen to increase cooperation
among the responsible desk officers and with the Federal Council for Low German.
A.5 Participation of the Bund, Länder and language groups

9
00118 The Federal Ministry of the Interior, which is responsible for overseeing the
implementation of the Charter, organizes meetings of the advisory committees for
individual language groups mentioned in Nos. 5 and 6, including their associations
and federal and state ministries, as well as annual conferences on implementing the
Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities and the European
Charter for Regional and Minority Languages. Given the short three-year reporting
cycle, reporting obligations, in particular arising from the Charter, consume a
considerable share of the available resources.
00119 As indicated in No. 102 of the Second State Report, the present report was
submitted for approval to the central organizations of the groups concerned and
discussed at an implementation conference. The groups’ comments are included in
Part E of this report, which will be published after having been submitted to the
Council of Europe Secretariat.
A.6 Public information regarding the Charter
00120 Despite a large print run, the Federal Government Commissioner for Matters
Relating to Repatriates and National Minorities ran out of copies of the information
brochure “National Minorities in Germany” mentioned in No. 104 of the Second State
Report. The brochure, which also deals with minority languages, was updated in
consultation with the language groups and reprinted in November 2006.
00121 Since November 2008, the Commissioner’s office also offers a brochure
focusing on the languages protected under the Charter.
00122 The Länder produce the following publications to inform the public about the
Charter and the minority and regional languages:
Bavaria’s Agency for Civic Education publishes the book Der Tod war mein ständiger
Begleiter – Das Leben, das Überleben und das Weiterleben des Sintu Franz
Rosenbach (Death was my constant companion: The life and survival of the Sinto
Franz Rosenbach).
Lower Saxony mainly uses the Internet to distribute information about the Charter:
The Charter and Germany’s state reports are published on the website of the Lower
Saxony Ministry of the Interior, Sport and Integration (in German).
The website also offers information about Low German and the Frisian languages
along with links to the Council of Europe, the Niedersächsischer Heimatbund, the
Saterland Municipality and the Institute for Low German, among others.

10
On its website, the Lower Saxony Ministry of Science and Culture notes that Low
German and Sater Frisian are included in Part III of the Charter.
The Ostfriesische Landschaft, which receives about half of its funding from Lower
Saxony, plans to publish a brochure in autumn 2009 with information about the
Charter and the work of the commissioner for Low German.
In Schleswig-Holstein, every legislative term the Land government presents to the
Land parliament a report on the implementation of the Charter in Schleswig-Holstein.
The report for 2007, the second one of its kind, is available on the government‘s
website (www.schleswig-holstein.de). The website also offers a greeting from the
minister-president in Low German and audio files with samples of regional and
minority languages. In 2008, a short film was produced to commemorate the 20th
anniversary of the office of Commissioner for Minorities entitled mittendrin –
Minderheiten in Schleswig-Holstein (Right in the middle: Minorities in SchleswigHolstein), featuring representatives of the different language groups speaking their
language. The film has German subtitles. It has also been supplied to educational
facilities in Schleswig-Holstein for informational purposes.
For the Charter’s 10th anniversary in 2008, the Institute for Low German in Bremen
drafted an interim report on language policy concerning Low German, with funding
from the Federal Government Commissioner for Culture and the Media.

Part B

Recommendations of the Committee of Ministers

B.1 Main recommendations of the Committee of Ministers
00200 In the third monitoring cycle, the Council of Europe Committee of Ministers
gave Germany the recommendations quoted below. These recommendations
prompted the Federal Government to discuss possible implementation measures and
needs with the Bund, the Länder and the language groups. The specific measures
are discussed in Parts C and D in connection with the reports on the implementation
of the relevant provisions. A summary is given below:
The Committee of Ministers,
In accordance with Article 16 of the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages;

11
Having regard to the instrument of ratification submitted by Germany on 16
September 1998;
Having taken note of the evaluation made by the Committee of Experts on the
Charter with respect to the application of the Charter by Germany;
Bearing in mind that this evaluation is based on information submitted by Germany in
its third periodical report, supplementary information given by the German authorities,
information submitted by bodies and associations legally established in Germany and
the information obtained by the Committee of Experts during its on-the-spot visit,

Recommends that the German authorities take account of all the observations of the
Committee of Experts and, as a matter of priority:

1. adopt specific legal provisions, where their absence hinders practical
implementation of the undertakings which Germany has entered into under the
Charter;
00211 According to the Committee of Experts in its third Evaluation Report, the
German authorities have not adopted any additional specific legal provisions to
implement Germany’s obligations under the Charter. The Committee rightly notes
that, as indicated in the Second State Report, the German authorities do not find it
appropriate to do so (No. 24a, Third State Report) because the Charter constitutes
directly enforceable law and because the number of legal provisions should rather be
reduced than increased.
The Committee of Experts however believes that the number of legal uncertainties
and the apparent lack of use of regional or minority languages in many areas of
public life revealed during the third monitoring cycle continues to justify the need for
legal provisions.
The Committee also believes that
(1) languages which benefit from formal legal measures at Land level generally
experience better promotion and protection than languages which do not;
(2) certain Land governments do not seem to feel bound by the legal obligations
under the Charter; and

12
(3) regardless of whether the Charter is directly enforceable law in Germany, it would
be desirable to have a legal framework for implementing the Charter.
00212 To Germany, it seems as if the Committee’s call for legal provisions is
intended to lead to more extensive obligations than it was possible to accept at
ratification given the need for agreement from the relevant Länder, precisely because
the Charter’s alternative formulations sometimes purposely leave options open.
00213 Hence, we reiterate the opinion expressed in No. 110 of the Second State
Report that Germany should not focus primarily on legal issues but rather on
practical ones, such as funding, given the tight public budget situation, when actually
implementing or complying with the obligations under the Charter.
The Federal Republic of Germany can therefore agree that implementation will
continue to be a high priority, although it will be almost impossible to increase funding
for the foreseeable future given budget constraints at federal, state and local level.
However, Germany cannot promise the necessary parliamentary majorities to pass
additional Land legislation to benefit regional and minority languages and enable
extensive application of the Charter.

2. adopt and implement a structured policy for the promotion and
preservation of North Frisian, Sater Frisian and Lower Sorbian, including in
particular measures which ensure as a matter of urgency that primary and
secondary education is available in these languages;
00221 To implement this recommendation, Schleswig-Holstein issued a decree for
schools in the Nordfriesland district and on the island of Helgoland. This decree,
issued by the Ministry of Education and Women’s Affairs on 2 October 2008,
stipulates that schools in the Nordfriesland district and on the island of Helgoland are
obligated to inform parents that they may apply for Frisian language instruction for
their children. For further information, see Part D.2.3 (Article 8). The decree is
included in an annex to this report.
00222 With regard to this recommendation, Lower Saxony refers to No. 00748 and
comments as follows:
Since 2006, the core curriculum for German in primary and secondary I schools
makes exposure to the Frisian language mandatory. In addition, within the language
area four full-time instructors are available to offer elective instruction in the language

13
(activity groups, required optional subjects). These offerings are available and utilized
at all schools in the Saterland region.
00223

3. take action to improve provision and allocate adequate resources for
regional or minority language teaching and in particular:
-

ensure that the current schools rationalization programme in Saxony does
not jeopardize the provision of education in Upper Sorbian;
increase the number of hours devoted to, and provide clear guidelines for,
Low German teaching in the Länder concerned;
adopt a structured policy with respect to Romany in the field of education,
in co-operation with the speakers;

00231 The Federal Republic of Germany is aware of the importance of the
educational sector in preserving and promoting regional and minority languages, as
already indicated in the Third State Report in No. 24b on the second
recommendation in the second monitoring cycle to take measures to improve
regional or minority language teaching. Under Germany’s federal system, the Länder
are responsible for education policy and they continue to work hard to provide
appropriate framework conditions for the regional and minority languages. In the
process, they must reconcile differences in the various language areas in terms of
the number of speakers and varying language use with funding and administrative
possibilities. For more information, see Nos. 515 and 516 in the Second State
Report.
00232 As explained in No. 112 of the Second State Report, language policy must
put demand from the language groups for educational offerings in proportion to the
appropriate administrative measures. Here too, Germany is aware of how
instrumental appropriate school infrastructure is in preserving and vitalizing
languages. It is just as important, however, to balance overall cultural efforts so as to
increase language awareness among a particular language group, especially the
younger generation as the intended audience of school education, as it is this very
awareness that will create demand for such education. Our experience shows that, in
some cases, demand lags behind the instruction actually offered. In planning school
curricula, the relevant authorities must take account of both synergies and tensions

14
between cultural promotion and school education measures. The Charter also
recognizes these tensions and calls in the relevant provisions for appropriate
educational provision whenever there is a sufficient number of pupils. The German
authorities will continue to seek a balance between measures in both fields and to
respond to emerging developments. Even though it may be argued that many
languages were suppressed or marginalized in the past, the Charter cannot require
that educational provision should be increased beyond the potential demand for it.
00233 In addition, with regard to the special recommendation for Upper Sorbian,
the provision of bilingual education is and will continue to be sufficient even after two
Sorbian middle schools in the Free State of Saxony had to be closed due to
continuing lack of demand.
00234 With regard to the recommendation to increase the number of hours of
teaching in Low German and to provide relevant guidelines, please see No. 60801 ff.
and the further references there.
00235 With regard to the recommendation to adopt a structured policy on Romani,
please refer to the comments by Hesse in No. 50807 ff., which is the only Land to
have adopted Part III of the Charter with respect to Romani.

4. ensure that an effective monitoring mechanism exists in the field of
education for all regional or minority languages covered under Part III;
00241 As indicated in the Third State Report, No. 27, concerning the same
recommendation made during the second monitoring cycle: The purpose of
monitoring is to keep management and superior authorities informed about the status
of task performance. This is ensured through regular legal and technical supervision
of the authorities responsible for implementing the Charter. If the extent of language
promotion does not always satisfy desires and expectations, this is not due to a lack
of information to be remedied by additional checking (resulting in additional costs),
but mainly to
- lack of available funding,
- the fact that Low German and the minority languages are spoken only in
regions with a weak economic base,
- the fact that regions where minority languages are spoken have been
disproportionately affected by low birth rates and out-migration, and

15
- that demand for instruction in the protected languages may shrink for these
reasons.
The above statements are another example of the tension described in No. 25 of the
Third State Report.
Moreover, the State Reports, which have to be prepared at very short intervals,
ensure the necessary transparency for legislators in implementing the Charter.
00242 For this reason, the present report also contains information on what schools
are doing to promote protected languages and on the number of speakers of each
language (see the sections for each language on the application of Article 8). The
general reasons for rejecting further expansion of supervision are also given in Nos.
00803 – 00813.
00243 Regarding the Committee’s question under No. 80 of its third Evaluation
Report, whether supervisory bodies are now producing and publishing periodic
reports in line with the obligation referred to in Art. 8 (1) i, the responsible authorities
state that no further reports have been or will be produced beyond those already
submitted, because they believe that additional reports would only increase
administrative burdens without improving the teaching of minority languages. (See
also Nos. 1017, 2021, 2022 and 3016 on supervisory bodies for the Danish
language.)
00244 Schleswig-Holstein adds that current school issues related to regional and
minority languages are discussed in the school administrations in connection with the
Land government report on implementing the Charter in Schleswig-Holstein, in the
Low German Consultative Council, in the Land parliament body for dealing with
issues of the Frisian ethnic group, and in the working group on Frisian.
00245 - 00250

5. take resolute action to establish a structured policy for making it possible
in practice to use regional or minority languages in dealings with the
administration and, where relevant, in the courts;

16
00251 With regard to this recommendation, in No. 798 of its third Evaluation Report
the Committee of Experts finds that the necessary structured policy is still lacking, for
example a human resources policy taking account of civil servants’ skills in regional
or minority languages, facilities and incentives for them to improve these skills, and
an adequate framework for and resources allocated to translation and interpretation.
According to the Committee, the possibility to use regional or minority languages in
dealings with judicial and administrative authorities in practice remains marginal, if
not non-existent, especially with respect to written communication.
00252 As indicated in No. 28 of the Third State Report concerning the same
recommendation made during the second monitoring cycle: As stated in No. 114 of
the Second State Report, Germany regards the possibility to use regional or minority
languages in dealings with administrative and judicial authorities as an important
element in preserving and promoting these languages. These possibilities have been
created as far as finances allow. Given the current budget situation, a
recommendation to create additional demand through structural measures would
meet with considerable resistance. (See also No. 01004.)

6. take measures so that adequate radio and television broadcasting are
available in Sater Frisian, North Frisian, Lower Sorbian and Danish.
00261 As indicated in No. 29 of the Third State Report concerning a similar
recommendation made during the second monitoring cycle: Because freedom of
broadcasting and freedom of the press are guaranteed under Germany’s Basic Law,
Germany agreed only “to encourage” under the Charter’s Article 11 referring to the
media sector (see No. 115 Second State Report).
The federal and state authorities have very limited possibilities to provide financial
incentives to increase the provision of the Low German regional language and
minority languages. One reason is that programming decisions are made based on
the number of potential listeners/viewers and thus on anticipated advertising
revenue. Public subsidies for programming for which there is little demand could
hardly make up for this revenue. See also Nos. 226 – 239 in Part D of the Second
State Report and No. 01103 ff. in this report, which describes the limits of national
law for the interpretation of obligations under Article 11 of the Charter.
B.2 Adjustment of the accepted undertakings

17
00301 Germany still views as fundamentally problematic the Committee of Experts’
comments in the first Evaluation Report on the acceptance of redundant
undertakings. In No. 453 of the report the Committee rightly points out that the
obligation accepted by the Free State of Saxony under Article 10 (3) c (submission of
requests in regional or minority languages) is already included in the obligation
accepted under Article 10 (3) b (requesting and receiving a reply in these languages)
and is therefore redundant. Further, in No. 214 of the first Evaluation Report, the
Committee states that although Schleswig-Holstein’s current administrative praxis
fulfils the obligation under option (b) of Article 14 (cross-border cooperation) which it
did not select, the Land did not fulfil the obligation under option (a) of Article 14
(transfrontier exchanges: bilateral and multilateral agreements) which it did select.
Germany believes that the selection of options should be switched. However, the
Charter does not allow for such changes. Germany therefore considers it necessary
to discuss in depth the issue of adjusting treaty provisions, also with regard to any
problems arising in future, and requests the Committee of Experts to clarify the
matter accordingly. The aim should be a procedure which allows member states to
slightly modify their obligations without having to terminate and re-ratify the Charter.
B.3 Relevant legislation
00401 The legal instruments and provisions needed to implement the Charter in
Germany are included in the annexes to the Second and Third State Reports.
Amendments are included in the annex to the present report.

18
Part C
Protection of regional or minority languages under Part II (Article 7)
of the Charter
00701 As already indicated in No. 31a of the Third State Report, with regard to the
scope of protection of the languages Danish, Frisian, Sorbian and Low German (in
the relevant language areas) as well as Romani (in the entire federal territory) under
the Charter, see Nos. 118 to 120 of the Second State Report.
There it states that, in addition to the undertakings under Part II of the Charter,
Germany adopted individual provisions of Part III of the Charter with regard to the
regional or minority languages Danish, Upper Sorbian and Lower Sorbian, North
Frisian and Sater Frisian, and Low German in the Free Hanseatic City of Bremen, the
Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Lower
Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein.
Since then, Germany has extended the scope of protection under Part III to Romani
in Hesse by adopting a sufficient number of undertakings in accordance with Article 2
(2) of the Charter.
As in the second and third reports, the pertinent details are discussed in the
comments on Part III of the Charter. For this reason, the description of
implementation measures taken under Part II once again concentrates on the most
important framework conditions.
00702

Article 7
Objectives and principles
Paragraph 1
In respect of regional or minority languages, within the territories in which such
languages are used and according to the situation of each language, the Parties shall
base their policies, legislation and practice on the following objectives and principles:

Art. 7 (1) (a)
a) the recognition of the regional or minority languages as an expression of cultural
wealth;

19
00703 Compliance with this provision under German law is documented, as before,
by the notification of the two Declarations on the Charter's scope of application and
by extensive measures taken for its implementation.

Art. 7 (1) (b)
b) the respect for the geographical area of each regional or minority language in
order to ensure that existing or new administrative divisions do not constitute an
obstacle to the promotion of the regional or minority language in question;
00704 As noted in No.123 of the Second State Report and No. 34 of the Third State
Report, there are no governmental or other measures in place in Germany which
would change the population balance in the settlement areas of the language groups,
which are directed against the exercise of their rights or which would influence their
members’ participation in decisions affecting them.
00705 However, with regard to local government restructuring in some Länder the
Committee of Experts expressed concern that this might result in fewer possibilities
for participation by the affected language groups.
00706 For example, in No. 25 of its third Evaluation Report, the Committee stated
that during its (third) on-the-spot visit to Germany, it had been informed by language
group representatives that abolishing the level of district administration in Lower
Saxony in 2004 and transferring the supervision of municipalities, administration and
the judiciary to the Land ministries as superior administrative authorities had
restricted the use of Low German, as few of the civil servants in Hanover spoke Low
German.
00707

Lower Saxony has commented on this issue as follows:

00708 The two-level administrative structure introduced in Lower Saxony in 2004
by dissolving the district governments affects the structure of direct Land
administration and has little impact on the implementation of the Charter. Indirect
Land administration (local and regional authorities) remains unchanged. The
supervision of municipalities the Committee of Experts referred to affects the internal
relations between the supervisory authority and the subordinate area. According to
the federal and Länder laws on administrative procedures, German is the official
language.

20

00709 As one result of administrative restructuring in the Free State of Saxony, in
which the districts of Bautzen, Kamenz and Hoyerswerda were merged to form a
single district called Bautzen, all of the Sorbian language area except for the
municipality of Schleife lies within one district. In No. 29 of its Third Evaluation
Report, the Committee of Experts noted the concern expressed by representatives of
the Upper Sorbian language group that the smaller proportion of Sorbian speakers in
the overall population of the new district (between 5% and 10%) could have a
negative effect on political participation. In requesting this report, the Committee
asked whether the authorities had ensured that the restructuring described would not
have a negative effect on the protection and promotion of Upper Sorbian.
00710 The government of Saxony provides the following assessment of the results
of restructuring: The notion that administrative restructuring in the Free State of
Saxony had reduced the Sorbian language area to a single district, with the
exception of the Schleife municipality, is incorrect. In fact, this restructuring did not
change the size of the German-Sorbian settlement area (see Article 10 of the Act of
29 January 2008 to restructure the administrative districts of the Free State of
Saxony and to amend other acts, Saxon Law Gazette 2008, p. 102 ff.).
Due to this restructuring, Section 3 (1) of the Saxon Sorbs Act (SächsSorbG) and the
annex to Section 3 (2) of the Act have been amended in both the Sorbian- and the
German-language versions. The restructuring did not affect municipalities’
membership of the Sorbian settlement area; the rights and freedoms of the Sorbian
people remain intact. The annex to Section 3 (2) was amended because the
municipality of Knappensee was dissolved effective 1 January 2005 and its district of
Wartha was merged with the municipality of Königswartha in the Bautzen district,
while the districts of Gross Särchen and Koblenz were merged with the municipality
of Lohsa.
Representing Sorbian interests at the hearing concerning the above-mentioned Act,
Domowina and the Council for Sorbian Affairs called for organizational measures to
ensure the political participation of the Sorbian people. However, only indirect effects
were cause for concern during the restructuring.
Such effects were countered on the one hand by legislation increasing the number of
district councils in each district; on the other hand, under their right to establish bylaws, the new districts of Bautzen and Görlitz have given high priority to preserving
the Sorbian language and culture. For example, in the district of Bautzen Sorbian
affairs are the responsibility of the district committee, while in the district of Görlitz
they are the responsibility of a consultative council for Sorbian issues. Each district

21
has also appointed a commissioner; in the Bautzen district this is a full-time
employee of the district administration, while in the Görlitz district, a staff member
devotes 25% of his working hours to this task.
00711
00712 In No. 30 of the third Evaluation Report, the Committee of Experts also
expressed concern that the reform of administrative districts in Schleswig-Holstein
planned for 2013, which will reduce the number of districts and merge the district of
Nordfriesland into a larger unit, could have a negative effect on the promotion and
protection of North Frisian. The Committee therefore asked whether the authorities
had taken steps to ensure that such negative effects would not occur.
00713 Schleswig-Holstein responds as follows: In the last legislative period, the
government of Schleswig-Holstein agreed not to use legal measures to require
changes to the administrative structure. Instead, the government agreed to work with
the local governments to draft an agreement in which the latter would commit to
maximize efficiency through extensive cooperation and voluntary mergers between
districts (Kreise and kreisfreie Städte). Thus, the existence of the Nordfriesland
district is no longer in question.
00714 The Committee of Experts has repeatedly expressed similar concerns with
regard to the resettlement of residents of Sorbian villages as a result of lignite mining.
00715 Following the resettlement of the village of Horno, as reported in the Second
State Report, and in response to the Committee’s urging to take due account of
Germany's undertakings under the Charter when taking decisions on resettlement,
the Third State Report (No. 36) once again explained that this was already the case.
00716 According to No. 27 of the third Evaluation Report, representatives of Lower
Sorbian reported that although efforts were undertaken to retain the social network of
the former inhabitants of Horno within the new settlement, 20% of the inhabitants
decided not to resettle there.
00717 In No. 27 ff. of its third Evaluation Report, the Committee also stated that the
mining company Vattenfall planned to conduct more mining in Sorbian-speaking
areas in future, although to date no procedures to obtain a permit had been initiated.

22
00718 The Committee also stated that speakers of Sorbian had informed it that,
within the next two decades, several villages inhabited by about 1600 people in the
Schleife region, where Upper Sorbian is spoken, would have to resettle due to lignite
mining.
00719 As a result, the Committee of Experts encouraged the authorities to take
active measures to compensate for the difficulties caused by lignite mining in
protecting and promoting the Sorbian language. When requesting the present report,
the Committee asked which measures had been taken.
00720 Brandenburg and the Free State of Saxony report the following concerning
the status of planned lignite mining and the Committee's recommendation to take
active measures to compensate for the difficulties caused by lignite mining in
protecting and promoting the Sorbian language:
1. Brandenburg
00720a Based on the Act on regional planning and on lignite mining and
redevelopment planning, last amended by Article 2 of the Act of 28 June 2006
(Gazette of Laws and Ordinances I/08, p. 96), two lignite mining plan approval
procedures are currently being processed.
According to current information, the plan approval procedure for the JänschwaldeNord mining operation will not affect any Sorbian settlements.
The planned continuation of the Welzow-Süd operation from segment I to segment II
requires updating the current lignite mining plan for Welzow-Süd, segment I, of 21
June 2004 (Gazette of Laws and Ordinances II/24, p. 614).
The plan approval procedure to update this plan was opened on 15 November 2007.
The planning area of segment II includes the village of Proschim, part of the town of
Welzow, which declared itself part of the Sorbian settlement area in 1995 pursuant to
the Sorbs/Wends Act.
Proschim is on the list of municipalities in the traditional settlement area of the
Sorbian (Wend) people published in the Official Journal of Brandenburg, No. 19 of 23
April 2008.
The lignite mining plan gives this fact high priority.
It is therefore necessary to gather the necessary baseline information and draw the
relevant conclusions for preserving and further developing Sorbian/Wend traditions
and culture.

23
At the moment, the Sorbian Institute in Bautzen is drafting a research report on
Sorbian (Wend) identity and culture in the villages of Proschim (Prozym) and
Karlsfeld.
To summarize, the report
takes stock of the current situation of Sorbian (Wend) culture and identity;
looks for existing and new models for Sorbs to describe and express their ethnic
identity;
records evidence of Sorbian structures and residence; and
studies the breadth and depth of Sorbian language use.
The results of this research will be considered in the lignite mining plan approval
procedure as assets to be given special protection.
They create the framework for safeguarding as much of Sorbian (Wend) traditions,
language and culture as possible and ensuring that they survive following
resettlement, should that be necessary.
The results of this report are expected in early 2010; the lignite mining plan approval
procedure is to be completed in 2012/13.

2. Free State of Saxony
00721 In the Schleife region, approx. 240 residents will soon be resettled. The plan
approval procedure to continue the Nochten mining operation by exploiting the
Nochten priority mining area, entailing the resettlement of 1500 residents, was
opened in autumn 2007. The procedure is expected to be concluded in 2011.
Comprehensive agreements on the resettlements were concluded between the
residents and the Vattenfall mining company. These agreements include the
obligation that the Sorbian language, culture and traditions are to be preserved and
promoted. A joint statement issued by Domowina and Vattenfall of 9/24 November
2007 specifies the funding details for current resettlements. All those being resettled
have been offered the possibility to move to the parish of Schleife which is in the
traditional settlement area of the Protestant Sorbs. Compliance with undertakings
under the Charter is ensured in the region also because lignite mining provides a
strong economic base, thereby making a significant contribution to preserving and
promoting Sorbian language and culture.
00722

24

Art. 7 (1) (c)
c) the need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in order
to safeguard them;
00723 See Nos. 131 to 142 of the Second State Report relating to constitutional
and other provisions of the Bund and the Länder highlighting the great importance
Germany attaches to the protection of minorities. No. 37 of the Third State Report
also notes that the Act on Promoting Frisian in the Public Sphere (Frisian Act) and
the Act on setting up a public-law corporation “Open Channel Schleswig-Holstein”
(OC Act) were adopted.
00724 In No. 31 of its third Evaluation Report, the Committee of Experts once again
expressed its view that “resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in
order to safeguard them” covers the following aspects:
creating a (broader) legal framework for the promotion of regional or minority
languages,
establishing bodies which are responsible for the promotion of these languages,
and
providing adequate financial resources.
00725 If the word “covers” is intended to mean that these measures can be
described as part of the “resolute action”, then the German authorities can agree with
this interpretation. However, they cannot agree to any view which sees limitations
with regard to these measures as a lack of “resolute action” and a failure to fulfil the
above-mentioned undertaking.
00726 In No. 32 of its third Evaluation Report, the Committee stated its view that
Sater Frisian and Lower Sorbian in particular appeared to suffer from a lack of
resolute action and that these two languages would merit serious attention and
investment as they were particularly endangered.
00727
ff.

The comments on this statement can be found in Nos. 00746 ff. and 40801

00728 With regard to No. 25 of the second Evaluation Report and No. 33 of the
third Evaluation Report, in which the Committee states that there is often
considerable confusion among speakers of regional or minority languages as to
which authorities are responsible for protecting and promoting their languages and

25
for implementing the Charter at Land and federal level, and that the criteria for
federal funding are not very clear and that there is often no guarantee of continued
funding, see No. 39 of the Third State Report for a rebuttal.
The implementation conferences in which representatives of all language groups
participate and the meetings of the consultative committees for the individual
minorities and language groups can also be used to clarify responsibilities and
funding criteria as needed. By contrast – especially in view of the current budget
deficits in Germany – there are no political possibilities in sight to limit the principle of
year-to-year funding in the field of promoting minorities and minority languages.
Rather, the responsible authorities must defend their estimated budgets every year.
The difficulty of winning budget increases and the fact that this is nonetheless
possible in isolated cases is clearly shown by the fact that cuts in federal funding for
the Bund Deutscher Nordschleswiger made in 2006 and 2007 were reversed and the
budget appropriation for 2008 restored to the level of 2004 and 2005; in 2009, the
budget appropriation was increased.
00729 Following No. 35 of its third Evaluation Report concerning funding for the
Foundation of the Sorbian People (which, due to special historical circumstances,
has been granted multi-annual funding despite the public budget principle of year-byyear funding), the Committee urged the German authorities to reach an agreement
that at least maintained the previous financial contribution of the federal authorities
and the Länder. When requesting the present report, the Committee asked whether
such an agreement had been reached.
The Federal Government Commissioner for Culture and the Media reports as follows:
The second agreement between the Bund (Federal Government Commissioner for
Culture and the Media) and the Länder Brandenburg and the Free State of Saxony
on joint funding for the Foundation for the Sorbian People was signed on 10 July
2009. According to this agreement, the Foundation receives annual funding of
approximately €16.8 million, with the Bund contributing €8.2 million, the Free State of
Saxony €5.85 million and Brandenburg €2.77 million. By comparison: From 2006 to
2008, total funding was approximately €15.6 million. The agreement entered into
force retroactively from 1 January 2009 and applies through 31 December 2013. It is
automatically extended for another year unless terminated by one of the participants
twelve months before it is due to expire.
00730 The greater cooperation among the Länder to promote Low German by
means of discussions among the responsible desk officers of the Länder repeatedly
urged by the Committee was reported in No. 122 of the Second and No. 33 of the

26
Third State Report following No. 52 of the first Evaluation Report. In addition, the
following may be reported:
Following the 2006 conference “Niederdeutsch und Friesisch im Bildungswesen - ein
Ländervergleich” (Low German and Frisian in the educational sector: A Länder
comparison) in Oldenburg, Lower Saxony, the desk officers responsible for Low
German in the governments of the northern German Länder met in Magdeburg,
Saxony-Anhalt in June 2007, in Bremen in April 2008, and in Schwerin, MecklenburgWestern Pomerania in May 2009 to share information and talk with representatives of
the Bund and the Federal Council for Low German (BfN). They discussed issues of
including Low German in preschool, school and higher education, as well as the
“Schwerin Theses on Education Policy” formulated by the Federal Council for Low
German. The Bund-Länder meeting in Schwerin in May 2009 coincided with a
conference, funded by the Federal Ministry of the Interior, of the Federal Council for
Low German on the occasion of the 10th anniversary of the Charter.
00731 As in No. 21 of its second Evaluation Report, in Nos. 37 and 46 of its third
Evaluation Report the Committee welcomed such meetings but observed that there
had been few practical results to date. In its request for this report, it asked for
information on the resolute action taken as a result of the meetings held in Oldenburg
in June 2006 and Magdeburg in June 2007.
00732 At these meetings, participants found little scope for additional measures
and that as a result of these meetings, the limits to the Charter undertakings, for
example in the educational and media sectors, should be made clear in this report.
These result from the consistency of the German legal system required by the
Constitution and clearly also include the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages. With regard to Germany’s interpretation of the Charter provisions for the
educational sector, in particular higher education see Nos. 00771 ff. and 00802; for
the media sector, see Nos. 00261 and 01101 ff. in this report.

Art. 7 (1) (d)
d) the facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of regional or minority
languages, in speech and writing, in public and private life;
00733 With regard to the provisions guaranteeing the right to use one’s own
language in everyday life (Article 2 (1) Basic Law) or in the media (Article 5 (1) Basic
Law) or deliberately restrict them for the field of administration (Section 23 Federal
Administrative Act) and identical provisions of the Länder and the judicial authorities

27
irrespective of the knowledge of - interpretable - Charter undertakings, see Nos. 143
to 145 of the Second State Report.
Schleswig-Holstein’s Frisian Act, mentioned in No. 41 of the Third State Report,
which regulates the use of North Frisian in North Frisia and on Helgoland, is part of
this legal framework. In No. 39 of its third Evaluation Report, the Committee notes
that representatives of North Frisian believed that the Act had had a positive effect on
the visibility of the language.
00734 Where the Committee of Experts has a positive assessment of measures to
fulfil undertakings from the following articles of the Charter, such as the Day of the
Danish Language in Schleswig-Holstein, contests on language-friendly municipalities
in Saxony and Brandenburg, and measures to promote the use of Low German in the
NDR broadcasting area, this will be discussed in the articles below.
00735 According to No. 38 of its third Evaluation Report, during its third on-the-spot
visit the Committee of Experts was informed of some cases illustrating the negative
effect of privatization on the use of regional or minority languages:
In 2006, a private railway company announced the approaching station names in
North Frisia in North Frisian as well as in German. Due to complaints from some
passengers, however, the company ceased announcing the names in North Frisian.
A member of the federal parliament informed the Committee of Experts that the
post code book had changed its bilingual entries of Sorbian place names into
monolingual German ones.
00736 The Committee of Experts therefore asked for information on how the use of
minority languages is secured in privatized services.
00737 The responsible federal and Länder authorities respond by stating that
although they try to promote the use of Low German and the minority languages by
privatized companies, these companies are not bound by the Charter undertakings,
nor can such economically and fiscally necessary privatizations be discontinued for
this reason.
00738

Art. 7 (1) (e)
e) the maintenance and development of links, in the fields covered by this Charter,
between groups using a regional or minority language or other groups in the State

28
employing a language used in identical or similar form, as well as the establishment
of cultural relations with other groups in the State using different languages;
00739 With respect to the right to maintain and develop contacts under Article 2 (1)
of the Basic Law (general freedom of action, freedom to leave the country) and
Article 11 (1) of the Basic Law (freedom of movement within the federal territory,
freedom to enter the country) and to the exercise of this right by the language groups
with the help of manifold organizations promoted, as reported lately to the same
extent with individual projects (such as the Federal Union of European Nationalities
(FUEN), the Youth of European Nationalities (YEN) and the European Bureau of
Lesser Used Languages (EBLUL)), see the comments in Nos. 147 through 160 of the
Second State Report.
Under No. 43, the Committee nonetheless underscored the importance of the
Federal Council for Low German, founded in 2002, as an inter-Land organization with
a view to representing the speakers of Low German with one voice across all Länder
where Low German is spoken, and pointed to the difficulties the Federal Council
faces, in particular due to the fact that it does not receive any funding at all. The
Committee therefore asked whether the authorities had considered the difficulties of
the Federal Council for Low German.
00740 In its second evaluation report (No. 34), the Committee recommended
negotiations to improve the situation by having the Institute for the Low German
Language (INS) assume the administrative and organizational costs for the Federal
Council for Low German, founded in 2002, also beyond an initial phase. This
recommendation has been followed in that the INS has received project funding for
this purpose from the budget of the Federal Government Commissioner for Culture
and the Media since 2008.
00741 An administrative agreement was concluded with the four northern German
Länder Free Hanseatic City of Bremen, Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg, Lower
Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein to ensure the funding for this institution and its
ongoing efforts, which entered into force on 1 January 1979. These four Länder plus
North Rhine-Westphalia, through its regional local authority Landschaftsverband
Westfalen-Lippe, continue to fund 88% of the INS budget.
Where the INS provides personnel, organizational or financial support for the Federal
Council for Low German, since 2008 it may use federal funds to do so. Based on a
decision by the Budget Committee of the German Bundestag, in 2008 the Bund set
aside up to €50,000 in the budget of the Federal Government Commissioner for

29
Culture and the Media for inter-Land projects of the Institute for Low German in
Bremen and for the work of the Federal Council for Low German at the INS. Out of
this sum, about €20,000 went in 2008 and 2009 to the work of the Federal Council for
Low German. In addition, the following individual projects of the INS were carried out
with funding from the Federal Government Commissioner for Culture and the Media:
Identifying and replacing missing items in the INS specialized library; adding to the
Low German bibliography; publishing a publication with historical Low German texts;
conducting public readings in Low German; publishing a publication on the Charter;
digitizing microfiches and audio documents; updating the website; and developing a
DVD language course. In 2007, the Federal Government Commissioner for Culture
and the Media provided about €53,000 for the representative survey “Wer spricht
Plattdeutsch” (Who speaks Low German) by the Institute for Low German in Bremen.
With regard to federal funding for the Federal Council for Low German, it should be
noted that this organization was not established until after the Budget Committee of
the German Bundestag decided to end all federal funding for institutions.
As part of its responsibilities in connection with the Charter, since the last State
Report (2007) the Federal Ministry of the Interior has funded various projects of the
Federal Council for Low German, both to contribute to the financial security of this
organization and to ensure substantive promotion of Low German despite limited
resources.
00742 - 00744
Art. 7 (1) (f)
f) the provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of
regional or minority languages at all appropriate stages;
00745 As reported in the Third State Report with reference to No. 162 of the
Second State Report that the individual’s freedom to learn a language of his/her own
choice unimpeded by external influences - in particular state influence - is protected
by Article 2 (1) of the Basic Law and to the basically unchanged situation (referred to
in No. 163 of the Second State Report) regarding educational options for individual
languages protected by the Charter, see the explanations in part D of the report
regarding specific educational undertakings from Part III of the Charter.
Funding available in Lower Saxony for learning Sater Frisian
00746 In No. 51 of its third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts repeated
that not enough undertakings for Sater Frisian had been accepted under Part III of

30
the Charter; in view of what it considered the need to do so, i.e. to accept
undertakings under Article 8 (1) (b) and (c) of the Charter, it referred to No. 37 of its
second evaluation report.
00747 In No. 52 of its third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts criticized
the fact that, according to the precise text of the new curriculum of August 2006, the
mandatory inclusion of the presentation of Sater Frisian in all types of schools in
Lower Saxony within the core curricula subjects of English and Low German referred
to in No. 3507 of the Third State Report (concerning the accepted undertaking under
Art. 8 (1) (g)) applies only in cases where a speaker of the respective language is a
pupil of the class.
00748 In No. 53 of its third evaluation report, however, the Committee concedes
having received additional information indicating that language encounter
(Sprachbegegnung) is part of the general curricula at primary and secondary level
and that Sater Frisian can be offered as an optional class. Lower Saxony adds:
Language acquisition is the main priority in elective courses (activity groups, required
optional subjects). Achievement in required optional subjects is graded and taken
into account when deciding whether pupils can pass to the next higher level.
00749 In No. 54 of its third evaluation report, the Committee notes that one hour
per week of Sater Frisian is offered in the secondary modern school in Saterland.
00750 However, the Committee criticizes the fact that, according to the information
received during its third on-the-spot visit, the teaching of Sater Frisian was still
carried out by voluntary teachers who are not reimbursed for their travel expenses.
00751 In No. 55 the Committee sums up by stating it is of the view that more can
and should be done. Given the severely endangered nature of Sater Frisian and the
well defined and compact nature of the language area, the Committee stated that it
was reasonable and necessary for the authorities to guarantee adequate resources
to support a realistic offering of the language in both primary and secondary
education. It also came to similar conclusions in Nos. 322 – 345 of its third evaluation
report and urged taking the necessary measures to develop teaching of Sater Frisian
at primary and secondary levels of education.
When requesting this State Report, the Committee asked whether such measures
had been taken in the meantime.

31
00752 Lower Saxony, the responsible Land, explains that the undertaking accepted
under Art. 7 (1) (f) of the Charter has been fulfilled for the reasons listed below. With
regard to the Committee's demand in No. 321 of the third evaluation report to accept
further undertakings in addition to those under Art. 7 (1) (f) mentioned above and the
few under Art. 8, Lower Saxony refers to the explanations in No. 40802 ff.
Nonetheless, Lower Saxony reports the following improvements with regard to
educational measures for Sater Frisian:
00753 The new curriculum for the subject of German has made language
encounter a mandatory element of classroom instruction for all pupils. The new core
curriculum also requires departments in all subjects to take the regional context
(here: Saterland) into account in their teaching.
Furthermore, the four primary schools and one lower secondary school in Saterland
offer language courses. Participation in this language instruction in activity groups or
required optional subjects is voluntary. Language instruction is provided mainly by
four trained full-time instructors. Additional support was provided by a volunteer
instructor in 2009. This number is currently sufficient, since not only the number of
teachers, but also the number of hours of instruction offered and provided in relation
to the number of pupils is an indicator for the developments in education.
Funding available in Rhineland-Palatinate for learning Romani
00755 In No. 57 of its third evaluation report, the Committee welcomed the fact that
a framework agreement was reached between the government of RhinelandPalatinate and the Land association of the Central Council of German Sinti and
Roma in July 2005, on the basis of which the Land supports initiatives of the Land
association in educational institutions for preserving the culture and language. In
requesting the present report, the Committee asked for information on the teaching of
Romani in Rhineland-Palatinate.
00756 Rhineland-Palatinate reports as follows:
The government of Rhineland-Palatinate regards the framework agreement of 25
July 2005 as an important step forward in protecting Sinti and Roma residents of the
Land against discrimination and in promoting and preserving the culture, language
and identity of this minority in line with the Council of Europe Framework Convention
for the Protection of National Minorities and the European Charter of Regional or
Minority Languages to the extent desired by members of this minority.

32
Article 2 of the framework agreement stipulates that, in order to preserve the culture
and language of the Sinti and Roma, the Land government will support initiatives of
the Land association to organize and provide additional offerings at child day-care
facilities and educational institutions (schools/higher education). This arrangement is
intended to ensure that the Charter’s provisions are not interpreted in a way that is
not in the interests of the minority. The framework agreement therefore provides that
the offerings of the Land association of German Sinti and Roma of RhinelandPalatinate are to be developed and carried out on its own responsibility.
For years, Rhineland-Palatinate has provided subsidies for important educational and
cultural efforts of the Land association of German Sinti and Roma, including support
for the minority language Romani, as part of its institutional funding for the
association’s office and with separate project funding for volunteer activities by
association members. For example, in the past volunteer members of the Land
association have conducted relevant events, seminars or study trips for members of
the minority, focusing on culture, history or discrimination issues, which also served
indirectly to promote the minority language.
At gatherings in 2007 and 2008, the Land association conducted the first systematic
study of the need for seminars and events to promote the Romani language. Then
the Land association submitted a draft funding application for a project, initially to run
for three years, on intercultural education of Sinti and Roma, intended to help
preserve the culture and language. According to the project description, the
association plans to offer seminars in the Romani language focusing on the
minority’s specific culture, history and problems of discrimination; the seminars will
be offered in communities in Rhineland-Palatinate where desired by local members
of the minority. The main target audience is Sinti and Roma youth, and is to be
expanded to include children and adults on request. As part of the project, a full-time
Sinti educational officer is to be hired.
At an initial meeting with the association, representatives of the Rhineland-Palatinate
ministries of the interior and education explained that, although the project
application aimed in the right direction, the Land government thought it was
necessary, in the interests of sustainability and in view of the framework agreement,
to check the extent to which the proposed project could be linked with measures for
children in day care, with school education and even with courses offered at adult
education centres. The association responded that members of the minority did not
want to provide such offerings in public institutions such as kindergartens, schools or
higher education facilities, etc., for fear that they would be identified against their will

33
as members of the minority. The association will present additional documents
indicating in greater detail the need to hire a full-time educational officer to be paid for
from project funds.
00756a In 2007, the registered Sinti Union of Rhineland-Palatinate e.V. applied for
funding for a project to improve the effectiveness and professionalism of existing
advising and support services and to expand additional innovative services for Sinti
in Rhineland-Palatinate. After the parliament agreed to provide the necessary funding
for the budget years 2009 and 2010, the Sinti Union of Rhineland-Palatinate e.V.
received project funding in 2009 for the first time.
With regard to preserving and promoting the Romani language (the Sinti Union of
Rhineland-Palatinate e.V. refers to the Rommenes of the Sinti = Sintetikes), the Sinti
Union of Rhineland-Palatinate e.V. opposes any use of the language outside the
minority and any instruction in or reporting on the language. The group says it is
important to support the measures listed below which promote regular contact
between the older and younger generations of Sinti, in order to enable the transfer of
culture and language to subsequent generations.
Among other things, the group organizes cultural gatherings to help promote social
contacts, strengthen the social networks of Sinti and create an opportunity to discuss
important events and concerns of the Sinti's cultural order (rules, taboos). These
gatherings usually also help preserve cultural traditions, such as the music and
dance of German Gypsies (Sinti) and the Romani language. Sinti and Sinti artists
from Germany and neighbouring countries took part in an international cultural event
in Mendig in May 2009 which was organized by the Sinti Union of RhinelandPalatinate e.V. By celebrating with other Sinti and members of the majority
population, the group hopes to encourage mutual understanding between Sinti and
the German majority. The Sinti Union of Rhineland-Palatinate e.V. also offers
homework assistance for children and young people and supervision during school
holidays, where they can also practise using the minority language. Open jam
sessions give children and young people the chance to take music lessons from
experienced Sinti artists and learn traditional dances and songs in the minority
language. The Sinti Union also offers a discussion group for victims of the Nazi
regime. Some of the elderly members of this group have also agreed to work with
Sinti children and young people. The project funding also helps pay for these
measures.

34
00756b In the field of adult education, a group of young Sinti fathers meets regularly
in Mainz to discuss career, family and other relevant issues. Promoting Romani
language skills is also a priority for the group.
Funding available in the Free State of Bavaria for learning Romani
00757 In No. 59 of its third evaluation report, the Committee welcomed the fact
that, according to the comments by the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma
attached to the Third State Report, the Land Association of German Sinti and Roma
in Bavaria provided homework assistance and extra tuition for a group of Sinti
primary school pupils in the Romani language and with funding from the Free State
of Bavaria for the 2004/5 school year, and that these projects were to be extended to
other towns and cities in Bavaria.
00758 In response to the Committee’s request for further information about
expanding the programme to other Bavarian towns and cities:
The Bavarian Ministry of Education and Cultural Affairs provides funding for the
current programme as part of its measures to look after public school pupils during
the midday break. The provider of midday care (e.g. school provider, club) must
apply for funding. The ministry would welcome funding applications for additional
projects of this kind but is not aware of any. The next deadline for funding
applications in 15 October 2009.
Funding available for learning Low German
00759 In No. 45 of its third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts noted that
Part II of the Charter only applies to Low German in the following Länder:
Brandenburg, Saxony-Anhalt and North Rhine-Westphalia (only with regard to
education) and is of the view that it has received only limited information on SaxonyAnhalt and the rather limited efforts towards education in Low German under Article
7.
00760 In its request for this State Report, the Committee asked for information on
the efforts by Brandenburg, Saxony-Anhalt and North Rhine-Westphalia under Part II
of the Charter with respect to Low German and education in particular. In No. 49 of
the third evaluation report, the Committee asked for concrete information on the
teaching and study of Low German in their territories.

35
00761 In No. 46 of the third evaluation report and in its request for the present
report, the Committee also asked for information about the results of the meetings of
Bund–Länder officials concerning Low German in 2007 and 2008 (see Nos. 00730–
00732 of this report) for the development of funds for learning Low German.
00762 Most of this information can be provided by reporting the results of the 2008
meeting of Bund-Länder officials on Low German in the educational sector.
According to the meeting minutes, the Länder are working hard to preserve school
instruction in Low German, the status of which is as follows: The Länder reports all
came to the conclusion that Low German can be offered for the purpose of language
encounter. Specifically:
1.

Free Hanseatic City of Bremen

The Free Hanseatic City of Bremen does not offer Low German as a separate
subject and is unable to do so. This is why the authorities are working to increase the
number of reading competitions in the future. Concrete preparations are under way to
anchor Low German more strongly within the lower secondary school curriculum.
The Institute for Low German has provided the schools of general education with a
comprehensive overview of Low German children and youth literature and textbooks.
Advanced training for instructors of Low German in Bremen and Bremerhaven has
led to networking among these instructors.
2.

Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg

Hamburg is not able to offer Low German as a separate subject. However, there are
plans to integrate Low German into German classes by reading (silently and aloud)
and listening to Low German texts. These plans also include the upper secondary
level.
Some Hamburg schools also have activity groups (theatre groups) which work with
Low German texts.
More than 600 school pupils entered the latest reading competition (sponsored by
the savings banks and the publishers Wachholtz Verlag and Quickborn Verlag). The
Land final was held on 22 May 2007 in close cooperation with the Carl Toepfer
Foundation.
Low German is also very popular at the annual reading festival “Seiteneinsteiger”,
organized by Literaturkontor e.V. and sponsored by Hamburg’s ministry of culture
and education.

36
Volunteer tutors from the organization MENTOR e.V. help pupils at many schools
who have special difficulties reading. Depending on the language skills of the
MENTOR volunteers, Low German texts may also be used.
The Hamburg textbook Schrievwark by Bolko Bullerdiek plays an important role in
Low German instruction: The book includes Low German literature suitable for use in
German classes. The book is used in 330 schools. A survey of parents indicated a
high level of acceptance.
In Hamburg, advanced teacher training for Low German entails a 20-hour language
course and a class on using Low German texts at the lower secondary level.
3.

Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania

Low German is not a separate subject at schools in Mecklenburg-Western
Pomerania.
In 2008, 86 active teachers took a certificate course in Low German as a subsidiary
subject.
Low German competitions in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania receive funding from
the association of savings banks. Unfortunately, the shrinking numbers of school
pupils also means fewer participants in Low German competitions.
4. Lower Saxony
In Lower Saxony, language encounters with Low German are a mandatory part of the
school curriculum, although language learning is not.
The Land tries to use native speakers in the schools, both teachers and volunteer
assistants.
The Land is also glad to serve as patron for reading competitions.
Since 1 August 2007, the schools have had a separate budget for advanced teacher
training and may set their own priorities.
At the teacher training institution in Cuxhaven, students training to teach at primary
and lower secondary schools (Hauptschule/Realschule) may acquire additional
certification in Low German.
5.

North Rhine-Westphalia

Although Low German is not a separate school subject, the Land does fund a
programme of culture in the schools in which relevant organizations send members
who can speak Low German to schools (especially in the districts of Coesfeld and
Münster) to help children become familiar with the language, for example by

37
rehearsing short plays in Low German. In 2008, there were 221 projects within the
programme of culture in the schools, of which four were devoted to Low German.
With its ordinance of 18 October 1990 (41 – 44.2.21), the government of the Münster
district called for greater funding for Low German in the schools. The ordinance,
which remains in force, was drafted by an expert commission of linguists and
education specialists.
Many clubs for the preservation of local culture and traditions in the region have also
given rise to Low German schools which provide a meeting place for friends of the
language.
There are strong organizations in the Münsterland districts of Coesfeld, Borken and
Steinfurt for the Low German competitions for school pupils in the coming winter
semester 2009/10. District clubs for the preservation of local culture and traditions
usually organize these events.
6.

Saxony-Anhalt

The programme for culture in the schools and clubs has been successful in
promoting Low German among children and youth also outside the schools.
In response to the Committee’s request in No. 48 of its third evaluation report,
Saxony-Anhalt provides the following information about statistical data collected from
2003–2006 on the extent to which Low German is taught at schools: Activity groups
or optional courses in Low German are offered at all types of schools. No statistics
on the extent of these offerings were collected during this period.
With regard to the Committee’s request in No. 47 of its third evaluation report for
more information about the analysis of the situation of preschool education in
Saxony-Anhalt and the expert discussion on what measures to take to introduce Low
German in preschools from 2007, Saxony-Anhalt responds as follows: While revising
its Framework Curricula for training child-care workers, the Low German Working
Group at the Ministry of Education added relevant references to taking due account
of Low German. These references were taken into account in the new Framework
Curricula (July 2009).
7.

Schleswig-Holstein

Schleswig-Holstein does not offer Low German as a separate subject and is unable
to do so. However, Schleswig-Holstein does have advanced teacher training for Low
German. All teacher candidates for the subject of German must take a mandatory

38
module in Low German during the second phase of training. This module is based on
the booklet Plattdüütsch in de School (Low German in school) written by the German
and Low German advisers of the Institute for Quality Development at Schools (IQSH)
and by the heads of the two centres for Low German.
More reading competitions are also being planned.
Schools which offer Low German are given the Low German seal of approval for
schools (Plattdeutsche Schulsiegel) in recognition of their special qualifications.
Unfortunately, the number of schools willing to participate in this programme is in
decline, likely due to falling local demand.
8.

Brandenburg

Brandenburg was unable to take part in the meeting of Bund-Länder officials
responsible for Low German. It reports on its educational offerings for Low German
as follows: Low German is offered in the form of activity groups at some primary
schools in the northern school districts of Eberswalde and Perleberg. As the name
indicates, these groups constitute a curricular activity rather than instruction.
Because participation is voluntary, Low German activity groups are not based on
framework curricula, nor is performance graded on the same basis that applies to
class work. Activities may be led by teachers or non-school personnel (parents,
clubs, native speakers, etc.).
Brandenburg does not plan to establish Low German as a separate school subject at
primary or secondary level. So there is no need to develop framework curricula or to
make Low German the subject of advanced teacher training.
9.

The Bund

In the framework of project funding by the Federal Government Commissioner for
Culture and the Media, in 2008 the INS developed and produced a Low German
language course on DVD for adult learners.
00763 - 00769

Art. 7 (1) (g)
g) the provision of facilities enabling non-speakers of a regional or minority
language living in the area where it is used to learn it if they so desire;

39

00770 As regards the scope of options for non-speakers of a regional or minority
language living in the area where it is used to learn this language, see Nos. 164 and
165 of the Second State Report, which note that, given opposition from speakers of
the Romani language of the German Sinti and Roma, it is not possible to create such
options in accordance with Article 7 (4) of the Charter.

Art. 7 (1) (h)
h) the promotion of study and research on regional or minority languages at
universities or equivalent institutions;
00771 In Nos. 60 – 62 of its third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts
referred to its concern, already expressed in its second evaluation report, over the
continuing decline of study and research opportunities on regional or minority
languages, and expressed its concern that this decline could be intensified by
budgetary pressures in higher education and the Europe-wide Bologna Process.
00772 The Länder, which in Germany are responsible for maintaining study and
research facilities for regional and minority languages, regard the Committee’s
concerns as understandable, stating that it is increasingly difficult to offer research
and teaching on the languages of Germany’s national minorities and on Low German
in higher education institutions for the following reasons:
The development of universities in Germany is subject to the conflicting forces of
government management, academic autonomy and market orientation. To this end,
many federal Länder have amended their laws on tertiary education in recent years.
Today, universities have a lot more freedom than in the past. This includes increased
competition as an organizing principle, quality assurance through evaluation and
accreditation, and target agreements between the Länder and the universities. This
process has resulted in enhanced autonomy instead of government regulation at
universities. The Länder have thus consciously opted for granting universities the
greatest possible independence from government requirements. This development
has also been supported by the Bologna Process.
00773 The process of creating a single European area of higher education
(Bologna Process) started already in 1997 with the Lisbon Agreement of the Council

40
of Europe and UNESCO, which laid the legal foundation for recognizing university
studies in Europe. This agreement aims at recognizing degrees and qualifications in
Europe on the basis of reciprocity. It was ratified by the German Bundestag on
16 May 2007.
The ministers of education of 29 European countries met in Bologna in 1999 and
adopted the Bologna Declaration, in which they agreed to create a European area of
higher education by 2010 with the following objectives:
•
Three levels of university studies with bachelor, master and doctoral degrees;
•
Introducing study modules and the European Credit Transfer System (ECTS) to
ensure mutual recognition;
•
Accreditation to ensure quality and the mutual recognition of studies and exams,
as well as the mobility of students across national borders;
•
Introduction of the diploma supplement explaining course content and
achievements.
00774 The Bologna Process has resulted in comprehensive changes for German
universities. In particular, the reform has affected the structure of university courses
and content, organizational processes in universities, administrative processes and
decisions by the students. One of the biggest challenges is the introduction of
bachelor and master courses and related developments such as modularization and
the introduction of the credit system.
00775 In its amended version (1998) the Federal Higher Education Act already
envisaged the experimental introduction of two levels of university courses (bachelor
and master courses). With the adoption of the sixth amendment to the Federal
Higher Education Act of 2002, bachelor and master courses are now part of the
regular curriculum. The higher education acts of the Länder have been or are being
gradually adapted. Bachelor and master courses may be introduced both at
universities and similar institutions of higher education and at polytechnics. During
the accreditation process the feasibility of the curriculum is examined.
00776 In the 2007/2008 winter semester, 61% of all study courses in Germany
were offered as bachelor and master courses. The universities in Germany have
taken advantage of the new possibilities offered. They already began restructuring
their entire curriculum several years ago. They now offer new bachelor, master and
doctoral programmes to improve the range of study courses. As a result, many M.A.
and diploma courses were discontinued.

41
00777 After the Länder created the prerequisites for the universities’ far-reaching
autonomy on the basis of the Bologna Process, the universities are now called upon
to use the freedom they have been given and to turn themselves into self-managing
organizations.
00778 Because of their unchanging nature, the commitments undertaken by the
Länder in higher education under the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages increasingly tend to be out of step with the dynamic developments in the
decentrally organized field of higher education in Germany.
Nevertheless, the shared aim is still to promote the development of structures
strengthening minority languages despite the changed framework conditions. Taking
account of the universities’ autonomy, the aim is to continue to pursue this objective
within the framework of the reorganization of teacher training courses and when (re)filling vacant professorial chairs. Independent of the federal approach, great care is
taken to ensure that higher education offerings are appropriate to fulfil the
commitments under the Charter.
00779 The response to the Committee’s concerns expressed in Nos. 62 and 63 of
its third evaluation report with regard to Low German in particular will largely be
reported in Part III in connection with the concrete undertakings accepted in the field
of higher education; here, only the measures to promote the study and research of
Low German at the universities in Brandenburg and Saxony-Anhalt will be discussed.
00780 To begin with, however, we would like to make clear that in the German
view, Land undertakings regarding the scope of application for a language in an area
for which the Land did not accept any undertakings under Part III of the Charter
cannot exceed the most limited undertaking under Part III of the Charter in this area.
With regard to study and research on Low German, this means that such a Land may
fulfil its undertaking under Art. 7 (1) (h) of the Charter simply by not prohibiting
courses from being offered in this language.
00781 Brandenburg reports that the objective under Art. 7 (1) (h) of the Charter (the
promotion of study and research on Low German at universities or equivalent
institutions) has the following effect on its higher education offerings: Brandenburg
interprets the objective under Art. 7 (1) (h) as resulting in fewer undertakings with
regard to research and teaching of minority languages than the provision under Art. 8
(1) (e) in Part III of the Charter. While Article 7 only calls for promoting the study of
minority languages and thus expresses a general objective, Article 8 requires the
Länder to provide offerings. Because Brandenburg is not in a position to provide

42
organizational and structural guarantees of ongoing courses in Low German
independent of teaching staff changes, it deliberately did not mention the undertaking
under Art. 8 (1) (e) but rather fulfils the objective under Art. 7 by means of the
organization, legal security and financial support for higher education offerings
enabling the integration of Low German content and the implementation of Low
German priority projects.
Within this framework, the offerings of the departments of German, regional and
cultural studies, and cultural history at the universities of Potsdam and Frankfurt
(Oder) enable the study of Low German content depending on the focus of the
individual instructors. For example, although Low German is not a separate course of
study at the University of Potsdam, seminars on Brandenburg’s linguistic landscape
are regularly offered, raising awareness of Low German and demonstrating that most
of the Land was originally part of the Low German language area and that Low
German is still spoken today in the northern parts of the Land. The universities in
Potsdam and Frankfurt (Oder) are also participants in the project referred to in No.
60857 on linguistic variations in Northern Germany (SiN), in which language
conditions in 18 regions within the Low German language area are being
documented and analysed.
00782 Saxony-Anhalt adds: The Institute for German Studies at the Otto von
Guericke University of Magdeburg integrates curriculum on Low German language
and literature into general linguistics, especially historical linguistics. In cooperation
with the Office for Low German, emphasis in the required practical seminars (new
bachelor courses) is given to maintaining and researching Low German. For
example, in 2009 an evening of Low German film was organized in Magdeburg, in
conjunction with presentations by clubs and associations, and an information flyer
advertising Low German in early childhood education was developed.
For the master course starting in winter semester 2009/10, German Studies:
Culture, Transfer and Intermediality, an elective module on Low German between
orality and written language is planned. In addition, final research projects on
variationist sociolinguistics and regional linguistic history were written and supervised
during the reporting period. Saxony-Anhalt also funded scientific conferences on this
issue in cooperation with the Landesheimatbund.

Art. 7 (1) (i)
i)
the promotion of appropriate types of transnational exchanges, in the fields
covered by this Charter, for regional or minority languages used in identical or similar
form in two or more States.

43

00783 See No. 00739 in this report and Nos. 147 – 160 in the Second State
Report.

Article 7 (2)
The Parties undertake to eliminate, if they have not yet done so, any unjustified
distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference relating to the use of a regional or
minority language and intended to discourage or endanger the maintenance or
development of it. The adoption of special measures in favour of regional or minority
languages aimed at promoting equality between the users of these languages and
the rest of the population or which take due account of their specific conditions is not
considered to be an act of discrimination against the users of more widely-used
languages.
00784 As this provision has still not caused any problems, see again Nos. 169
through 174 of the Second State Report on its implementation.

Article 7 (3)
The Parties undertake to promote, by appropriate measures, mutual understanding
between all the linguistic groups of the country and in particular the inclusion of
respect, understanding and tolerance in relation to regional or minority languages
among the objectives of education and training provided within their countries and
encouragement of the mass media to pursue the same objective.

00785 As far as the Committee recalls in No. 64 of its third evaluation report that
the extent to which a regional or minority language is protected or promoted is, in
many respects, linked to the majority language speakers’ perception of regional or
minority languages, we refer to the public information measures described in Nos.
00120 - 00122 of this report for the regional and minority languages and for the
national minorities in Germany.
00786 Where the Committee emphasizes the importance of mass media for
promoting the understanding for protected languages among speakers of the majority
language, it should be pointed out that media offerings on regional or minority
languages which speakers of the majority language cannot understand should be
regarded as only of limited usefulness, because they are intentionally not used by

44
persons who speak only the majority language. In this context, see also the
discussion in this report concerning Art. 11 of the Charter of the limited possibilities
for government influence on the media. The same applies to the discussion in this
report of educational offerings under Art. 7 (1) (f) and Art. 8 of the Charter.
00787 With regard to the general promotion of tolerance as a prerequisite for
mutual understanding falls under the undertaking under Art. 7 (3) of the Charter to
promote mutual understanding between all the linguistic groups, see Nos. 06001 –
06108 in the Third State Report in accordance with Art. 25 (2) of the Framework
Convention for the Protection of National Minorities of February 2009, where the
extensive government measures to promote tolerance and protect against hostile
attack are described in detail. This report has been submitted to the Council of
Europe and is available to anyone upon request.

Article 7 (4)
In determining their policy with regard to regional or minority languages, the Parties
shall take into consideration the needs and wishes expressed by the groups which
use such languages. They are encouraged to establish bodies, if necessary, for the
purpose of advising the authorities on all matters pertaining to regional or minority
languages.
00788 As noted by the Committee in Nos. 65 – 67 of its third evaluation report, the
language groups are involved in the process of taking their needs into consideration,
among other things through the consultative committees
for issues of the Danish minority,
for issues of the Sorbian people,
for the Frisian ethnic group, and
for speakers of Low German.
The committees are made up of representatives of the relevant group, of federal and
Land agencies, members of the German Bundestag and members of the relevant
Land parliament.
00789 In response to the Committee’s statement in No. 65 of its third evaluation
report that the only regional or minority language which is not represented by a
consultative committee is Romani: In connection with the scope of the Charter, the
Central Council of German Sinti and Roma and the Sinti Alliance of Germany

45
disagree, and the government bodies do not believe that they can work together
productively within a consultative committee.
00790 In No. 66 of its third evaluation report, the Committee also notes (as already
described in No. 00118 of this report) that conferences on the implementation of the
Charter and/or the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities
are held annually as needed, and that the Federal Government Commissioner for
Matters Related to Repatriates and National Minorities supports the representation of
the interests of the language groups.
00791 With regard to the representation of the language groups at Länder level, in
No. 67 of its third evaluation report the Committee commends
once again the fact that Upper and Lower Sorbian are represented through
councils at the respective Land Parliaments,
and that the interests of the speakers of Danish and North Frisian are
represented by the political party SSW.
In addition, we note that the concerns of the Frisian language are discussed in the
Frisian body at the parliament of Schleswig-Holstein.
00792 In response to the Committee's request in No. 68 of its third evaluation report
for more information about the regular meetings between the Land and the Central
Council of German Sinti and Roma planned under the Framework Agreement of July
2005 between the government of Rhineland-Palatinate and the Central Council, the
Land reports as follows:
It should first be noted that the government of Rhineland-Palatinate concluded the
Framework Agreement of 25 July 2005 not with the Central Council of German Sinti
and Roma, but with the Land association of German Sinti and Roma of RhinelandPalatinate.
Representatives of the Land government, of the minority, of the Land association and
its secretariat meet and discuss regularly. Some examples are listed below:
•
The minister-president of Rhineland-Palatinate met with representatives of the
Land association and Sinti and Roma Holocaust survivors at the signing of the
Framework Agreement on 25 July 2005. The interior minister of Rhineland-Palatinate
and the Land Association met in November 2005 and January 2007 to discuss
relevant issues. In April 2007, the interior minister of Rhineland-Palatinate met with

46
the chair of the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma and with the chair of the
Land association to discuss the associations’ wish to include a ban on discrimination
in the Act on Equal Treatment (AGG). In August 2007, at the invitation of the Land
association, the interior minister visited the Frank Loebsches House in Landau,
where the association has its secretariat and a permanent exhibition on Nazi
persecution of Sinti and Roma in the region. The Rhineland-Palatinate Commissioner
for Migration and Integration also visited the secretariat in October 2007 for expert
meetings with the chair of the Land association.
•
Meetings at working level between staff of Rhineland-Palatinate ministries or the
state chancellery and the Land association were held in December 2005, July 2006,
January 2007 and March 2008. These meetings dealt with issues related to
implementing the Framework Agreement and funding for individual projects.
•
The Rhineland-Palatinate Minister of Labour, Social Affairs, Health, Family and
Women appointed the chair of the Land association of German Sinti and Roma of
Rhineland-Palatinate to serve on the Land Board for Migration and Integration, which
is chaired by the minister and meets two or three times a year. On the Board, the
Land association would like to contribute its integration policy experience and serve
as a point of contact for Sinti and Roma affected by migration.
•
Cooperation between the Land government and the Land association is trusting
and constructive also when it comes to fighting racist crime. The association was one
of the first to sign the Joint Declaration against Right-Wing Extremism adopted on 28
May 2008 by the Land government together with numerous democratic stakeholders.

Article 7(5)
The Parties undertake to apply, mutatis mutandis, the principles listed in paragraphs
1 to 4 above to non-territorial languages. However, as far as these languages are
concerned, the nature and scope of the measures to be taken to give effect to this
Charter shall be determined in a flexible manner, bearing in mind the needs and
wishes, and respecting the traditions and characteristics, of the groups which use the
languages concerned.
00793 Given the lack of topicality of the above provision, it suffices to refer once
again to No. 207 of the Second State Report.

47
Part D Measures to Promote the Use of Regional or Minority Languages in
Public Life in accordance with the Obligations under Part III of the Charter,
entered into under Article 2 (2)
D.1 General remarks regarding the various articles of the Charter
00800 Regarding the general conditions which apply to the protected languages in
the Länder and thus must precede the statements about the implementation of
specific undertakings for individual languages (starting with Part D.2 of the report),
we wish to avoid repetition by referring to Nos. 208 to 251 of the Second State
Report.

Article 8
Education
00801 For information about the promotion of knowledge of the culture, history,
languages and religion, etc. of protected language groups subject to Länder
autonomy in cultural and educational matters through different schools and centres
for civic education to reduce prejudices and intolerance, and about the language
groups’ persistent desire for funding outside their major settlement areas, which has
not been significantly increased, see Nos. 209 to 211 of the Second State Report.
00802 Where in its third evaluation report the Committee of Experts expressed
concerns regarding
the undertaking in Article 8 (1) (e) (ii) to provide facilities for the study of
languages protected under the Charter as university and higher education
subjects,
and/or the undertaking in Article 8 (1) (h) to provide the basic and further
training of the teachers required to implement those undertakings accepted in
the field of education,
in connection with the individual languages as to whether these can be fulfilled in
view of the recent higher education reforms, see No. 00771 ff. above for a general
discussion of this issue; the aspects affecting only one language are discussed below
in the section on that language.
00803 The repeated recommendation No. 4 of the Committee of Ministers re Art. 8
(1) (i) (supervisory bodies) to “ensure that an effective monitoring mechanism exists
in the field of education for all regional or minority languages covered under Part III”

48
will be discussed in detail below, in order to avoid repetition concerning the
undertakings under Art. 8 of the Charter for the individual languages.
00804 With regard to the undertaking under Art. 8 (1) (i) (supervisory bodies), the
Committee of Experts stated in No. 796 of its third evaluation report that none of the
Länder had implemented Recommendation no. 4 of the Committee of Ministers and
that therefore none had fulfilled this undertaking.
00805 Regarding the undertaking to set up supervisory bodies to monitor
educational offerings, in No. 76 of its third evaluation report the Committee correctly
noted that, in response to the Committee’s finding in its second evaluation report that
this undertaking was not fulfilled, the authorities argued that the public and the
authorities are already sufficiently informed about the implementation of the Charter
and that there was no need to set up a separate supervisory body, especially as this
would be contrary to the current general trend of deregulation and bureaucracy
reduction of administration (No. 1017 of the Third State Report).
00806 In No. 77 of its third evaluation report, the Committee conceded that the
undertaking in question did not necessarily require setting up a new body to carry out
the monitoring envisaged under this undertaking, but rather that it would be possible
for existing supervisory bodies to carry out these functions and be integrated into
existing administrative structures. In that case, there would be a need for a single
body to coordinate, analyse and present the work carried out by the other bodies,
and that this task could in turn be carried out by one of the existing bodies.
00807

The relevant Länder believe that they already have such supervisory bodies.

00808 In No. 797 of its third evaluation report, the Committee then formulated its
requirements for such supervisory bodies in further detail: Here, the Committee
states that “an effective monitoring mechanism goes beyond the inspection and
reporting of mainstream education. It requires evaluating and analysing the
measures taken and the progress achieved with regard to regional or minority
language education on a regular and frequent basis. The results of the monitoring
should, among other things, contain information on the extent and availability of
regional or minority language education together with developments in language
proficiency, teacher supply and the provision of teaching materials. As a rule,
regional or minority language education differs from mainstream education as it has
different dynamics and must therefore be surveyed and monitored separately. The

49
aim of such monitoring is to continuously improve regional or minority language
education and to ensure full and sustainable language proficiency of the pupils.”
The Committee makes similar remarks in No. 220 of its third evaluation report.
00809 Where aims based on the explanations above are not already fulfilled by
existing supervisory procedures, the relevant Länder again reject these demands for
the reasons listed in No. 2022 of the Third State Report, as not necessarily following
from the provision above, as unreasonable and requiring excessive effort. The
Länder also point out that partial fulfilment of undertakings under the Charter, also in
the field of education, do not result from insufficient awareness of the extent of
fulfilment, but rather from the limited funds available, which should not be further
reduced by additional bureaucracy. Further, the Länder are of the view that the aim
of using evaluation to optimize curriculum and teaching methods as far as possible
applies to all teaching and educational provision within reason and should be
pursued for all offerings, always within the framework of general supervision for the
particular field of education.
00810 With regard to the undertaking that the supervisory body should produce
regular reports, in No. 79 of its third evaluation report the Committee stated that “the
drafting of a comprehensive periodic reports need not depend on major resources, if
the existing supervisory work on the ground is already extensive. A comprehensive
report would be the logically consistent and tangible conclusion of the concerted
supervisory work.” But such reports would also require “evaluating and analysing the
measures taken and the progress achieved with regard to regional or minority
language education. The report should, among other things, contain information on
the extent and availability of Danish language education together with developments
in language proficiency, teacher supply and the provision of teaching materials.”
The Committee states that these reports should also be made public, but that none
have been produced.
00811 The relevant Länder, however, are of the view that direct local supervision
must satisfy the principle of proportionality and for this reason alone cannot be
comprehensive, as the Committee demands.
00812 For this reason, the relevant Länder continue to be of the view that no
significant expansion of educational supervision can be considered (and is anyway
impossible in the higher education sector for legal reasons), and that no reports in
addition to existing reporting requirements (Schleswig-Holstein, for example, requires
regular reports to the Land parliament on the protection of national minorities and

50
implementation of the Charter in that Land) are to be produced, and that the
periodical reports on the Charter and the Framework Convention for the Protection of
National Minorities, which must be produced at short intervals, suffice to fulfil the
above-mentioned reporting requirement.
00813 In response to the Committee’s request for information as to whether
periodical reports as referred to in Art. 8 (1) (i) were produced and made public: No
reports beyond those referred to in this report have been or will be made.

Article 9
Judicial authorities
00901 See Nos. 213 to 215 of the Second State Report for more information about
the use of other languages before courts, bearing in mind that the official language in
court is German.
According to the Federal Ministry of Justice (BMJ), the current legal situation neither
yields intolerable results nor violates the principle of equal treatment. Current law
also complies with the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages (cf. the
comments by the Federal Ministry of Justice in the annex).

Article 10
Administrative authorities and public services
01001 For information about the limited (and according to most language groups
insufficient) exceptions from the principle that the official language is German and
about the recognition of family names in a regional or minority language by the Act to
implement Article 11 (1) of the Framework Convention (Act on Name Changes by
Minorities; MindNamÄndG) see Nos. 216 to 225 of the Second State Report.
01002 No. 71 of the Third State Report indicates that Section 1 of the Act to
Promote Frisian in the Public Sphere (Frisian Act) limits the principle of German as
official language as follows:
“Citizens may address administrative authorities in the district of Nordfriesland and
on the island of Helgoland in Frisian, and submit petitions, records, documents and
other papers in the Frisian language. If staff at the relevant authority does not have
sufficient Frisian language skills, Section 82a (2) to (4) of the Land Administration Act
applies [among other things, it provides that documents are not recognized until the

51
German translation has been filed]. If a citizen uses the Frisian language in dealings
with authorities in the district of Nordfriesland and on the island of Helgoland, the
authorities may in turn use Frisian for communicating with this citizen unless the
administrative activities infringe third party rights or impede the legal capacity of other
public bodies.”
01003 In No. 798 of its third evaluation report, with reference to Recommendation
no. 5 of the Committee of Ministers, the Committee of Experts nonetheless
concluded that “a structured policy for making it practically possible to use regional or
minority languages in dealings with the administration” was still lacking,
that there was a “general lack of relevant organizational measures, such as a human
resources policy taking account of civil servants’ skills in regional or minority
languages, facilities and incentives for them to improve these skills, or an adequate
framework for and resources allocated to translation and interpretation”, and that “the
possibility to use regional or minority languages in dealings with judicial and
administrative authorities in practice remains marginal, if not non-existent, especially
with respect to written communication.”
01004 In the German view, structural measures, for example to allow applications
to be submitted to administrative authorities in regional or minority languages, make
sense only on the basis of identifiable need; as explained in No. 216 of the Second
State Report, such measures are considered only in regions inhabited traditionally or
by large numbers of members of the language groups. For more information, see the
sections on the individual languages.
With regard to the human resources policy demanded by the Committee of Experts, it
should be noted that the local governments are responsible for human resources
policy. The Federal Ministry of Labour has clarified that local governments may
require knowledge of Low German as an additional qualification when advertising
vacancies. Whether they do so is up to them.

Article 11
Media
01101 For background on applying this provision, see Nos. 226 – 239 of the
Second State Report on the general freedom of expression including the freedom of
the press and freedom of reporting by means of broadcasts and films pursuant to Art.
5 of the Basic Law and on the (dual) broadcasting system (public and private
broadcasting) including supervisory bodies composed of a proportional number of

52
representatives from different social groups and participation of national minorities
and language groups. In this context, we remind the Committee that the Land
association of German Sinti and Roma of Rhineland-Palatinate has a seat on the
board of the Rhineland-Palatinate Land supervisory authority for private media
(Landeszentrale für Medien und Kommunikation), in accordance with the Media Act
of that Land. In this way, the German Sinti and Roma may make their interests
known, and any possible discrimination can be counteracted.
The fact that the German Sinti and Roma are represented in the supervisory
authority for private media led to intensive educational efforts directed at one national
commercial broadcaster due to programmes it had aired which stigmatized Sinti and
Roma. The head of the Land supervisory authority for private media and
representatives of the broadcaster went with the Land Association of German Sinti
and Roma to visit the Documentation and Cultural Centre of German Sinti and Roma
in Heidelberg; they also met for talks with representatives of the Central Council of
German Sinti and Roma. They were able to agree on supplementary information for
broadcast programming.
01102 As to whether the Committee of Experts sees the undertakings under
Art. 11 (1) (b) and (c) as fulfilled, No. 800 of its third evaluation report may be
important, in which the Committee states that it “has reviewed its interpretation of
Articles 11.1. b and c [leading] to a more holistic assessment of the presence of
regional or minority languages in the broadcasting media (private and public) which
means that the Committee of Experts has found undertakings to be fulfilled where
previously it had not” because the measures taken did not affect the (public or
private) area to which, in the Committee's earlier view, they were supposed to apply.
01102a In No. 799 of its third evaluation report, the Committee states that the “acts
on private broadcasting of the Länder Schleswig Holstein, Bremen, Lower Saxony
and Hesse all contain provisions on the promotion of regional or minority languages.
The presence of regional or minority languages in private broadcasting, however,
remains marginal”, and in “some instances, there is a presence in public service
broadcasting, in other instances, the presence is strongest on the Open Channels
which are citizens' broadcasting channels under public law and supervised by the
independent media authorities. However, the drawbacks of the Open Channels are
their limited geographical coverage of radio broadcasting and in most cases irregular
and infrequent broadcasting. There are almost no regional or minority languages
present on private television and on Open Channel television.”

53
01103 The Committee regards numerous undertakings under Art. 11 as still
unfulfilled; following the third monitoring cycle, Recommendation no. 6 of the
Committee of Ministers calls for “creat[ing] incentives to increase the provision for
regional or minority languages in private broadcasting”.
01104 In order to avoid repetition, we will discuss the underlying conclusions of the
Committee of Experts regarding the individual protected languages below only to the
extent required by special circumstances. We also refer to the inter-Land framework
conditions.
For this reason, we will again explain the effects of the limits of national law when
interpreting the individual undertakings under Art. 11 concerning the individual media
areas it covers, which apply to all Länder and all protected languages in Germany
and are binding under the principle of consistency of German law (including the
Charter), so that divergent ideas cannot be taken into account.
01105 As a Council of Europe measure, the Charter cannot conflict with the
national law of the member states. In Germany, this is above all Article 5 of the Basic
Law, which guarantees comprehensive freedom of the press and freedom of
reporting by means of broadcasts and films and also applies to regional or minority
programming. Government support of regional or minority offerings in the form of
binding law or financial incentives for specific content would violate this article. Article
5 of the Basic Law means that the government cannot require specific programming.
The constitutionally protected autonomy of all broadcasters in programming matters
allows the government at most to set general programming guidelines for public
broadcasting. Using broadcasting fees to pay for ordered content is illegal, because
no government funding may be used to pay for specific programmes. However,
producers of minority offerings may apply for general film subsidies. With this in
mind, the inter-state agreements on broadcasting do not mention the issue of
regional or minority languages and contain only general wording. For example, see
Section 6 (2) and (3) of the Deutschlandradio Inter-State Treaty.
With regard to this matter, the governing mayor of the Free and Hanseatic City of
Hamburg wrote to the NDR director-general, also on behalf of the other Länder party
to the NDR Inter-State Treaty (Schleswig-Holstein, Lower Saxony, MecklenburgWestern Pomerania), asking the broadcaster to continue and increase its efforts to
implement the Charter in the field of audio-visual media.
The same applies to legislation on private broadcasting. Some laws on private
broadcasting mention Low German or a minority language in their general
programming principles, but at most call for "appropriate consideration". Similar

54
programming principles apply to the non-commercial users of the Open Channels.
The Land supervisory authorities may promote public-access media, which allows for
indirect support for certain types of media. Here the law assumes non-commercial
and especially diverse programming.
Press law has even fewer parameters for content than broadcasting. There is no
publicly funded print media and thus no guidelines for content. Print media operations
are purely private enterprises and do not receive any government funding.
Government agencies making rules on content or funding ordered content would
violate Article 5 of the Basic Law.
For this reason, an undertaking involving a set quota for regional and minority
languages in public or private broadcasting or print media, for example, would be
illegal in Germany. Any expectations on the Committee’s part, also of a financial
nature, beyond the current legal framework must therefore be rejected.
01106

Article 12
Cultural activities and facilities
01201 As indicated in No. 73 of the Third State Report, we refer to
Nos. 240 and 241 in the Second State Report on the promotion of measures
needed to maintain and foster the culture and preserve the protected languages and
identity of members of the language groups, carried out by the Länder and local
governments within the framework of the federal system of the Federal Republic of
Germany;
No. 242 in the Second State Report on the right of the free development of one’s
personality under Article 2 (1) of the Basic Law, including the right to use one’s own
language, to maintain one’s own culture and preserve one’s own identity, also
applicable to members of special language groups; and
Nos. 243 and 244 of the Second State Report on the significance of institutions
of local government bodies and the language group associations which also serve
the aims of cultural exchange.
01202 With regard to Art. 12 (3) on the duty to make appropriate provision, in
pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for regional or minority languages protected
under the Charter and the cultures they reflect, the Committee of Experts stated its

55
view, among others in No. 104 ff. of its third evaluation report, that this has not been
fulfilled for all these languages.
01203 In No. 105 of its third evaluation report, the Committee disagrees with the
German argument that if the undertaking is fulfilled at Länder level, then it is also
fulfilled at federal level, as in a federal state responsibility for regional aspects of the
cultural policy abroad is predominantly assumed by the Länder. The Committee
counters that “the spirit of this undertaking requires positive promotion abroad of
Germany’s regional or minority languages in the regular structures of cultural policy
abroad"; because “cultural policy abroad is run by the federal authorities, mainly
through the network of the Goethe Institutes ... fulfilment of this undertaking would
include promoting regional or minority languages through the Goethe Institute”
comparable for example, to the promotion of Spain’s regional or minority languages
through the Cervantes Institutes.
01204 Although the Committee recognizes in No. 104 of its third evaluation report
that “the Federal Foreign Office has granted funding to groups that reflect the culture
of regional or minority languages for cultural events abroad through the Goethe
Institute”, the Committee of Experts says it has not been made aware of any concrete
examples of how the Danish language has been represented through the funding
scheme and finds that the undertaking is not fulfilled.
01205 With regard to the Committee’s question as to whether the German
authorities have made further provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for
regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect, the Federal Foreign
Office responds that the intermediary organizations of cultural and educational policy
abroad did not carry out any events to promote minority languages abroad in
2008/2009. However, the contracting party does not see any legally binding
obligation to regularly take measures in its cultural policy abroad providing for
minority languages and the cultures they reflect.
In his contribution to the Federal Government’s comments on the draft work
programme of the Deutsche Welle for 2010 – 2013, the Federal Government
Commissioner for Culture and the Media plans to call for greater attention to
Germany’s recognized national minorities in the broadcaster’s programming.
01206

Article 13

56
Economic and social life
01300 For information on the use of one’s own language in public and in private
life, pursuant to Article 2 (1) of the Basic Law, on provisions in Brandenburg and
Saxony expressly guaranteeing the right to use the Sorbian language, and on the
general acceptance of the use of regional and minority languages in public, see Nos.
245 to 247 of the Second State Report.
01301 At the moment, we have nothing to add, except what was already mentioned
in No. 75 of the Third State Report:
the undertaking, under Article 13 (1) (c), to oppose practices designed to
discourage the use of regional or minority languages in connection with economic or
social activities, discussed in No. 248 of the Second State Report;
the undertaking, under Article 13 (1) (d), to facilitate and/or encourage the use of
regional or minority languages by means other than those specified in (a) to (c) of
that Article, discussed in No. 249 of the Second State Report; and
Article 13 (2) (c) (ensuring use of the regional or minority language in social care
facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and hostels), discussed in No. 250 of
the Second State Report.
We also refer to the initiative of the Federal Council for Low German (Schleswiger
Appell) on the use of Low German in care facilities (see the comments by the Low
German speakers' group in Part E).
01302 As already explained in No. 76 of the Third State Report, the Act to
implement European Directives implementing the principle of equal treatment (equal
treatment directives 2000/43/EC, 2000/78/EC, 2002/73/EC and 2004/113/EC) in
German law, which entered into force on 14 August 2006 (Federal Law Gazette I, p.
1897), does not prohibit limits on the use of regional or minority languages.

Article 14
Transfrontier exchanges
01400 As already noted in No. 77 of the Third State Report, we reiterate that the
right to maintain and develop contacts as part of transfrontier exchanges is one of the
fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the Basic Law and is protected under its Article
2 (1) (general freedom of action; freedom to leave the country) and Article 11 (1)
(freedom of movement within the federal territory; freedom to enter the country).

57

Please also refer to the detailed comments in Nos. 147 to 161 of the Second State
Report and in No. 00739 above.

D.2 Implementation of the obligations undertaken with regard to the various
languages
D.2.1

Danish in the Danish language area in Schleswig-Holstein

Article 8
Education
10801 The Danish minority in Schleswig-Holstein receives financial support from
Schleswig-Holstein and its local government structures, from the Kingdom of
Denmark and from the Federal Republic of Germany.
By the same token, the German minority in Denmark receives financial support from
the Kingdom of Denmark and its local governments, from the Federal Republic of
Germany and from Schleswig-Holstein. Funding measures make up a multi-layered
and complex structure. In response to a parliamentary enquiry into this matter, the
Federal Government stated in 2000:
“The members of the German and Danish minorities are citizens of the nation in
which they live; they take advantage of government services, for example in the
social and cultural area, and help finance these services by paying taxes. The
minorities need additional services depending on their specific cultural and social
needs, on the number of their members, their age structure and settlement patterns.
The resulting additional expenditures are largely financed by the other country. In
view of the horizontal and vertical distribution of material and financial competences
in the Kingdom of Denmark and the Federal Republic of Germany, both minorities
rely on a number of services provided by both countries.”
10802 No. 252 of the Second State Report noted that the Danish minority has the
right to instruction in the Danish language in all of Schleswig-Holstein (Declaration by
the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany of 29 March 1955). Article 8 (4)
of the Schleswig-Holstein Constitution leaves it up to parents/guardians to decide
whether their children should attend a school of a national minority. Pupils coming
from the Danish minority thus have the opportunity to learn and use the Danish
language. The details are governed by the new Schools Act, which entered into force
in February 2007. Some of the changes also affect the schools of the Danish

58
minority, such as those on school financing. These changes are discussed in the
section on fulfilling the obligations under Art. 8 (1) (b) on primary education.
10803 The Danish minority has a well established system of schools and nursery
schools. The body responsible for schools and nursery schools is the Danish Schools
Association for South Schleswig (Dansk Skoleforening for Sydslesvig), with
approximately 8,000 members. It currently runs 55 child day-care centres and 47
schools and is the point of contact for all issues of educational policy. The Danish
schools are state-approved independent schools run by voluntary bodies, i.e. their
pupils attain the same qualifications and degrees as in public schools (see No.
10807). They are the regular schools for members of the Danish minority. The
teaching objectives and facilities of these schools and the academic training of their
teachers are equivalent to those of public schools. The degrees are recognized by
both Germany and Denmark.
10804 At the start of the 2008/2009 school year, the Danish Schools Association
restructured its entire school system in close consultation with all stakeholders (see
No. 10808).
10805 The schools Duborg-Skolen in Flensburg and A.P. Møller Skolen in
Schleswig each have an upper secondary level leading to the Abitur school-leaving
certificate.
10806 The A.P. Møller Skolen opened on 1 August 2008 as the Danish minority’s
second comprehensive school with an upper secondary level. The school has a
capacity of 625 pupils. The construction costs were paid for by a private Danish
foundation.
10807 Certification under Section 116 (1) of the Schools Act remains in effect
following the restructuring ahead of the 2008/2009 school year; final certification for
the A.P. Møller Skolen is still pending.
10808 The Danish school system in South Schleswig currently encompasses 35
primary schools, 3 primary schools with a special-education component, 3
comprehensive schools with primary schools, 4 comprehensive schools with primary
and special-education components and 2 comprehensive schools with an upper
secondary level, with a total enrolment of 5,565 pupils as at 1 September 2009.

59
10809 In addition, the Jaruplund Højskole, the Danish minority’s residential adulteducation college in the district of Schleswig-Flensburg founded in 1950, offers
Danish language courses, among others, and follows the tradition of the Danish
educationalist Grundtvig, paying special attention to the cultural activities of the
Danish minority in the Schleswig region.

Article 8 (1)
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such
languages are used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and
without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State:

Art. 8 (1) (a): Pre-school education
i) to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
ii) to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or
iii) to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those
pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient; or
iv) if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of preschool education, to favour and/or encourage the application of the measures
referred to under i to iii above;
10810

Schleswig-Holstein chose the obligation under (iv).

10811 As indicated in No. 10803, within the framework of pre-school education the
Schleswig region in Schleswig-Holstein offers 55 Danish programmes at child daycare centres. According to the Danish Schools Association for South Schleswig,
2,096 children took advantage of these programmes in 2009.
10812 With a few exceptions, all of these children move on to a Danish school.
These institutions have their own admission regulations.
10813 The Danish Schools Association receives funding from the Danish
government and the government of Schleswig-Holstein. Subsidies for the teaching
staff at day-care centres are granted under Section 25 (2) of the Children’s Day-Care
Centres Act (Kindertagestättengesetz).

60
10814 Some German nursery schools also offer Danish language instruction. Local
public child and youth welfare agencies are responsible for day-care centres
(planning and other general tasks). This includes the right to decide whether and
which regional and minority languages should be offered. Since 2004 local
governments (Kreise and kreisfreie Städte) have received Land funding to look after
children in independent day-care centres. Hence, day-care centres offering Danish
language programmes must negotiate funding with the responsible local government.
The programmes are offered by various bodies. An estimated 540 children are
currently receiving Danish language instruction.
10815 Since 1998, the ADS-Grenzfriedensbund e.V., a German border association
in the Schleswig region, has offered Danish at seven nursery schools as part of a
language encounter strategy to promote language learning in nursery school. Its
aims include developing tolerance and understanding for another culture (access to
culture primarily occurs through its language), initial experience with secondlanguage learning and improved acquisition of the German language. Language
instruction is offered in age-appropriate form in line with research results and
extensive educational experience. The programme uses Danish-speaking staff and
volunteers who are native speakers of Danish. Language instruction lasts from thirty
minutes a week to the entire school day (daily multi-group offerings using the
immersion method). In this way, the ADS-Grenzfriedensbund enhances the
language instruction offered by the Danish Schools Association.
As well as Danish, Low German is taught in 14 nursery schools and Frisian in four
nursery schools using the same method.
10816

Art. 8 (1) (b) - Primary education
i) to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
ii) to make available a substantial part of primary education in the relevant regional
or minority languages; or
iii) to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to
those pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered
sufficient;

61

10817 Schleswig-Holstein chose the obligation under (iv).
10818 See Nos. 10804 and 10808 above on the number of Danish schools offering
primary education.
10819 In No. 72 of its third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts welcomed
the decision to fund the running costs of Danish private schools on an equal footing
with publicly funded schools. This decision is anchored in a special provision on
Danish private schools in the new Schleswig-Holstein Schools Act of 2007 which
entered into effect on 1 January 2008 (Section 124 first and second sentences
Schools Act). However, the Committee of Experts has been made aware of the
recent criticisms of the Land Audit Court against these regulations of the Schools Act
for the promotion of the Danish schools. When requesting this report, it therefore
asked whether the Land government had ensured that the new regulations on
funding would remain in order to secure the future survival of the Danish schools.
10820 Schleswig-Holstein comments as follows:
The future survival of Danish schools has never been in doubt. The schools of the
Danish minority receive funding in accordance with Section 124 of the Schools Act.
The legal basis for this funding was never altered following the Act’s entry into force
in January 2008.
10821 With regard to the problem of school transport mentioned by the Committee
in No. 73 of its third evaluation report, Schleswig-Holstein responds as follows:
10822 The situation of school transport costs can currently be described as follows:
School transport for pupils attending public schools is governed by Section 114 of
Schleswig-Holstein’s Schools Act, which, however, does not apply to independent
(private) schools run by voluntary bodies. This includes the schools of the Danish
minority.
Under Section 124 of the Schools Act, unlike other independent schools providing
general education, the schools of the Danish minority receive subsidies of 100% of
the public cost-per-pupil rates established the previous year, regardless of how many
pupils actually require transport. The contribution is determined on the basis of the
average material and payroll costs per pupil at a comparable public school in the
Land. This average amount (cost-per-pupil rate) includes one-third of the school
transport costs in accordance with Section 114 (3) of the Schools Act. This
corresponds to the average cost for a public school in the Land to transport a pupil.

62
The remaining two-thirds of transport costs of the public school system are paid for
by the districts and under current law are not taken into account in subsidies provided
to private schools. Hence, the districts of Nordfriesland, Schleswig-Flensburg and
Rendsburg-Eckernförde have provided voluntary subsidies for the Danish minority
schools for years. The district of Rendsburg-Eckernförde ceased payments in 2006
but resumed the subsidy again in 2008.
The aim of the Danish minority and the districts concerned is to adopt a legal
provision covering the remaining two-thirds of transport costs. For this reason, the
question of school transport has been discussed at political level for some time (by
the Land, the districts and the Danish minority). The 2009/2010 biennial budget will
deal with this issue as follows: The Land will reimburse the districts 50% of their
expenditures on school transport for the Danish minority in the previous year. Further
developments remain to be seen.
10823

No. 10822 refers to primary and secondary education.

10824 Danish is offered as a foreign language at some public primary schools in
the region of Schleswig. The target groups are the 3rd and 4th grades. The courses
must be voluntary, and the declared wishes of the parents must be respected.
Enrolment has declined in comparison to earlier years, possibly because English
language classes were introduced in primary schools and because overall enrolment
is falling. During the 2002/2003 school year, 374 pupils took Danish; in 2004/2005
157 pupils did so, and in 2008/2009 the figure was 133 pupils.

Art. 8 (1) (c) - Secondary education
i) to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
ii) to make available a substantial part of secondary education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or
iii) to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant
regional or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to
those pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number
considered sufficient;
10825 Schleswig-Holstein has accepted the obligations under (iii) and (iv).
10826 The school system of the Danish minority previously had only one grammar
school (Gymnasium), the Duborg-Skolen. A second grammar school, the A.P. Møller

63
Skolen, opened in Schleswig on 1 September 2008. With regard to the Committee’s
request in No. 74 for more information on the A.P. Møller Skolen, as already noted in
our No. 10806: Both the Duborg-Skolen in Flensburg and the A.P. Møller Skolen in
Schleswig are comprehensive schools with an upper secondary level offering the
Abitur school-leaving certificate.
10827 In the 2008/2006 academic year, a total of 3,670 pupils attended Danish
classes offered by numerous public secondary schools, especially in the Schleswig
region; in 2005/2006 the number was 4,312 pupils.

Art. 8 (1) (d) (iii) - Technical and vocational education
iii) to provide, within technical and vocational education, for the teaching of the
relevant regional or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum;
10828 See No. 264 of the Second State Report. There are no new developments to
report.

Article 8 (1) (e) (ii) - University and other higher education
ii) to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher
education subjects
10829

The current situation can be described as follows:

Christian Albrechts University in Kiel offers bachelors and masters degrees in Danish
within the department of Nordic/Scandinavian philology, and students training to be
teachers may take Danish as a subject to be taught at grammar schools.
Following the introduction of the bachelor/master system at Flensburg University, a
multi-disciplinary bachelors programme in education was set up to prepare students
to teach at elementary, secondary modern and secondary technical schools and
special remedial schools. Students may take Danish as part of this course and in
masters programmes for teacher candidates. Flensburg University also offers Danish
lessons in study courses organized in cooperation with Danish universities.
See No. 266 of the Second State Report for information about scholarly articles on
the Danish minority prepared by the Danish Central Library for South Schleswig
(Dansk Centralbibliotek for Sydslesvig) in Flensburg.

64

Art. 8 (1) (f) - Adult education
ii) to offer such languages as subjects of adult and continuing education; or
iii) if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult education,
to favour and/or encourage the offering of such languages as subjects of adult and
continuing education;
Schleswig-Holstein has accepted the obligations under (ii) and (iii).
10830 As stated in No. 267 of the Second State Report, Danish language courses
are offered by the adult education centres of Schleswig-Holstein, by Jarplund
Højskole, the Danish residential adult education college in South Schleswig
described in No. 10809 above, and by other providers of adult and continuing
education. These include employer-recognized courses for which employees are
entitled to take educational leave. The latest information about language courses can
be searched at www.sh.kursportal.info. In August 2009, about 100 courses were
offered.
In 2008, the 89 Schleswig-Holstein adult education centres offered 686 Danish
courses, with enrolment of 7,080 participants. Danish ranks third in terms of
enrolment numbers, after English and Spanish. By comparison: In 2005 the
Schleswig-Holstein adult education centres offered 438 Danish courses with an
enrolment of 4,604.

Art. 8 (1) (g) - Teaching of history and culture
g) to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture
which is reflected by the regional or minority language;
10831 Regarding curricula and this undertaking in general see the information in
Nos. 268 to 270 of the Second State Report.

Art. 8 (1) (h) - Basic and further training of teachers
h) to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to
implement those of paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;
10832 For information about advanced training by a specialized adviser for Danish
and through further and advanced training offered by the Institute for Quality

65
Development at Schools (IQSH), see No. 271 in the Second State Report; about
special training opportunities for the Danish language, see Nos. 265, 266 and 272 in
that report; and about funding for special training, see No. 273 in that report.
For information about teacher training in Danish, see No. 10829.

Art. 8 (1) (i) - Supervisory bodies
i) to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures
taken and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or
minority languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be
made public.
10833 Where, in No. 76 and elsewhere in its third evaluation report, the Committee
of Experts finds the above-mentioned obligation not fulfilled for Danish, we refer to
the general rebuttal in Nos. 00802 – 00813.
10834 - 10837

Article 8 (2)
With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the
regional or minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the
number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow,
encourage or provide teaching in or of the regional or minority language at all the
appropriate stages of education.
10838 Regarding the implementation of this undertaking, see No. 277 (Danish at
schools in the Holstein region) and 278 (authorization of university courses due to the
autonomy of institutions of higher education) of the Second State Report.

Article 9
Judicial authorities
10901 In No. 47 of its second evaluation report, the Committee of Experts refers to
its first evaluation report stating that the three undertakings of this article did not pose
any problems. There are no new developments to report. In this regard, see the
comments in the Second State Report.

66
Article 9
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of
residents using the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified
below, according to the situation of each of these languages and on condition that
the use of the facilities afforded by the present paragraph is not considered by the
judge to hamper the proper administration of justice:

Art. 9 (1) (b) (iii) - Civil proceedings
in civil proceedings:
(iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;
10902 No. 279 of the Second State Report already explains that the
above-mentioned obligation is fulfilled under the condition that documents and
evidence in the minority language are admissible if presented in a form which rules
out the possibility of misunderstandings or errors in translation.

Article 9 (1) (c) (iii) - Proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters
in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;
10903 With regard to this obligation accepted by Schleswig-Holstein, see Nos. 279
and 281 of the Second State Report (no disadvantages resulting from the use of a
minority language, based on the principle of ex officio investigations in administrative
processes alone).

Art. 9 (2) (a) - Validity of legal documents
The Parties undertake:
a) not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely
because they are drafted in a regional or minority language;
10904 With regard to this obligation, see Nos. 279 and 281 of the Second State
Report.

67

Article 10
Administrative authorities and public services
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who
are users of regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below
and according to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this
is reasonably possible:
Art. 10 (1) (a) (v) - Submission of documents
v) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a
document in these languages;
11001 In No. 82 of its third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts referred to
the information that translation costs for documents submitted in Danish would not be
incurred where Danish-speaking staff were available. The Committee then refers to
the explanatory report to the Charter (paragraph 104), according to which this
undertaking automatically entails a commitment to make the necessary resources
and administrative arrangements available. As a result, according to the Committee,
the authorities are also obliged to enable documents always to be submitted in
Danish without incurring costs, e.g. through the use of translators. The Committee
adds that, “[a]ccording to the representatives of the Danish-speakers, there are a
growing number of Danish-speakers working in administration. On the other hand,
according to another representative, many documents such as labour contracts and
documents dealing with pension, health insurance and financial matters, must be
submitted in German or translated into German, whereby the applicant covers the
translation costs.”
As a result, the Committee regards this undertaking as still unfulfilled and urges the
German authorities to ensure that documents in Danish can be submitted to
administrative authorities in practice.
11002 Schleswig-Holstein responds as follows: With reference to the recent
reports, the Land government regards the obligation under Art. 10 (1) (a) (v) of the
Charter as fulfilled. As required by the Charter, users of Danish may validly submit a
document in this languages. No further requirements can be derived from paragraph
104 of the explanatory report to the Charter.

68
Article 10 (2) (g) - Place-names in Danish
g) the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official
language(s), of traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or minority
languages.
11003 Although Schleswig-Holstein has not accepted this obligation for Danish,
with its order of 11 June 2007 the Ministry of Research, Economics and Transport
allowed for the possibility of bi- or multi-lingual town signs (Sign 310, Road Traffic
Regulations (StVO)). The city of Flensburg has taken advantage of this option and
added the name “Flensborg” to all its city signs. By order of 31 March 2009
superseding the previous order, the Ministry added the possibility for bilingual
German and Danish information signs (Sign 385, StVO) and tourist information signs
for special topographical features.

Article 10 (4)
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted
by them, the Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:

Art. 10 (4) (c) - Appointment of public service employees having a knowledge of a
regional or minority language
c) compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees
having a knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the
territory in which that language is used.
11004 In its third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts did not refer to the
fulfilment of this undertaking. We therefore refer to No. 1024 of the Third State
Report referring to No. 293 ff. of the Second State Report and the Committee’s
positive remarks in Nos. 61 – 64 of its second evaluation report, and to the
cooperation between the Flensburg and Husum police with the Husum adult
education centre begun in 2006.

Article 10 (5)
The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or
minority languages, at the request of those concerned.
11005

See No. 01001.

69

Article 11
Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the
territories in which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each
language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are
competent, have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the
independence and autonomy of the media:

Art. 11 (1) (b) (ii) - Broadcasting of radio programmes
ii)

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the

regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
11101 The Committee of Experts previously considered this obligation to apply only
to private broadcasters. In No. 88 of its third evaluation report, the Committee
acknowledged that it was “aware of the particular sensitivities of the German
authorities about requiring private broadcasters to include private programming in
regional or minority languages, whether by regulation or license condition.
Nevertheless, the Committee of Experts considers that promoting regional or minority
language broadcasting through financial incentives, as is currently carried out, for
example, for cultural programmes, would not infringe those sensitivities, nor indeed
German law. The Committee of Experts encourages the German authorities to do so
in the case of Danish.”
11102 By contrast, Schleswig-Holstein, like other Länder in similar situations, is of
the opinion, for the reasons given in No. 01103 ff., that financial incentives too
interfere in media markets and are therefore to be avoided.
11103 With regard to public broadcasting, the Committee notes in No. 89 of its third
evaluation report that, according to representatives of the Danish speakers, there are
no radio programmes in Danish on public radio.
11104 Schleswig-Holstein refers to No. 01103 ff. explaining what additional
measures can be taken in future within the narrow legal limits to encourage public
broadcasters to offer Danish-language programming.

70
11105 In No. 85 of its third evaluation report, the Committee notes that according to
the Third State Report (No. 1026a), “the Open Channel (Offener Kanal) became an
independent legal entity with the entry into force of the Act on establishing a
corporation under public law ‘Offener Kanal Schleswig-Holstein’ in October 2006.
This act contains a provision on the promotion of minority languages as part of the
broadcaster’s duties and responsibilities. Furthermore, the act states that one of the
five board members of the Open Channel is appointed by the Commissioner for
Minority Issues of Schleswig-Holstein. Currently, a representative of the Danish
minority is member of the advisory board. The Committee of Experts welcomes these
positive developments.”
11106 In No. 86 of its third evaluation report, the Committee adds that “[t]he Open
Channel is a citizens broadcasting channel under public law and supervised by the
independent media authority that supervises private broadcasters. In March 2007,
the media authority ULR (Unabhängige Landesmedienanstalt für das
Rundfunkwesen) merged with HAM (Hamburgische Anstalt für neue Medien) to form
the new media authority Medienanstalt Hamburg/ Schleswig-Holstein (MA HSH).”
11107 According to the Committee in No. 87 of its third evaluation report, the “Open
Channel model could serve as a basis for fulfilling this undertaking”. However, the
Committee does not find this satisfactory in practice, because “programmes in
Danish are currently broadcast only sporadically on the Open Channel OK
Westküste. Danish language programming is needed also in those areas where the
Danish language is strong, and should be provided there on a regular and frequent
basis.”
11108 In No. 90 of its third evaluation report, the Committee therefore concludes
that this undertaking remains not fulfilled with regard to Danish. It urges German
authorities to take measures to encourage and/ or facilitate the broadcasting of radio
programmes in Danish on a regular basis and asked for information as to whether
such measures had been taken in the meantime.
11109 The Land refers to the very limited possibilities for action as described in No.
01103 ff. with regard to Art. 11 in general and disagrees with the assessment of the
Open Channel in Schleswig-Holstein referred to in No. 11107. The Open Channel
offers individuals the opportunity to broadcast programmes in minority and regional
languages. The fact that it requires a certain level of commitment to produce
programmes, and that the results do not live up to expectations when this
commitment is lacking, cannot justify the conclusion that the obligation to take

71
measures to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of minority-language
programmes has not been fulfilled.
11109a For years, R.SH has been broadcasting Danish-language programmes
across the Land as a regular part of its programming. These programmes are
produced in cooperation with the newspaper Flensborg Avis and broadcast on
weekdays up to three times a day as Danish regional news. In addition, regional
windows are offered on special occasions, such as elections.
11109b Reporting on the Danish minority on NDR 1 Welle Nord regularly includes
news and reports on current events, extensive features in the programme “Von
Binnenland und Waterkant” (From inland and the water’s edge) and one-hour
productions on special occasions. Interview excerpts in Danish are frequently used.

Art. 11 (1) (c) (ii) - Broadcasting of television programmes
ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
11110 The Committee of Experts previously considered this obligation to apply only
to private broadcasters. In No. 93 of its third evaluation report and in No. 88 with
regard to private radio broadcasting, the Committee acknowledged the particular
sensitivities of the German authorities about requiring private broadcasters to include
private programming in regional or minority languages, whether by regulation or
license condition, but stated that financial incentives are possible and should be
used.
11111
11.

Here we refer again to the general remarks in No. 01103 ff. regarding Art.

11112 In No. 94 of its third evaluation report, the Committee stated that “[w]ith
regard to public broadcasting, according to representatives of the Danish-speakers,
there are no television programmes in Danish on public television.”
Schleswig-Holstein responds as follows:
In recent years, NDR in Kiel has worked with Danish television on several EU-funded
projects, leading to intensive German-Danish cooperation which has steadily grown.
The offices in Kiel, Kolding and Vordingborg are in regular contact and have set up a
shared research service.

72
11113 In No. 92 of its third evaluation report, the Committee states that “since June
2007, a one-hour Danish television programme is broadcast monthly on the Open
Channel Flensburg, obtained through an exchange of programmes with the television
channel TV Abenraa based in Denmark. It is planned to extend the coverage via the
Open Channel Kiel. Also, since April 2007, there is another fortnightly programme.
The Open Channel conducted several training courses for Danish-speaking teachers
and pupils on how to use a video camera and other related projects.”
11114 In No. 95 of its third evaluation report, although the Committee “welcom[es]
the developments on the Open Channel, the Committee of Experts observes that the
current coverage is too limited in terms of area covered, regularity and amount of
broadcasting to lead to a fulfilment of this undertaking.” It therefore “urges the
German authorities to take measures to encourage and/ or facilitate the broadcasting
of television programmes in Danish on a regular basis”.
Schleswig-Holstein responds as follows:
Where creation of own broadcasting media is not expedient or feasible, Open
Channels are usually available. These are used for local and regional broadcasts of
non-commercial programming. In this way, individuals, social groups/citizens groups,
organizations, associations, unions and institutions can, independently and on their
own responsibility, produce and air programmes. These programmes must conform
to the general programming principles, may not contain any commercial advertising,
must be on a non-profit basis and may not be provided for remuneration. The Danish
minority uses the Open TV Channel at irregular intervals for local broadcasts of
videos about this minority in the Danish or German language.
11115 In autumn 2006, there was a serious risk that both Danish broadcasters in
Schleswig-Holstein, and thus in the territory of the Danish minority, would be
discontinued due to disagreements over compensation for copyrights and feeds
between the Danish public service broadcasters Danmarks Radio and TV 2 on the
one hand and Kabel Deutschland GmbH on the other. Therefore, all parliamentary
groups at the Land parliament called on the broadcasters and the cable provider to
negotiate a contract so that the Danish programmes could continue to be received
through the cable network. The German minister-president asked his Danish
counterpart for his help in the matter. These initiatives were ultimately successful,
and Danmarks Radio reversed its decision to discontinue transmission to Germany
after 15 October 2006, while TV 2 and Kabel Deutschland GmbH reached agreement
on what each was to pay the other. The details of these financial issues are the
concern of the aforementioned parties. In any case, the Danish minister-president

73
wrote to his counterpart in Schleswig-Holstein to say that he believed the agreement
between the parties would ensure continued transmission of the Danish broadcasting
signals. As of 1 December 2009, the situation is as follows: The rapid agreement to
continue transmission of Danish television programmes on the German cable
network is greatly welcomed. The reciprocal reception of broadcasting media in the
German-Danish border region is of great interest to people on both sides of the
border, because it is the best way to promote the minority languages and encourage
mutual understanding.
11115a Media digitization set for 1 November 2009 represented a special problem.
In order to ensure continued reception of Danish television in Schleswig after the end
of analogue broadcasting and complete digitization in Denmark, the governments of
Denmark and Schleswig-Holstein undertook major efforts together with the Danish
minority. Negotiations with Danmarks Radio (DR) and Kabel Deutschland (KDG)
ultimately succeeded in ensuring that Danish programmes can still be seen in
Schleswig-Holstein. At the same time, viewers will have to accept the fact that
Denmark’s decision to go entirely digital may require some households to take
special measures to maintain reception.
While most viewers will still be able to receive DR 1 and TV 2 via aerial antenna,
households in the area of terrestrial transmission will need a decoder compatible with
the new Danish broadcasting technology (MPEG 4). The Schleswig-Holstein
minister-president offered the Danish minister of culture to supply fill-in transmitters
in Schleswig-Holstein to improve terrestrial reception of both broadcasters in the
Land. DR 1 and TV 2 are currently studying this offer. According to KDG, about 90%
of households with cable television which have so far been able to receive DR 1 and
TV 2 will not see any changes. Kabel Deutschland has converted the digital signal
from Denmark into an analogue signal. Kabel Deutschland has also announced that,
after its test measurements which started 1 November 2009, it plans to convert the
signal for most of the remaining area where cable reception has so far existed. In
addition to cable and terrestrial transmission, Danish television can be received
directly from the Thor satellite. Foreigners are also entitled to purchase the
smartcards needed to decode the Danish satellite signal, as the Danish side has
explicitly confirmed. The Internet offers an additional possibility for accessing
individual Danish programmes.
In sum, Danish programmes are still accessible in Schleswig-Holstein, as reciprocal
reception of media in the German-Danish border region is of great interest to many
people because this is the best way to promote the minority languages and
encourage mutual trust.

74

Art. 11 (1) (d) - Audio and audiovisual works
d) to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and
audiovisual works in the regional or minority languages;
11116 Schleswig-Holstein responds as follows to the Committee’s finding in Nos.
96 and 97 of its third evaluation report that the above-mentioned undertaking is no
longer fulfilled since a contract concluded with a private media office in 2002 to assist
Danish speakers in producing their own television programmes ended in 2003/2004,
and to the Committee’s request for information about what is being done to
encourage the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual works in the
Danish language:
11117 See the possibilities offered by the Open Channel (cf. Nos. 11113 and
11114).
In addition, Schleswig-Holstein reports that the Danish minority, in particular the
Sydslsvigsk Forening (SSF) as the main cultural organization, receives significant
funding for cultural activities. Under the principle of organizational autonomy, it is the
SSF’s responsibility to decide how to spend these funds.

Art. 11 (1) (e) (ii) - Newspaper articles
iii) to encourage and/or facilitate the publication of newspaper articles in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
11118 With regard to the limited possibilities for influence, see No. 1029 of the
Third State Report, No. 01101 above, Nos. 226 - 239 of the Second State Report and
above all No. 01103 ff. for a comprehensive explanation of the limits of German law
in interpreting the individual provisions of Art. 11 of the Charter.
11120 Further, see No. 322 of the Second State Report referring to the bilingual
(German/Danish) daily newspaper Flensborg Avis and the press service of the South
Schleswig Association (SSV).

Art. 11 (1) (f) (ii) - Financial assistance for audiovisual productions
ii) to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual
productions in the regional or minority languages;

75
11121 As noted in No. 1030 of the Third State Report and with reference to the
general promotion measures described in No. 334 of the Second State Report and
the problem of direct government funding expressed in No. 333 of the Second State
Report which might violate the constitutional right to freedom of broadcasting as
explained in No. 226 – 239 of that report, we refer to the demand in No. 29 of this
report to take general promotion into account and disagree with the Committee’s
opinion that this undertaking was only formally fulfilled.
11122 With regard to the Committee’s request in No. 99 of its third evaluation
report for information about how the subsidy fund allows for the qualification of
productions in Danish in practice, Schleswig-Holstein responds as follows: The
Hamburg Schleswig-Holstein film fund supports feature films and unusual television
productions in all genres. Film projects receive support from the first draft of the script
through production to distribution and festival presentations. Criteria for funding
include quality of the project and substantive reference to Hamburg or SchleswigHolstein. This means filming in Hamburg and/or Schleswig-Holstein and using local
skilled labour and film technology companies. Applications may be submitted to the
Hamburg Schleswig-Holstein Film Fund GmbH (www.ffhsh.de).
See also No. 11404.
Art. 11 (2) - Freedom of direct reception of broadcasts, and freedom of expression
Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and
television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in
identical or similar form to a regional or minority language, and not to oppose the
retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries
in such a language. They further undertake to ensure that no restrictions will be
placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of information in the written
press in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority
language. The exercise of the above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it
duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions
or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in
the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention
of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the
reputation or rights of others, for preventing disclosure of information received in
confidence, or for maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
11123 With regard to this obligation, in No. 100 of its third evaluation report the
Committee of Experts commends the fact, reported in No. 127a of the Third State

76
Report, that “in 2006, the [Schleswig-Holstein] Land Parliament negotiated a contract
between the Danish broadcasters and German cable providers to guarantee a
continued reception of two Danish television channels through the cable network.”
11124
11125 In No. 102 of the third evaluation report, the Committee “draw[s] the
attention of the German authorities to the fact that this undertaking may require some
positive action on their part in the future if the digitalisation [sic] process makes it
impossible for the Danish-speakers to receive Danish television programmes. As
stated in paragraph 111 of the Charter’s explanatory report, ‘the undertaking to
guarantee freedom of reception relates not only to obstacles deliberately placed in
the way of the reception of programmes broadcast from neighbouring countries but
also to passive obstacles resulting from the failure of the competent authorities to
take any action to make such reception possible’.”
11126 Schleswig-Holstein refers to the extensive discussion in Nos. 11115 and
11115a.

Article 12
Cultural activities and facilities
Article 12
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries,
cultural centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as
literary work and film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals
and the culture industries, including inter alia the use of new technologies – the
Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used and to the
extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this
field:

Article 12 (1) (c) - Access to works produced in other languages
c) to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other
languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation
and subtitling activities;

77
11201 As indicated in No. 1032 of the Third State Report, see No. 338 of the
Second State Report indicating that the institutions of the Danish minority - such as
the South Schleswig Association (SSF) and the Danish Central Library - can rely on
funding provided by Schleswig-Holstein for translation, dubbing, post-synchronization
and Danish subtitles.

Art. 12 (1) (d) - Taking account of the regional or minority language in cultural
activities
d) to ensure that the bodies responsible for organizing or supporting cultural
activities of various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the
knowledge and use of regional or minority languages and cultures in the
undertakings which they initiate or for which they provide backing;
11202 As noted in No. 1033 of the Third State Report, see No. 339 of the Second
State Report explaining that the institutions of the Danish minority or their appointed
bodies for cultural self-administration ensure the knowledge and use of the Danish
language and culture in their cultural activities, with funding from Schleswig-Holstein.

Art. 12 (1) (e) - Employment of staff proficient in the language(s) concerned
e) to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organizing or
supporting cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of
the regional or minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the
rest of the population;
11203 As noted in No. 1034 of the Third State Report, No. 340 of the Second State
Report stated that government subsidies for activities of national minorities in
Germany also include funds for covering personnel expenses and that the full-time
staff employed in the field of Danish cultural work speak Danish and German, and
some of them also Low German.

Article 12 (1) (f) - Participation of representatives of the group speaking the given
language in cultural activities
f) to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given
regional or minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

78
11204 As noted in No. 1035 of the Third State Report, with regard to the abovementioned undertaking, see No. 342 of the Second State Report indicating that a
“Schleswig-Holstein Day” is held every two years in different places in the Land, that
the organizations of the Danish minority are invited to this event, and that the Danish
language is also used at some local cultural events such as town festivals and
anniversaries. In 2006, Schleswig-Holstein Day was held in Eckernförde, with
participation from the Danish minority; the same was true of Schleswig-Holstein Day
in Neumünster in 2008. In 2006, the main Land festivities for the Day of German
Unity were held in the Schleswig-Holstein capital, Kiel. The Land government offered
national minorities and language groups the opportunity to contribute to the
presentation of Schleswig-Holstein at the public festival.

11205

Art. 12 (1) (g) - Creation of archive bodies
g) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for
collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the
regional or minority languages;
11206 As in No. 1036 of the Third State Report, see
No. 343 of the Second State Report on the Danish Central Library and its affiliated
institutions, which are available for collecting, keeping copies of, or publishing works
produced in the Danish language, for which purposes they can rely also on funding
provided by Schleswig-Holstein. No. 343 of the Second State Report also reports on
stage productions of works produced in Danish which are organized and financed,
also with the use of funding provided by Schleswig-Holstein, by the South Schleswig
Association and its affiliated institutions and by action groups of other associations.

Article 12 (2)
In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority
languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a
regional or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or provide
appropriate cultural activities and facilities in accordance with the preceding
paragraph.

79
11207 As indicated in No. 1037 of the Third State Report, Nos. 344 and 345 of the
Second State Report explain that in the Federal Republic of Germany cultural
activities complying with the law in force are not subject to any permit procedure or
restrictions, and that thanks to the broad definition of the specified purposes for
which the public promotional funds of Schleswig-Holstein may be used in the context
of the Danish minority’s cultural work, it is also possible to stage events outside the
immediate language area.

Article 12 (3)
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural
policy abroad, for regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.
11208 In No. 104 ff. of its third evaluation report, the Committee concludes that this
undertaking remains not fulfilled with regard to Danish.
11209 In No. 104 of its third evaluation report, the Committee notes that “the
Federal Foreign Office has granted funding to groups that reflect the culture of
regional or minority languages for cultural events abroad through the Goethe
Institute. However, so far the Committee of Experts has not been made aware of any
concrete examples of how the Danish language has been represented through the
funding scheme.” The Committee then concludes that the undertaking remains
unfulfilled, although the German side explained that the lack of concrete examples is
primarily due to the failure of representatives of the Danish language group to submit
the necessary applications for cultural presentations abroad, although they could
have received assistance, for example at the Charter implementation conferences or
at meetings of the Consultative Committee on Issues concerning the Danish Minority.
In the view of the German authorities, the Danish minority sees no possibility to
express their cultural identity by performing traditional music or dances; instead, they
invite performers from Denmark to appear at their events.
11210 With regard to the Committee’s question as to whether the German
authorities in the meantime make further provision, in pursuing their cultural policy
abroad, for the Danish language and the culture it reflects, see No. 01202 ff. above.

Article 13
Economic and social life

80

Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake within the whole
country:
a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting
without justifiable reasons the use of regional or minority languages in
documents relating to economic or social life, particularly contracts of
employment, and in technical documents such as instructions for the use of
products or installations;
b) to prohibit the insertion - in internal regulations of companies and private
documents - of any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or minority
languages, at least between users of the same language;
c) to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority
languages in connection with economic or social activities;
11301 With regard to this undertaking, which the Committee saw as fulfilled in its
second evaluation report and again in Nos. 107 – 109 of its third evaluation report,
the Committee stresses the entry into force of the federal anti-discrimination act
(Allgemeines Gleichbehandlungsgesetz) which prohibits among other things
discrimination against members of a national minority and in certain circumstances
their language, and notes that the national minorities are represented by one
member in the Advisory Council of the Federal Anti-Discrimination Bureau.

Art. 13 (1) (d) - Facilitating the use of the regional or minority language
d) to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by
means other than those specified in the above sub-paragraphs.
11302 As indicated in No. 1041 of the Third State Report, see Nos. 349 – 351 of
the Second State Report for a description of the difficulties of using the Danish
language in marriages in which only one partner belongs to the Danish minority, and
of public activities to foster and encourage such language use.

Article 13 (2)
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the
public authorities are competent, within the territory in which the regional or minority
languages are used, and as far as this is reasonably possible:

81

Art. 13 (2) (c) - Social care facilities
c) to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and
hostels offer the possibility of receiving and treating in their own language
persons using a regional or minority language who are in need of care on grounds
of ill-health, old age or for other reasons;
11303 As in No. 1042 of the Third State Report, we refer to the Committee’s
confirmation in Nos. 85 – 87 of the second evaluation report that with the situation as
described in Nos. 352 and 353 of the Second State Report (e.g. Danish-language
health care service in facilities of the Danish minority) the above obligation is
sufficiently fulfilled.

Article 14
Transfrontier exchanges
11401 The Committee did not comment in its third evaluation report on the
undertakings under the above-mentioned article, as they presented no difficulties in
the past. There are no major new developments to report.
The Parties undertake:
Art. 14 (a) - Agreements with other states
a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the
States in which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if necessary
to seek to conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster contacts between
the users of the same language in the States concerned in the fields of culture,
education, information, vocational training and permanent education;
11402 As in No. 1043 of the Third State Report, we refer to No. 354 of the Second
State Report concerning the fulfilment of the above-mentioned undertaking through
the implementation of the Bonn-Copenhagen Declarations.
Art. 14 (b) - Co-operation across borders
b) for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or promote cooperation across borders, in particular between regional or local authorities in
whose territory the same language is used in identical or similar form.

82
11403 With regard to the reference in No. 1044 of the Third State Report to Nos.
355 – 357 of the Second State Report referring to the Joint Declaration on regional
cooperation between Schleswig-Holstein and Sønderjyllands Amt which has existed
since 2001, we can report that this declaration has been amended to reflect the new
regional structure in Denmark effective in 2007, and that the Sønderjylland /
Schleswig regional council mentioned in the Third State Report has been
reconstituted in appropriate form.
11404 Since 2009, the SSF, the umbrella organization of the German minority in
Denmark (BdN), the Museum Sønderjylland, the Danish Central Library for South
Schleswig and the Cultural Foundation for the district of Schleswig-Flensburg have
been carrying out a cross-border museum project on minority life.
In this project, the museums with minority-related collections, in Dannewerk
(Dannevirke), Åbenrå (Apenrade) and Sønderborg (Sonderburg), are developing new
exhibitions and ways to present the daily life of minorities in the border region since
1920. The project receives funding from the INTERRG 4A programme of the
Syddanmark-Schleswig-K.E.R.N. region. The project is to run until mid-2012. The
Federal Government Commissioner for Culture and the Media and the state
chancellery in Kiel have provided funding of €50,000 and €12,000, respectively. The
funds from the Federal Government Commissioner are earmarked for the production
of a documentary film and for audiovisual elements in the exhibitions.

83
D.2.2

Sorbian (Upper and Lower Sorbian) in the Sorbian language area in
Brandenburg and the Free State of Saxony

20000 Obligations regarding the Sorbian language have been accepted by
Brandenburg and Saxony where the Sorbs have their traditional settlement area.

Article 8
Education
20801 As in No. 2001 of the Third State Report, for information on
the Sorbian school system, the legal basis for independently run private schools
and individual schools of the agencies see No. 358,
the scope of Sorbian language skills among Sorbs see No. 359, and
legislation on teaching and cultivating the Sorbian language and culture at
Sorbian and bilingual day-care centres and schools see No. 360 of the Second
State Report.

Article 8(1)
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such
languages are used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and
without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State:

Article 8(1)(a) - Pre-School Education i) to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
ii) to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or
iii) to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to
those pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered
sufficient; or
20802 In No. 112 of its third evaluation report, the Committe of Experts confirmed
the statements made in No. 2003 of the Third State Report, namely that by virtue of
the revised Ordinance on Children’s Day-Care Centres in the German-Sorbian
Region (SorbKitaVO) which entered into force in Saxony in January 2007, Sorbian

84
and bilingual day-care centres receive additional funds to the amount of € 5,000 per
group and that the aim of the day-care centres is to ensure bilingualism and the
teachers must have a mother-tongue-level command of Sorbian. Representatives of
the Upper Sorbian-speakers informed the Committee of Experts that despite a
growing demand for Sorbian pre-school education, including outside the core-areas
where Upper Sorbian is spoken, the establishment of new Sorbian pre-school groups
or day-care centres was prevented due to the staffing ratio specified in the day-care
ordinance and the lack of resources for extra staff. Furthermore, the Committee
reported about concerns of the Sorbian language group that the decree was
monitored by the youth welfare office (Jugendamt) whose staff is largely non
Sorbian-speaking and about the Sorbian language education centre Witaj which
agreed to help the youth welfare office in this respect.
20803 In Nos. 113 and 114 of its third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts
considered this undertaking fulfilled on the basis of the information that there were 13
Upper Sorbian day-care centres, five of them run by Witaj, and ten day-care centres
with Witaj groups, and that 750 children received Upper Sorbian education. It
nevertheless encouraged the authorities to take measures to ensure that the growing
demand for pre-school education in Upper Sorbian is met with the supply of
appropriate resources, especially with regard to pre-school teachers. Currently, some
1,150 children are effectively instructed in the Sorbian language or bilingually at 23
Sorbian-language and bilingual day-care centres. These figures were provided by the
Witaj language centre in Bautzen in February 2010 at the request of the Saxon State
Ministry of Science and Arts.
20804 As requested, the Free State of Saxony answers the Committee’s question
whether such measures have already been taken: Please refer to Saxony’s
statements in No. 20837 for a description of the activities of the Sorbian College for
Social Pedagogy (Sorbische Fachschule für Sozialpädagogik).

Art. 8(1)(a)(iv)
iv) if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school
education, to favour and/or encourage the application of the measures referred to
under i to iii above;
20805 In Nos. 191 to 195 of its third evaluation report the Committee of Experts
concludes that the undertaking is only partly fulfilled and that a more structured policy
as recommended in the second evaluation report was still not adopted. In the

85
Committee’s view it is not sufficient that local authorities provide advice to interested
parents about the Witaj-project and the funding connected to it if they do not know
who would be potentially interested in Sorbian-language pre-school education so
they do not reach out to them. Without further explanation, the Committee states that
this undertaking requires the authorities to take pro-active steps so that parents are
at least made aware of the possibilities through, for instance, a public information
campaign.
20806 In addition, the Committee of Experts reported on the issue of privatized
day-care centres where the formation of Lower Sorbian groups is more difficult,
although there is a demand for bilingual education and the teachers in these centres
would be willing to attend further language training, because these centres tend to
have a smaller number of children and because the funding procedure for financial
support from the Land under the Land Youth Plan is unclear.
20807 Another issue addressed by the Lower Sorbian speakers and reported by
the Committee of Experts is the lack of pre-school teachers and the insufficient
degree of Sorbian education within the professional training courses.
20808 Regarding the Committee’s question whether a more structured policy was
adopted and whether the necessary resources for the provision of pre-school
education in Lower Sorbian were allocated, and regarding a solution of the
addressed issues, Brandenburg provides the following reply:
20809 Brandenburg considers the information parents receive via the media, the
day-care centres and local authorities on the educational approach of the centres
and their priorities sufficient. According to the Land government there is no reason to
believe that interested parents are not aware of available services. Therefore, it does
not intend to change the information channels. Although the overall number of
children in Lower Lusatia is decreasing, a growing number of children are attending
Witaj centres, which indicates that parents are well informed. Currently, there are
some 200 children in 14 Witaj groups in eight day-care centres in Lower Lusatia.
There are also Witaj groups providing after-school day care.
20810 We agree that it is a problem that no Lower Sorbian groups are established
if demand is low. However, we object to the conclusion that the creation of Lower
Sorbian day-care centres is impeded by an unclear funding procedure. The funding
procedure is quite clear, and the Land government is making considerable efforts to
provide experts, centres, parents and the interested public with full and up-to-date

86
information about the legal and factual basis of day care in Brandenburg. The
brochure Unternehmen Kindertagesstätte (the day-care centre undertaking) and a
day-care centre specifically funded to provide consultation inform about the
foundation, operation and funding of day-care centres. In addition, there are several
Internet forums where specific questions are answered at short notice. Regarding
No. 20807 Brandenburg notes that educators not pre-school teachers perform the
tasks of day-care experts. Therefore, there can be no lack of pre-school teachers.
The Land government is not aware of a general lack of educators going beyond local
shortages. The lack of Sorbian education within the professional training courses
should be viewed against the following background: Training in social pedagogy
covers all areas of this discipline (i.e. day care, parenting support, youth work, work
with children and youths outside child and youth welfare services). However,
professional training institutions are free to teach aspects of the Lower Sorbian
culture. For the Land government, teaching regional, social and cultural particularities
of the relevant region is an important part of professional training. In research, this is
called the “contextual approach” (Situationsansatz), which is an important standard in
education. In addition to their compulsory classes, trainees interested in the Sorbian
(Wendish) language may attend optional Sorbian (Wendish) classes. Since close
interaction between practical and school training at suited training places is required,
practical training should be provided at all Witaj centres (1,200 hours of guided
practical training in social pedagogy). Focusing on practical training and a targeted
search for suited experts create a solid basis for employing experts in certain
regions.

Art. 8(1)(b) - Primary Education i) to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
ii) to make available a substantial part of primary education in the relevant regional
or minority languages; or
iii) to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to
those pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered
sufficient;
Both Brandenburg and Saxony have accepted the obligation under sub-paragraph
(b) (iv).

87
20811 In No. 189 of the third evaluation report the Committee of Experts refers to
No. 2008 of the Third State Report stating that it was decided not to amend the
provision of Section 3(2) of the Sorben(Wenden)-Gesetz which stipulates that the
traditional settlement area includes only municipalities with a tradition of Sorbian
language and culture instead of Sorbian language or culture. However, in No. 197 of
its third evaluation report the Committee also states that according to information
received from representatives of the Lower Sorbian-speakers, Sorbian education is
also offered in schools that lie outside the traditional settlement area, if there is a
demand.
20812 In Nos. 198 – 200 of the third evaluation report, the Committee addresses
the following issues reported by the representatives of the Lower Sorbian speakers:
- in some cases, Lower Sorbian is only offered from third class onwards,
- there is a shortage of teachers able to teach in Lower Sorbian,
- the introduction of new subjects such as English from third class onwards has led
to a shift of Lower Sorbian classes to outside core school hours (“Randstunden”),
which has also led to a problem with school transport,
- the representatives noted a deterioration in the knowledge of Lower Sorbian
among the pupils.
20813 Given these problems, the Committee asked whether efforts were taken to
ensure that Lower Sorbian is taught as an integral part of the curriculum throughout
primary education in all areas where there is a sufficient demand. Brandenburg
commented as follows:
20814 Instruction in the Sorbian (Wendish) language is based on the curriculum.
Thus, the Sorbian (Wendish) language may be taught from the first grade. According
to feedback from schools on the number of pupils, there are no classes where the
language is offered from the third or fourth grade onwards. The State Education
Office in Cottbus has employed a new teacher for Sorbian (Wendish) since the
2009/2010 school year. There is no shortage of teachers for the planned classes. All
teachers work part-time so that working hours can be extended at any time. Not all
pupils of one grade attend the Sorbian (Wendish) language classes. If the classes
are offered in the morning, there must also be offerings for the other pupils. This
would cause costs and idle learning time. Alternative instruction cannot be offered
because pupils of the Sorbian (Wendish) classes would be excluded. Therefore, the
introduction of English classes has not caused a shift to outside core school hours.
Instruction has been provided in the afternoon hours for the organizational reasons
mentioned above already long before English classes were introduced in the third

88
grade. Problems with transport occur will all kinds of afternoon classes, e.g. all-day
schools, activity groups and religious instruction. Statements about deteriorating
language skills are not based on research and are therefore not reliable. In the
framework of the Witaj project mentioned in No. 20809 six primary schools offer
bilingual specialized Sorbian (Wendish) language instruction to 232 pupils in addition
to classes for Sorbian (Wendish) as a second language. According to the results of
VERA 3 (centralized survey on the knowledge of pupils in the third grade) pupils in
Witaj classes achieve better results in German and Mathematics as well as in
Sorbian (Wendish). Since a significant number of pupils are learning the Sorbian
(Wendish) language in the framework of the Witaj project, a positive conclusion can
be drawn. All pupils wishing to participate in Sorbian (Wendish) language instruction
will be offered such classes, and new participants are actively sought at schools
where such instruction is already available. Moreover, we are actively looking for
further schools offering such instruction.
20815 In Nos. 115 – 120 of the third evaluation report the Committee of Experts
addressed the following concerns of representatives of the Upper Sorbian language
group against the background that there are currently six Upper Sorbian primary
schools and four schools where Upper Sorbian is taught following the new bilingual
teaching model “2 plus”:
20816 The Committee of Experts expresses its concern that outside the core areas
the teaching of Sorbian could vary considerably in terms of quality and quantity.
Reply of the Free State of Saxony:
The schools provide Sorbian language instruction on the basis of different curricula
and approved subject hours. This includes “2 plus” instruction and instruction of
Sorbian as a foreign language. These options differ in the number of subject hours
per week and the subjects taught. The approved subject hours for primary schools
providing instruction in Sorbian as a first or second language, i.e. according to the “2
plus” concept, include a language block (first and second grade 11 hours per week,
third grade 13 hours and fourth grade 14 hours per week). In addition to Sorbian and
German, this block also includes elementary science. However, schools are
encouraged to provide bilingual instruction also in other subjects. These schools are
characterized by a balanced bilingualism. Moreover, they seek to teach pupils the
Sorbian language at a high level. At schools providing classes for Sorbian as a
foreign language, Sorbian is taught one (first grade) or three (second to fourth grade)
hours per week. Sorbian is taught only during the Sorbian classes. All other subjects
are taught in German.

89
20817 In connection with the European Union “2 plus” model the Committee of
Experts expressed its concern that the introduction of the new model would harm the
language competence of mother tongue pupils. Although the advantage of the new
model is the possibility to introduce a Sorbian stream into mainstream schools, the
maximum of five hours taught in Sorbian was too low to fulfil the undertaking. No
figures were provided as to the minimum number of pupils required to set up a
Sorbian class, and no examples were given for case by case decisions. Comment by
Saxony:
Important language-learning skills are acquired by learning Sorbian early. In the
name “2 plus” the number two stands for the two languages Sorbian and German
and “plus” for additional languages such as English from the third grade onwards,
Czech, and Polish taught in activity groups. The concerns are unjustified. The Saxon
State Ministry for Culture scientifically evaluated the “2 plus” strategy. The evaluation
was conducted by Hamburg University. The evaluation period covered six years. A
total of 13 project schools were evaluated (seven primary schools, five intermediate
secondary schools and one grammar school). Already the first research results for
primary schools unmistakably prove that concerns are not justified. The mentioned
“maximum of five hours per week” is not included in any curriculum in Saxony. The
culture administration still considers it an advantage to refrain from a minimum
number of pupils to create a class because this facilitates flexible decisions. For
example, very small groups were created at the primary schools in Hochkirch and
Baruth.
20818 The Committee of Experts was also concerned that replacing Sorbianmedium education with a variety of the “2 plus” model further weakens the provision
of education in Upper Sorbian.
20819 Therefore, the Committee of Experts repeated its opinion expressed in the
second evaluation report that the undertaking is only partly fulfilled and asked
whether measures were taken to remedy the supposed shortage of Upper Sorbian
offerings at primary schools.
20820 Comment by Saxony:
The Saxon culture administration does not see a shortage in Sorbian-language
offerings at primary schools. On the contrary, the “2 plus” strategy has created more
offerings which are actively used. Moreover, since 2006 there has been an increase
in quality and quantity through the introduction of full-day offerings in the Sorbian
language and on Sorbian issues. This includes in particular cultural activities such as
choirs and dance groups as wells as numerous theatre groups at schools. In recent

90
years, primary schools presented important achievements at school festivals or in
theatre workshops. A welcome development is the growing Sorbian-language
proficiency of children with a German background.
20821 At schools providing classes for Sorbian as a foreign language, Sorbian is
taught one (first grade) or three (second to fourth grade) hours per week. Sorbian is
taught only during the Sorbian classes. All other subjects are taught in German.

Art. 8(1)(c) - Secondary Education i) to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
ii) to make available a substantial part of secondary education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or
iii) to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional
or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to
those pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number
considered sufficient;
20823 Brandenburg and the Free State of Saxony have accepted the obligation
under sub-paragraph (c) (iv).
20824 In No. 201 of its third evaluation report the Committee of Experts refers to its
concerns expressed in the second evaluation report that demand for Lower Sorbian
language instruction at secondary schools was not sufficiently taken into account by
schools in Brandenburg due to the exclusion of territories where Lower Sorbian is
spoken but which lie outside the traditional linguistic and cultural Lower Sorbian
settlement area as defined by law. However, in No. 202 it acknowledges that there is
an increasing demand for Lower Sorbian education in lower secondary schools as a
consequence of the success of the Witaj schools.
20825 In Nos. 203 and 204 of its third evaluation report the Committee expresses
its concerns that non-Sorbian speaking teachers are employed at the Lower Sorbian
schools without providing them with appropriate advanced training to acquire the
necessary skills.
20826 In No. 205 the Committee of Experts states that it considers this undertaking
still only partly fulfilled and asked whether the Land followed its recommendation and

91
took immediate efforts to ensure that Lower Sorbian is taught as an integral part of
the curriculum throughout secondary education in all areas where there is a sufficient
demand.
20827 Comment by Brandenburg:
Sorbian (Wendish) instruction is provided at the following secondary schools:
a) Oberschule Burg (this school has the status of an Oberschule because since
the 2009/2010 school year it has no longer provided the upper secondary
level)
b) Lower Sorbian grammar school in Cottbus
The Oberschule Burg offers Sorbian (Wendish) in grades 7 to 10 and in grade 13:
-

grades 7 and 8 – four hours each
grades 9 and 10 – three hours each (required optional subject as second foreign
language)
grade 13 – basic course of three hours.

Instruction is given by two trained Sorbian teachers.
Situation at the Lower Sorbian grammar school:
School year

Teachers

Teachers with Sorbian training

2006/2007

60

23

2007/2008

66

23 (one teacher on maternity leave)

2008/2009

67

23 (one teacher deployed in another school)

2009/2010

66

23 (two teachers on maternity leave)

About a quarter of teachers at the Lower Sorbian grammar school have no command
of the Sorbian (Wendish) language. In the 2009/2010 school year one guest teacher
(without training: Sorbian-Latin) taught at the Lower Sorbian grammar school.
The following intensive advanced training courses for bilingual teaching and learning
were offered and attended by secondary school teachers:

92
Course

Number of
teachers

Subject

1. Course 2001-2003

4

Physical education

2. Course 2003-2005

2

History / Lifestyle-Ethics-Religion

3. Course 2005-2007

3

History / Lifestyle-Ethics-Religion

4. Course 2007-2009

6

2 × Music / Physical education
3 × Mathematics

In the 2009/2010 school year, the Lower Sorbian grammar school was granted four
hours for advanced teacher training in Sorbian (Wendish). In the school years
2009/2010 and 2010/2011 four teachers (three from the Lower Sorbian grammar
school and one from the Paul-Werner-Oberschule in Cottbus) will attend the
Sorbian/Wendish course of study at Leipzig University; if they pass the course they
will also be entitled to teach Sorbian (Wendish). The State Education Office in
Cottbus released these teachers from five teaching hours per week (one course of
study). The teachers prepared for the course in an introductory course in the
2008/2009 school year. In the Cottbus school district, existing demand for secondary
schools is met.
As a rule, teachers without training in Sorbian do not provide Sorbian classes at
secondary schools. Bilingual instruction in other subjects is provided by teachers who
passed a two-year intensive advanced training on bilingual teaching and learning
with Sorbian (Wendish) as a working language.
20828
20829 In its second evaluation report the Committee of Experts expressed its
concerns regarding the closing of the intermediate school in Crostwitz so that the
Committee of Ministers recommended to “ensure that the current schools
rationalization programme in Saxony does not jeopardize the provision of education
in Upper Sorbian”. In No. 2014 of the Third State Report Germany informed the
Committee of the closure of the intermediate school in Panschwitz-Kuckau so that
now four Sorbian intermediate schools (Räckelwitz, Ralbitz, Radibor, Bautzen), two
intermediate schools offering Sorbian in line with the “2 plus” model and one Sorbian
grammar school remain. Nevertheless, in No. 126 of its third evaluation report the
Committee of Experts still considers the undertaking partly fulfilled.
20830 The reasons were stated in Nos. 122, 124 and 125 of the third evaluation
report:

93

-

-

-

examples of cases where authorities were handling the issue of a minimum
number to set up a class in intermediate schools (Mittelschulen) with a certain
degree of flexibility,
the general demographic and budgetary situation which required the closure of
intermediate schools so that pupils from neighbouring municipalities had to be
transferred to the Sorbian school in Radibor, and
the information provided by Saxon authorities that there would be no further
closures of intermediate schools taking into account the predictable demographic
development.

20831 Moreover, the Committee of Experts recognized that as a way of reconciling
the trend of school closures, Saxony has introduced Sorbian streams into
mainstream schools using the bilingual teaching model “2 plus”, but still sees some
serious problems such as the relatively low number of five hours devoted to Sorbian
and its possible harm to the language competence of mother tongue pupils.
20832 Saxony’s reply to the question whether measures were taken to improve
secondary school education in Upper Sorbian:
20833 A global strategy for language education was developed in the course of
reforming curricula. The uniform curricula are based on this strategy. In addition to
the new curricula for Sorbian at primary schools, intermediate secondary schools and
general grammar schools, framework requirements for optional Sorbian courses at
intermediate and grammar schools were developed. Learning Sorbian thus provides
access to the Slavonic language area and raises awareness of the Sorbian minority.
The number of hours mentioned in No. 20831 refers only to Sorbian language
instruction and requires further explanation:
Special subject hours apply to schools in the German-Sorbian settlement area. They
are published in the administrative regulation of 17 July 2004 of the Saxon State
Ministry for Culture on curricula and subject hours at primary schools, remedial
schools, intermediate secondary schools, grammar schools (secondary level I),
evening grammar schools (Abendgymnasium) and colleges (secondary level I) as
well as schools for general education in the Sorbian settlement area in Saxony (VwV
Studentafeln). The approved subject hours indicate the total number of hours per
week in a certain grade for the subjects of German and Sorbian, and they give
recommendations as to how the hours should be divided between both subjects. In
consultation with the Saxon Education Agency (Sächsische Bildungsagentur),
individual schools may determine a different number of hours devoted to German

94
and Sorbian. However, the required minimum number of German classes to achieve
a secondary technical school degree (Realschulabschluss) must be provided. In
addition, at the schools mentioned above at least three specialized subjects are
taught in Sorbian. As a rule, this includes history, arts, music, biology, geography,
physical education, religion and civics. The individual schools determine the number
of subjects in consultation with the Saxon Education Agency taking into account the
minimum number and specific local conditions and needs. Therefore, there are much
more than five hours of instruction in Sorbian. Hence, the concern expressed in No.
20831 is unjustified.
A comprehensive set of teaching and learning material was developed during the
reporting period. Based on the new Saxon curricula, readers were elaborated and
published for grades 2 to 4 at primary schools and grades 5 to 8 at intermediate and
grammar schools. The books were mainly compiled by teachers who are actively
involved in school service. The books were published by the Witaj Language Centre.
Text books for other subjects taught in Sorbian were published as licensed editions
of German text books. They are translated also by active or retired teachers. They
are published by the Witaj Language Centre. Examples include text books on
geography for grades 5 to 7 and on history for grades 5 to 9 at intermediate and
grammar schools.
There is also other material. For primary schools, for example, there are also games,
game cards and worksheets. Worksheets were also provided on CD-ROM for the
lower secondary level, for example for history, music and biology. They were created
by active teachers which were credited teaching hours by the Saxon Education
Agency. If this is not possible, the Saxon Education Agency may pay a fee. The
additional material is published by the Saxon Education Agency.
Hence, the “2 plus” strategy did not reduce but enhance Sorbian language offerings.
Moreover, since 2006 there has been an increase in quality and quantity through the
introduction of full-day offerings in the Sorbian language and on Sorbian issues. For
example, the Sorbian intermediate school in Ralbitz provides all-day offerings in
Sorbian and classes on Sorbian issues. This includes the school theatre, the course
on local heritage and a beekeeper course. In particular the last course is intended to
convey terms which are very rarely used in the Sorbian language. At the Sorbian
intermediate school in Radibor, all pupils with Sorbian as their mother tongue meet in
groups at certain times. For example, lunch breaks, free-time activities and
homework are carried out in a Sorbian language environment. In addition, there are
classes on Sorbian issues such as a course on decorating Easter eggs using

95
traditional techniques. Similar examples could be provided for the Sorbian
intermediate schools in Bautzen, Räckelwitz and Schleife.

Art. 8(1)(d) - Technical and Vocational Education i) to make available technical and vocational education in the relevant regional or
minority languages; or
ii) to make available a substantial part of technical and vocational education in the
relevant regional or minority languages; or
iii) to provide, within technical and vocational education, for the teaching of the
relevant regional or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to
those pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number
considered sufficient;
In No. 131 of its third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considers the
undertaking fulfilled taking into account the following measures taken by Saxony:
20835 In No. 128 of its third evaluation report it stated that the special Sorbian
course at the technical school for social welfare in Bautzen was extended by two to
three hours of Sorbian classes and that attempts to introduce a similar offer in other
areas of vocational training failed due to a lack of applicants.
20836 In No. 129 the Committee refers to a field of activity mentioned in No. 2015
of the Third State Report, namely that since 2005 Saxon authorities have been
cooperating with the Sorbian umbrella organization Domowina to provide funds for
additional apprenticeships in Sorbian companies, which resulted in Domowina
participating in two pilot projects. One of them aimed at providing school graduates
with language skills related to their vocational training; the other project is funded by
the district concerned and carried out with an association for employment in
Hoyerswerda where trainees in the field of tourism follow a one-year Sorbian
language programme. Comment by Saxony:
There is no information available on cooperation to provide funds for additional
apprenticeships in Sorbian companies. If the Saxon State Ministry for Economics and
Labour (SMWA) provided funds for (additional) apprenticeships, these funds were
available to all companies in Saxony. The ministry is not aware of the
aforementioned pilot projects. It is correct that in January 2006 the ministry informed
representatives of Domowina about possibilities to receive funds from the European
Social Fund (ESF) for specialized Sorbian language skills during vocational training

96
and offered further support. Since then Domowina has not contacted the responsible
division at the ministry. According to the Sächsische Aufbaubank (SAB) no funds
were provided within the remit of the responsible division.
20837 Reply by Saxony regarding the question of the Committee of Experts
whether the proactive measures have been continued, i.e. identifying other areas
where vocational training in Upper Sorbian might be offered:
Vocational training, including the structure of individual apprenticeships, lies within
the sole responsibility of the Federal Government. At the moment, no training
regulation provides for vocational training in (Upper) Sorbian, and also the final
exams are taken in German. With a view to the responsibilities for vocational training
regulations and Section 23 of the Federal Administrative Act, identifying other areas
or professions where vocational training could be offered in Upper Sorbian is
problematic. The Federal Government is responsible for identifying possible areas or
professions and creating the legal framework. The Saxon State Ministry for Culture
(SMK) would be responsible for providing vocational training in (Upper) Sorbian. The
ministry comments on this issue as follows:
Since 1991 Sorbian has been taught at the Sorbian technical school for social
welfare (Sorbische Fachschule für Sozialpädagogik) at the vocational training centre
in Bautzen (Berufliches Schulzentrum, BSZ) so that instruction in day-care centres
can be provided in Sorbian. Employers complain that there is an insufficient number
of graduates with a sufficient command of the Sorbian language. However, Sorbian
as a native language is an integral part of the curriculum. All students at the technical
school must attend the Sorbian class (compulsory class!).
Taking into account individual skills, the following proficiency levels are to be
achieved:
Level A: Spoken and written command of the Sorbian language
Level C: Basic vocabulary, overview of tradition and customs
In addition, the school offers two hours of optional Sorbian classes per week
(proficiency level A) to enhance Sorbian language skills. However, the biggest
problem is not the native language training but the lack of qualified applicants as
illustrated by the following example: During the last three years, each year 200
persons have applied for a full-time class (28 places) but only three or four were
proficient in Sorbian. Only 12.5% of some 80 full-time students seeking to become
state-approved child-care teachers are Sorbian native speakers or attended Sorbian
classes at the intermediate secondary school.
To rapidly meet the increasing demand at day-care centres, the Sorbian technical
school offers on-the-job training in Sorbian. Again, the problem is not to be found in

97
schooling. On-the-job training started during the 2008/2009 school year with one
class (28 places). There were 60 applicants of which six to eight were proficient in
Sorbian. The school tries to attract more Sorbian-speaking applicants. For examples,
students (proficiency level A) and teachers talk about the profession of child-care
teacher at intermediate secondary schools. Information on the profession is provided
in the Sorbian and German media.
20838

Art. 8(1)(e) – University and Other Higher Education i) to make available university and other higher education in regional or minority
languages; or
ii) to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and
higher education subjects
20839 The Committee of Experts did again not comment on this undertaking
because it did not pose any problems in Saxony. Information about Sorbian studies
at Leipzig University and at the Sorbian Institute (Sorbisches Institut) are provided in
Nos. 390 to 393 of the Second State Report and No. 2016 of the Third State Report.
Update: Leipzig University introduced new courses of study (Bachelor and Master) in
the winter semester 2006/2007. Hence, students can enrol for the following courses
at the Institute for Sorbian Language and Culture:
Sorbian language and culture (Bachelor of Arts)

- since winter term 2006/07

Sorbian language and culture (Master of Arts)

- since winter term 2009/10

Sorbian teacher training (Bachelor of Arts)

- since winter term 2006/07

Sorbian teacher training (Master of Education)
(for primary, intermediate secondary,
remedial and grammar schools)

- since winter term 2009/10

Lower Sorbian (advanced training: Master of Arts)

- since winter term 2009/10

The master course in Lower Sorbian is based on an agreement with Brandenburg
and is intended as an advanced training course for teachers in Brandenburg.

98

20840

Article 8(1)(e)(iii)
iii) if, by reason of the role of the State in relation to higher education institutions,
sub-paragraphs i and ii cannot be applied, to encourage and/or allow the provision of
university or other forms of higher education in regional or minority languages or of
facilities for the study of these languages as university or higher education subjects;
20841 In No. 210 of its third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considers
the undertaking fulfilled taking into account the following activities taken by
Brandenburg:
20842 In No. 207 of its third evaluation report, the Committee notes that there are
at least two university professors specialized in Lower Sorbian and courses on Lower
Sorbian are offered.
20843 In No. 209 of its third evaluation report, the Committee of Expers states that
students who wish to take Sorbian studies, are exempted from the passing level
required for the other subject or subjects they intend to study from the winter
semester 2008/2009 onwards. Correction by Saxony: This statement is not correct
because
the
Saxon
Act
on
University
Admission
(Sächsisches
Hochschulzulassungsgesetz, SächsHZG) does not provide for a complete exemption
of these students from the passing level. The act stipulates: “When deciding on
applications for teacher training and one of the chosen subjects is Sorbian, the proof
of advanced Sorbian language skills shall be appropriately taken into account”
(Section 6(2) SächsHZG).
20844 Brandenburg provides the following update of the information in No. 2017 of
the Third State Report regarding Lower Sorbian university courses:
The information of the Third State Report that due to low demand Sorbian is no
longer offered by Brandenburg universities and that Brandenburg provides funding
for a Sorbian course of study at Leipzig University to ensure that qualified teachers
are trained also for Lower Lusatia still apply. A new Sorbian (Wendish) master course
started at Leipzig University in the 2009/2010 winter term. The course provides onthe-job training for teachers who may earn a degree in Sorbian. At the moment, six
teachers are enrolled for the course. The training is partly provided in Cottbus.

99
20845

Article 8(1)(f)(iii) - Adult Education iii) if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult education,
to favour and/or encourage the offering of such languages as subjects of adult and
continuing education;
20846 The Committee of Experts did again not comment on this undertaking
because it did not pose any problems in Saxony and Brandenburg.
20847 Therefore, when requesting the present State Report the Committee of
Experts asked whether the proactive measures have been continued, i.e. identifying
other areas where vocational training in Upper Sorbian might be offered.
The statements in No. 2018 of the Third State Report are updated as follows: The
adult education centres in Bautzen/Kamenz, Löbau/Zittau and Hoyerswerda offer
Upper Sorbian language courses (basic and advanced) in the framework of general
further training.

Art. 8(1)(g) - Teaching of the History and Culture Education g) to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture
which is reflected by the regional or minority language;
20848 In No. 211 of its third evaluation report the Committee again considers this
undertaking fulfilled and stresses that the amended Brandenburg Teacher Training
Act of May 2007 includes a provision stipulating that the history and culture of the
Sorbs should be adequately considered during teacher training at university level.
20849
20850

Article 8(1)(h) - Basic and Further Training of Teachers h) to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement
those of paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;

100
1. Brandenburg
20851 In No. 212 et seqq. of its third evaluation report the Committee of Experts
stated its opinion regarding compliance with this undertaking by Brandenburg and
referred to the recommendation given during the second monitoring cycle to “take
action to improve provision and allocate adequate resources for regional or minority
language teaching and in particular (…) – remedy the existing shortage of LowerSorbian-speaking teachers; (…)” (RecChL(2006)1, Recommendation 2).
20852 In No. 790 of its third evaluation report the Committee states that there is still
a shortage of teachers and considers the undertaking only partly fulfilled because
flexible interim solutions – as proposed by representatives of the language group –
were not implemented and the required structured policy is not adopted. However, it
also stated that the following measures show a positive development:
-

the agreement to exempt university students of Sorbian from the passing level for
complementary courses,
the support from the Ministry of Education for the Information days for grammar
school pupils to attract them to the profession of Sorbian teacher, and
the provision of training for teachers with little or no Lower Sorbian language
skills, as reported by the speakers.

20853 Reply of Brandenburg to the question whether a structured policy to tackle
the present shortage of Lower Sorbian teachers at all levels of education has been
adopted as repeatedly recommended:
Changing passing level provisions for complementary courses to the Sorbian teacher
training at Leipzig University does not lie within the responsibility of Brandenburg.
The responsible ministries in Brandenburg consulted the responsible ministries in
Saxony and Leipzig University to recommend amendments. This was taken into
account during the last amendment of the Saxon Act on University Admission. Both
the Ministry for Education, Youth and Sport and the responsible State Education
Office in Cottbus supported the information days at the Lower Sorbian grammar
school to attract pupils to the profession of Sorbian (Wendish) teacher and are willing
to repeat this. In addition to the measures mentioned in No. 20827, further training
courses were offered and conducted for teachers without or with only little Sorbian
(Wendish) language skills to meet the imminent need. A higher number of further
training courses – offered during school days and in addition to the courses of study
mentioned in No. 20827 – would affect instruction processes at the Lower Sorbian

101
grammar school. However, teachers may attend Sorbian (Wendish) language
courses at the School for Lower Sorbian language and culture in Cottbus at any time.
20854
2. Free State of Saxony
20855 The amendment of the Saxon Act on University Admission ensures the
enrolment of Sorbian applicants for teacher training by changing the provisions on
passing levels for complementary subjects of Sorbian language students.
20856 Taking into account that by virtue of the revised Ordinance on Children’s
Day-Care Centres pre-school teachers must have a mother tongue level command of
Sorbian, the Committee of Experts noted in No. 133 of its third evaluation report that
three to four native Sorbian-speakers received qualified vocational training as preschool teachers.
20857 In No. 134 it confirms the information that Bachelor and Masters degree
courses were introduced at Leipzig University and at the Institute for Sorbian
Language and Culture in 2006/2007 and that every year about four to six school
graduates enter Sorbian studies. Saxony would like to add that Leipzig University
and thus the Institute for Sorbian Language and Culture introduced bachelor and
master courses in the 2006/07 academic year. Bachelor courses started in the
2006/07 winter term. However, the first students will enrol for master courses only in
the 2009/10 winter term, also at the Institute for Sorbian Language and Culture.
Saxony confirms the statement that four to six students enrol each year.
20858 In No. 135 of the third evaluation report the Committee stresses that a
decree of the Ministry of Education guarantees students of Sorbian a teaching
position after graduation and that pupils are informed about this on special
information days during the final two years of grammar school. Additional information
provided by the Free State of Saxony:
The recruitment agreement stipulates that the recruitment of teachers for schools in
the Free State of Saxony can be guaranteed if the graduates of the grammar school
speak Sorbian as their mother tongue and have successfully completed teacher
training in a combination of subjects required by the regional school office in
Bautzen.

102
20859 Concerned about the fact that there were still non Sorbian-speaking
teachers at Sorbian schools, in Nos. 136 and 137 of the third evaluation report the
Committee states that a regional school authority in Bautzen offers a two-year
specialized advanced training course in Upper Sorbian for teachers in cooperation
with Leipzig University. Additional information provided by Saxony:
The two-year on-the-job training was offered in cooperation with Leipzig University in
the 2006/07 and 2007/08 school years. The advanced training course is and will be
offered by the Bautzen Regional Office of the Saxon Education Agency. Depending
on their skills, interested teachers may choose between a basic and an advanced
course. The courses have the following aims and contents:
1. Basic course
Aims:
Participants enhance their oral and written communication skills.
They gain more detailed knowledge about the history, culture, and literature and
acquire methodological knowledge on how to approach bilingual instruction.
Participants practice advanced communication situations.
Contents:
- oral and written communication in everyday life,
- specialized Sorbian terminology,
- methodological ideas on how to approach bilingual instruction,
- developing components of bilingual instruction.
2. Advanced course
Aims:
Participants enhance their oral and written language proficiency.
They improve their ability to reflect on language.
They enhance their vocabulary.
They develop competences for bilingual instruction.
Contents:
- oral communication on school and everyday issues,
- written communication on school issues,
- language learning strategies.
20860 In No. 138 of the third evaluation report the Committee stated that it
considers the undertaking fulfilled as regards Upper Sorbian.

103
20861

Art. 8(1)(i) - Supervisory Bodies i) to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures
taken and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or
minority languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be
made public.
20862 The Committee of Experts stated in No. 796 of its third evaluation report that
neither Brandenburg nor Saxony had implemented Recommendation no. 4 of the
Committee of Ministers to “ensure that an effective monitoring mechanism exists in
the field of education for all regional or minority languages covered under Part III”
and that therefore none had fulfilled this undertaking.
20863

A comment on this issue can be found in the general remarks in No. 00802.

20864 In No. 218 of its third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts refers to
statements made in the Third State Report, namely that the Ministry of Education as
well as the regional supervisory school authority continue to carry out supervisory
functions and that they have reported extensively to parliamentary interpellations but
that these parliamentary interpellations only seem to target certain aspects of
education, such as the teaching of or research into the history and culture of the
Sorbs. Since the undertaking goes beyond merely reporting, the Committee of
Experts considers it not fulfilled. In this context, Brandenburg states that this does not
change its opinion expressed in No. 00802 et seqq.
20865
20866 Regarding the Committee of Experts’ statement in No. 140 of its third
evaluation report that a report is presented by the Saxon Government to the Saxon
Parliament at least once every legislative period, disagreeing with the view taken by
the Committee of Experts, Saxony states that given the opinion expressed in No.
00802 et seqq. this can unfortunately not be avoided.
20867

104
Article 8(2)
With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the
regional or minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the
number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage or
provide teaching in or of the regional or minority language at all the appropriate
stages of education.
20868 Like in No. 2023 of the Third State Report we should like to point out that
this undertaking would already be fulfilled by avoiding bans so that no further action
is required.
20869 Comment by Saxony on No. 146 of the third evaluation report requesting
that speakers should be made aware of the possibility of Sorbian instruction outside
the traditional settlement area against the background of the statements made in No.
145 of the report (insufficient demand for setting up a class in Dresden) and the
question whether information measures were taken:
We did not actively inform speakers about the possibility to receive Sorbian
instruction outside the Sorbian settlement area. Given the low number of pupils in the
core settlement area, we do not expect relevant demand outside this area. Moreover,
the Saxon Education Agency and the Saxon State Ministry for Culture and Sport did
not receive any requests to provide Sorbian instruction outside the Sorbian
settlement area. Apparently, serious and promising efforts are being made to
establish a Sorbian language day-care centre group in Dresden. Pupils whose
parents live outside the Sorbian settlement area and who wish to attend a Sorbian
school may attend the Sorbian boarding school at the Sorbian school and community
centre (Sorbisches Schul- und Begegnungszentrum) in Bautzen.

105
Article 9
Judicial Authorities
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of
residents using the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified
below, according to the situation of each of these languages and on condition that
the use of the facilities afforded by the present paragraph is not considered by the
judge to hamper the proper administration of justice:

Art. 9(1)(a) - Criminal Proceedings in criminal proceedings:
ii) to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or minority language;
and/or
iii) to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not be
considered inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a regional or minority
language;
20901 No. 2024 of the Third State Report referred to Nos. 425 to 427 of the Second
State Report regarding language use and pointed out that German authorities,
contrary to the Committees opinion, still insist that establishing a legal framework
was sufficient to fulfil the above undertaking.
20902 In Nos. 148 and 225 of its third evaluation report the Committee of Experts
acknowledges the measures taken by the authorities, namely the Saxon Law Guide
brochure published by the Saxon State Ministry of Justice which expressly mentions
the possibility of using the Sorbian language in court proceedings in line with Section
9 of the Saxon Sorbs Act. Due to the absence of any practical implementation, the
Committee of Experts considers that the undertakings remain only formally fulfilled.
20903 Comments on the Committee’s question whether the use of Lower Sorbian
in criminal proceedings has been implemented in practice:
1.

Free State of Saxony

20904 In criminal proceedings accused persons have the right to use their own
language. If necessary, law enforcement authorities and courts call an interpreter.
Courts would also provide an official translation of the written charge, if required.

106
However, no accused has ever asked for a translation into Sorbian. If a witness or
another person involved in the proceedings wishes to speak Sorbian, the court would
also call an interpreter.
2.

Brandenburg

20905 The conditions for using Lower Sorbian during court proceedings have been
explained in detail in previous reports. Courts were asked whether they encountered
any problems with requests to use Lower Sorbian. The survey showed that there
were no requests to use Lower Sorbian in the reporting period.

Article 9(1)(b) - Civil Proceedings in civil proceedings:
ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or
she may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring
additional expense; and/or
iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;
20906 The obligations under sub-paragraph (b) (ii) and (iii) have been accepted by
the Free State of Saxony; also, the obligation under (iii) has been adopted by
Brandenburg. As already stated in No. 2026 of the Third State Report this
undertaking would already be and is fulfilled by allowing minority language use. New
information is not available.
20907
20908

Article 9(1)(c) - Proceedings before Courts concerning Administrative Matters in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or
she may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring
additional expense; and/or
iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

107

Art. 9(1)(d) - Expense d) to take steps to ensure that the application of sub-paragraphs i and iii of
paragraphs b and c above and any necessary use of interpreters and translations
does not involve extra expense for the persons concerned.
20909 The obligations under sub-paragraph (c)(ii) and (iii) and under subparagraph (d) have been expressly accepted by the Free State of Saxony; also, the
obligation under sub-paragraph (c) (iii) has been adopted by Brandenburg.
20910 For more information see No. 430 of the Second State Report which
explains that the use of Sorbian in administrative proceedings is ensured in particular
by the principle of ex officio investigations.
20911 The question of whether the brochure published by the Saxon State Ministry
of Justice fulfils the undertaking (see No. 148 of the third evaluation report) requiring
that the use Upper Sorbian is allowed in communicating with judicial authorities is
addressed in No. 20902 of the present report.
20912 - 20921
20922 Comment by Saxony and Brandenburg on No. 150 of the third evaluation
report urging the German authorities to take the necessary measures to ensure that
the possibility to use Upper Sorbian in court proceedings is guaranteed in practice:
1.

Free State of Saxony

20923 In recent years, almost no use was made of the possibility to speak Sorbian
in court. There were only four cases, in particular under family law, where a
participant chose to speak Sorbian in an ordinary or administrative court. Some local
courts in the Sorbian settlement area have Sorbian-speaking staff. However, this has
no impact on the actual use of the Sorbian language.
2.

Brandenburg

20924 The President of the Brandenburg Higher Regional Court reported that in
Brandenburg, including the entire traditional settlement area of the Sorbian people
and subordinate courts such as the Cottbus Regional Courts and its subordinate

108
local courts, there was only one family case where participants asked to use Lower
Sorbian.

Art. 9(2)(a) - Validity of Legal Documents Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake:
a) not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely
because they are drafted in a regional or minority language;
20925 The Committee of Experts did not comment on this undertaking because it
did not pose any problems in Brandenburg and Saxony. There is no new information.

109
Article 10
Administrative authorities and public services
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who
are users of regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below
and according to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this
is reasonably possible:

Art. 10(1)(a) - Applications, and Submission of Documents iv) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written
applications in these languages;”
or
v) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a
document in these languages;
21001 The obligations under sub-paragraphs (iv) and (v) have been accepted for
administrative districts in the Sorbian language areas in Saxony and Brandenburg.
21002 The Committee of Experts refers to the opinion stated in the Third State
Report that no practical measures need to be taken as long as there is the right to file
applications with Brandenburg authorities in Sorbian (see No. 227 of the third
evaluation report).
21003 In No. 228 of its third evaluation report the Committee of Experts points out,
as in its last report, that the undertaking goes beyond merely removing legal
restrictions to the use of Sorbian, but requires the creation of conditions so that it
becomes practically possible to use the language and the need to make the speakers
aware of this possibility.
21004 In this context, the Committees statement in No. 798 of its third evaluation
report applies with reference to Recommendation no. 5 of the Committee of Ministers
to “take action to establish a structured policy for making it practically possible to use
regional or minority languages in dealings with the administration”. The Committee
argued that a structured policy complying with the standard set (and required) by the
Committee of Ministers has still not been adopted. The Committee stated that there
was a “general lack of relevant organizational measures, such as a human resources
policy taking account of civil servants’ skills in regional or minority languages,

110
facilities and incentives for them to improve these skills, or an adequate framework
for and resources allocated to translation and interpretation”. According to the
Committee, the possibility to use regional or minority languages in dealings with
judicial and administrative authorities in practice remains marginal, if not nonexistent, especially with respect to written communication.
21005 According to No. 230 of the third evaluation report one way towards ensuring
the possibility to submit oral and written applications in practice is to give preference
to job applicants with a knowledge of Lower Sorbian/ or to state this as an asset or a
requirement in the job announcement. According to representatives of the speakers,
this has so far only happened very occasionally and there is a need to make it part of
the job requirement in the job description.
21006 However, the Committee also noted that the Brandenburg Minister of the
Interior has given instructions to review the demand for further training in Sorbian
language skills for employees.
21007 In No. 231 the Committee of Experts welcomes this initiative but still
considers that the undertaking remains only formally fulfilled.
21008 The Committee asked whether the German authorities took the necessary
steps to ensure that the possibility to submit oral and written applications in Lower
Sorbian is guaranteed in practice.
21009

Comment by Brandenburg:

Brandenburg does not share the Committee’s view expressed in Recommendation
No. 5 of the Committee of Ministers. It reiterates that structural measures, for
example to allow applications to be submitted to administrative authorities in regional
or minority languages, make sense only on the basis of identifiable need. For this
reason the Brandenburg Minister of the Interior has given instructions to review the
demand for further training in Sorbian language skills for employees. In this context,
the following information is provided: Section 4 of the Brandenburg Administrative
Procedure Act (VwVfGBbg; see annex) applies regarding the obligation to ensure
that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written applications in
these languages and validly submit a document in these languages. According to this
provision, Section 23(2) to (4) of the Federal Administrative Procedure Act applies in
the Sorbian settlement area under the condition that Sorbian participants in
proceedings are not charged for interpreters and translators. Notwithstanding Section

111
23(3) of the Federal Administrative Procedure Act, the time limit begins the day an
authority in the Sorbian settlement area receives a notice, application or statement of
intent in Sorbian. This provision replaces the former version of Section 23(5) of the
Brandenburg Administrative Procedure Act.
21010 As regards public administration in Saxony, the Committee of Experts stated
in No. 152 of its third evaluation report – referring to the Third State Report – that the
Academy of Public Administration and the College for Public Administration in
Saxony review the requirements for language training and upon demand would also
offer Sorbian language training for public service employees in Saxony.
21011 As regards federal authorities (e.g. the Federal Employment Agency), the
Committee of Experts states in No. 153 of its third evaluation report that it is only
possible to submit written applications – also in Sorbian – to these bodies.
21012 In the same paragraph, the Committee refers to information provided by
Upper Sorbian speakers that an increasing number of state administrative bodies
accepted written applications in Sorbian and replies are given in German but there
are problems with Land administrative bodies physically situated outside the Sorbian
language areas, but which nevertheless have responsibilities within those areas.
21013 The Committee of Experts nevertheless considers that the undertaking is
fulfilled.
21014 The Committee asked whether Land administrative authorities which are
physically situated outside the Sorbian language areas but nevertheless have
responsibilities within those areas accept oral and written applications in Upper
Sorbian. Saxony’s reply to this question can be found in No. 21022.
21015

Article 10(2)
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of
residents who are users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the
measures specified below, the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:

112
Art. 10(2)(a) and (b) - Use of a Regional or Minority Language, and Applications to
Local and Regional Authorities a) the use of regional or minority languages within the framework of the regional or
local authority;
b) the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written
applications in these languages;
21016 The obligations under sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) have been accepted by
the Free State of Saxony; also, the obligation under sub-paragraph (b) has been
entered into by Brandenburg.
21017 In No. 234 et seqq. of its third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts
objects to Brandenburg’s view that structural measures must only be taken if there is
a specific demand. It reiterates its view that the undertaking goes beyond merely
removing legal restrictions to the use of Sorbian, but requires the creation of
conditions so that it becomes practically possible to use the language and the need
to make the speakers aware of this possibility.
21018 As regards the Committee’s statement that the undertaking remains partly
fulfilled please refer to No. 21002 et seqq. and as regards the Committee’s request
for information on necessary initiatives to ensure the use of Lower Sorbian in local
and regional authorities to No. 21009.
21019 Brandenburg adds the following comment:
The Federal Ministry of the Interior repeatedly consulted the other ministries and
suggested taking into account Sorbian language skills for staffing if this skill might be
of use for performing the envisaged job. However, according to Article 33(2) of the
Basic Law, which is implemented in Section 12 of the Act on Land Civil Servants,
every German shall be equally eligible for any public office according to his aptitude,
qualifications and professional achievements so that command of the Sorbian
language cannot be considered a qualification criterion for employment with public
authorities. In addition, the ministries were requested to review, within their
respective area of responsibility, the extent to which actual use is being made of this
possibility, and the further training demand as regards the Sorbian language. The
ministries replied that there was no demand for further training and that no further
training measures were provided or carried out. Only the Ministry for Education,
Youth and Sport reported that extensive advanced teacher training measures were
and are carried out to promote the Sorbian language, e.g. for bilingual instruction with
Sorbian as a working language. The division responsible for basic and advanced

113
training at the Federal Ministry of the Interior stated that it is not aware of any Sorbian
training courses or demand for such courses at local education institutes. The same
information was supplied by a circular to the local self-administration units specified
in Section 3 (2) of the Sorbs/Wends Act (SWG); those local authorities were also
asked for information on the extent to which it was ensured that citizens using the
Sorbian language could submit oral or written applications in this language or validly
submit a document in this language. Local authorities in the Sorbian settlement area
reported that on the one hand only a few staff speak Sorbian but that on the other
hand applications, request and documents are very rarely submitted in Sorbian. They
confirmed that translation of Sorbian documents is ensured.
21020 The Committee of Experts expresses its appreciation of the information
provided in the third periodical report (paragraph 2035) that from 2004 to 2005,
competitions Sprachfreundliche Kommune (language-friendly communities) were
carried out in Saxony and Brandenburg under the auspices of the Saxon parliament’s
president and organized by the Council for Sorbian Affairs. The aim of the
competition was to promote the use of the Sorbian languages only in No. 41 of its
third evaluation report in connection with the undertaking under Art. 7(1)(d).
21021 Stating that it has not received any further information, the Committee
therefore reiterated its view that the undertaking is fulfilled in the core area, and only
formally fulfilled in other parts of the Upper Sorbian language area.
21022 Regarding the Committee’s request for information on oral and written
applications submitted to local and regional authorities in the Upper Sorbian
language area outside the core area, Saxony reports that it offers the possibility to
submit applications in Sorbian in line with the undertaking but does not solicit for
such applications.

Art. 10(2)(g) - Place-names g) the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official
language(s), of traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or minority
languages.
21023 The Committee of Experts did again not comment on this undertaking
because it did not pose any problems in Saxony and Brandenburg.

114
Article 10(3)
With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other
persons acting on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which
regional or minority languages are used, in accordance with the situation of each
language and as far as this is reasonably possible:

Art. 10(3)(b) and (c) - Applications in a Regional or Minority Language with regard to
Public Services Paragraph 3
b) to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request and receive
a reply in these languages; or
c) to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request in these
languages.
21024 The obligations under sub-paragraphs (b) and (c) have been accepted by
Saxony and Brandenburg.
21025 In No. 239 of its third evaluation report the Committee of Experts states that
it must assume that the undertaking is not fulfilled because it did not receive sufficient
information.
21026 Regarding the Committees request to provide information on the possibility
of speakers of Lower Sorbian to submit an application in Lower Sorbian and receive
a reply in Lower Sorbian, Brandenburg provides the following reply: See No. 21019.
Local authorities in the traditional Sorbian settlement area confirmed that the
translation of Sorbian documents is ensured.
21027 In No. 158 of its third evaluation report the Committee of Experts states that
there are an increasing number of public bodies that accept written applications in
Upper Sorbian. However, replies would be given in German.
21028 In No. 159 it states that in the light of this new information, the Committee of
Experts considers the undertaking partly fulfilled and encourages the authorities to
achieve complete fulfilment by ensuring that replies are given in Upper Sorbian.
21029 The Committee of Experts asked whether steps were taken to ensure that
speakers of Upper Sorbian receive replies of public services in Upper Sorbian.
Saxony replies that it is not aware of any significant activities in this field.

115

21030

Article 10(4)
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted
by them, the Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:

Article 10(4)(a) - Translation or Interpretation a)

translation or interpretation as may be required;

21031 The Committee of Experts did not comment on this undertaking because it
did not pose any problems. No new information can be added to No. 2039 of the
Third State Report.

Article 10(4)(c) - Appointment of Public Service Employees having a Knowledge of
the Minority Language c) compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees
having a knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory
in which that language is used.
21032 Stating that according to No. 2040 of the Third State Report the Land
authorities in Saxony and Brandenburg were not aware of any demand and did not
feel the need to take a structured approach to an implementation of this undertaking
(No. 241 of the third evaluation report), the Committee of Experts considers the
undertaking not fulfilled.
21033 However, the Länder reiterate their view that there is no demand for further
structural measures because neither the Charter nor any other provisions include
such obligation and because there are no implementation or other deficits, in
particular there are no reports on Sorbian speaking staff whose application to work in
the Sorbian settlement area was rejected. Therefore, according to the Länder there is
still no sufficient evidence (also not provided by the Committee of Experts) for
assuming that the undertaking was not fulfilled.
21034 The Committee of Experts asked whether public service staff with Lower
Sorbian language skills have the possibility to work in the area where the language is

116
used. Saxony and Brandenburg replied that this possibility of course still exists but
that there is a difference between having the possibility to do something and doing it.
We continue to object to adopting a legal instrument encouraging public service staff
to use this possibility. There is no information available on how many Sorbianspeaking public service staff asked for being deployed in the traditional settlement
area.
21035
21036

Article 10(5)
The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or
minority languages, at the request of those concerned.
21037 The Committee of Experts did not comment on this undertaking because it
did not pose any problems. Please refer to Nos. 220 to 225 of the Second State
Report.

117
Article 11
Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the
territories in which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each
language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are
competent, have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the
independence and autonomy of the media:

Art. 11(1)(b) (ii) - Broadcasting of Radio Programmes ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;

21101 In its second evaluation report the Committee of Experts considered that this
undertaking is not fulfilled in Brandenburg and Saxony because measures were
taken only in the field of public broadcasting whereas the undertaking concerns the
private sector (see also No. 2042 of the Third State Report).
21102 However, from Nos. 17 and 800 of its third evaluation report we understand
that the Committee has reviewed its interpretation leading to a more holistic
assessment of the presence of regional or minority languages in the broadcasting
media (private and public) which means that the Committee of Experts has found
undertakings to be fulfilled where previously it had not because the measures taken
did not affect the (public or private) area to which, in the Committee's view, they were
supposed to apply.
21103 The Committee of Experts is aware of the particular sensitivities of the
German authorities about requiring private broadcasters to include private
programming in regional or minority languages, whether by regulation or license
condition (No. 164 for Upper Sorbian in Saxony, No. 244 for Lower Sorbian in
Brandenburg). Nevertheless, the Committee considers that promoting regional or
minority language broadcasting through financial incentives, as is currently carried
out, for example, for cultural programmes, would not infringe German law. The
Committee of Experts encouraged the German authorities to do so in the case of
Upper Sorbian.

118
21104 No. 01102 et seqq. includes the answer to the Committee’s question
whether measures were taken to encourage private broadcasters to broadcast Upper
Sorbian radio programmes.
21105
21106
21107 In No. 245 and 246 of its third evaluation report the Committee of Experts
considers that this undertaking is fulfilled in Brandenburg because there are 6.5
hours of broadcasting per week in Lower Sorbian on the regional public channel
RBB.
21108
21109 In No. 165 of its third evaluation report the Committee of Experts considers
that this undertaking is fulfilled in Saxony. The Committee notes that there continues
to be a good coverage of radio programmes in Upper Sorbian on public channels and
adds that the broadcaster MDR 1 Radio Sachsen broadcasts a daily three hour
programme, a Sunday programme and a weekly youth programme and that MDR
involves young Upper-Sorbian speakers creating their own programme which is also
accessible via the Internet.
21110

Article 11(1)(c)(ii) - Broadcasting of Television Programmes ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
21111 The Committee of Experts reviewed its opinion that the undertaking
concerns only private broadcasting in Brandenburg and Saxony.
21112 However, as regards Brandenburg the Committee of Experts states that is
not aware of any television programmes in Lower Sorbian.
21113 In No. 249 of its third evaluation report the Committee also states that it has
received no further information on the broadcasting of Lower Sorbian television
programmes in the private media in Brandenburg.

119

21114 Nor did it receive any information about measures taken by the Land
authorities to encourage and/ or facilitate the broadcasting of public or private
television programmes.
21115 The Committee of Experts therefore maintains the conclusion that the
undertaking is not fulfilled in Brandenburg.
21116 The Committee’s question whether Brandenburg authorities have
encouraged and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in Lower
Sorbian on a regular basis is answered in No. 01102 et seqq.
21117
21118 In No. 167 of its third evaluation report regarding private television
programmes in Saxony, the Committee of Experts states that it seems that
programmes in Upper Sorbian are very sporadically aired on the private television
channel Punkteins Oberlausitz TV (Sorbian features produced by the Saxon training
channel SAEK).
21119 Therefore, the Committee asked whether authorities encouraged and/or
facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in Upper Sorbian on a regular
basis.
21119a The question is answered in No. 01102 et seqq.
21119b In No. 169 of its report the Committee states that there continues to be
coverage of television programmes in Upper Sorbian on public channels in Saxony.
Therefore, it concludes that the undertaking is partly fulfilled. In this context, the
Committee notes that the broadcaster MDR broadcasts a monthly magazine and a
weekly children’s programme in Upper Sorbian and has improved its programming
with regard to Upper Sorbian.
21119c Update: Sorbian-language radio programmes can be received also via live
stream on the Internet. Thus, everyone living outside the broadcasting area can listen
to Sorbian radio programmes. The TV programme Wuhladko is available on the
Internet for seven days after the first broadcast. From 1998 to 2009 a Domowina
representative was a member of the MDR Broadcasting Board. In line with the

120
decision of the Saxon parliament of 11 November 2009, no Domowina representative
participates in the Board in the new legislative term.

Art. 11(1)(d) - Audio and Audiovisual Works d) to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and
audiovisual works in the regional or minority languages;
21120 The Committee of Experts did again not comment on this undertaking
because it did not pose any problems in Saxony and Brandenburg. The situation has
not changed since the Third State Report (see also No. 2045 of the Third State
Report and Nos. 469 to 474 of the Second State Report).

Article 11(1)(e)(i) - Newspaper i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one
newspaper in the regional or minority languages; or
21121 The Committee of Experts did again not comment on this undertaking
because it did not pose any problems in Saxony and Brandenburg. The situation has
not changed since the Third State Report (see also No. 2046 of the Third State
Report and Nos. 475 and 476 of the Second State Report).

Art. 11(1)(f)(ii) - Financial Assistance for Audiovisual Productions ii) to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual
productions in the regional or minority languages;
21122 In No. 172 of its third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts contradicts
the statements made in No. 2047 of the Third State Report by stating that Saxony
does not fulfil the undertaking only because the Saxon training channels (SAEK) are
funded mainly by the Saxon Supervisory Authority for Private Broadcasters and the
Bautzen branch cooperates with Sorbian schools and institutions and carries out
specific projects in Upper Sorbian. The Committee argues that the fulfilment of this
undertaking requires financial assistance to audiovisual productions in a broader
sense, including for instance mainstream documentary and drama.
21123

Saxony objects to the Committee’s broad interpretation of the undertaking.

121
21124

Art. 11(2) - Freedom of Direct Reception of Broadcasts, and Freedom of Expression
The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and
television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or
similar form to a regional or minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission
of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language.
They further undertake to ensure that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of
expression and free circulation of information in the written press in a language used
in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of the
above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be
subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by
law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security,
territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others,
for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the
authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
21125 The Committee of Experts did again not comment on this undertaking
because it did not pose any problems in Saxony and Brandenburg. For further
information please refer to No. 2048 of the Third State Report or Nos. 481 and 482 of
the Second State Report.

122
Article 12
Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries,
cultural centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as
literary work and film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals
and the culture industries, including inter alia the use of new technologies – the
Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used and to the
extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this
field:
a) to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority
languages and foster the different means of access to works produced in these
languages;
b) to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in
regional or minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, postsynchronisation and subtitling activities;
c) to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other
languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and
subtitling activities;
d) to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural
activities of various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the
knowledge and use of regional or minority languages and cultures in the
undertakings which they initiate or for which they provide backing;
e) to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or
supporting cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of
the regional or minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest
of the population;
f) to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given
regional or minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

123
g) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for
collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the
regional or minority languages;
h) if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and terminological
research services, particularly with a view to maintaining and developing appropriate
administrative, commercial, economic, social, technical or legal terminology in each
regional or minority language.
21201 In previous evaluation reports, the Committee of Experts never noticed any
problems with the undertakings under a) to h) in Saxony and Brandenburg. However,
in its present report the Committee observes that there is a risk of this undertaking
not being fulfilled (No. 174 for Upper Sorbian in Saxony and No. 250 for Lower
Sorbian in Brandenburg) because representatives of the Sorbian language group
expressed concerns about the insecure situation of the future funding of the
Foundation for the Sorbian People and further funding of the Sorbian National
Ensemble. According to the authorities, these concerns are unjustified.
21202 The Committee’s question whether steps were taken to ensure the level of
funding of the foundation and the continuity of the Ensemble, given its particularly
significant position in Sorbian culture is answered in No. 00729. On 26 November
2009 the Board of the Foundation for the Sorbian People decided to grant the
Ensemble an interest-free, reimbursable loan (to be reimbursed from 1 January
2011) of no more than € 400,000. At the same time, a consolidation strategy was to
be prepared by spring 2010. The mid-term consolidation target is an annual
allowance of no more than four million euros provided by the foundation and a
maximum of 62 staff for the Ensemble.
21202a At the invitation of the Federal Chancellor, the four national minorities
actively supported the team of the Federal Ministry of the Interior at the Brandenburg
Gate during the public festival marking 60 years of the Basic Law on 23 May 2009. In
addition, the national minorities presented themselves to visitors at the Federal
Ministry of the Interior on the Federal Government’s annual Open Day on 22 and 23
August 2009.

Article 12(2)
In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages
are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or

124
minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural
activities and facilities in accordance with the preceding paragraph.
21203 The Committee of Experts did not comment on this undertaking because it
did not pose any problems.

Article 12(3)
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy
abroad, for regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.
21204 In Nos. 252 (Lower Sorbian in Brandenburg and No. 178 (Upper Sorbian in
Saxony) the Committee of Experts again considers that this undertaking is not
fulfilled.
21205 In No. 177 of its third evaluation report the Committee of Experts states that
no relevant information is given in the Third State Report, presumably because it
considers that the information does not concern the Upper and Lower Sorbian
language, e.g. a Sorbian folk dance group which was granted funding for
performances at a festival in Canada by the Goethe Institute during the last
monitoring cycle. Apparently, the Committee does also not consider that the
Saxony’s measures described in No. 2056 of the Third State Report fulfil the
undertaking (e.g. support for the Domowina – Bund Lausitzer Sorben e.V. to
preserve traditional Sorbian relations to the Wendish Seminar in Prague; support by
the Saxon State Ministry for Science and Arts for the cross-border project of the
Bautzen Sorbian Museum “Im Reich der schönen, wilden Natur”; and support for the
2005 Sorbian Cultural Days in Prague organized by the Foundation for the Sorbian
People together with several cooperation partners). According to the Committee of
Experts, the undertaking cannot be fulfilled by activities of the Länder but only by a
foreign policy which takes a structured approach to fulfilling the undertaking.
21206 With regard to the Committee’s question as to whether the German
authorities made further provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for the
Lower and Upper Sorbian language and the culture it reflects, see No. 01202 ff.
above.

125
Article 13
Economic and Social Life
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake within the whole
country:
a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without
justifiable reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to
economic or social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical
documents such as instructions for the use of products or installations;
b) to prohibit the insertion - in internal regulations of companies and private
documents - of any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or minority
languages, at least between users of the same language;
c) to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority
languages in connection with economic or social activities;
21301 The Committee of Experts did again not comment on the undertaking under
a) because it did not pose any problems in Saxony and Brandenburg.
21302 The Committee did also not comment on the undertaking under c) regarding
Lower Sorbian in Brandenburg; as regards Upper Sorbian in Saxony it reiterated that
it is not yet able to decide on this issue.
21303 In No. 180 of its third evaluation report the Committee was pleased to note
that in August 2006, a federal anti-discrimination act entered into force which
prohibits among other things racial discrimination or ethnocentrism, the latter
implying discrimination against members of a national minority and in certain
circumstances their language. In addition, the Committee of Experts noted that the
national minorities are represented by one member in the Advisory Council of the
Federal Anti-Discrimination Bureau.
21304 The Committee did not conclude on this undertaking as regards Upper
Sorbian because in No. 2059b of the Third State Report Saxony reported that in
November 2003 the management of the centres for people with a disability of the St
Marienstern monastery in Panschwitz-Kuckau instructed all staff to use German
during working hours so that the use of Sorbian was restricted taking into account the
special situation of the residents. The prohibition was reviewed by the Saxon State
Ministry for Social Affairs (SMS) and the Saxon State Ministry for Science and Arts
(SMWK) which was followed by an adaptation of the establishment’s regulations on

126
language use. However, the Saxon authorities state that the issue has not been
sufficiently settled. Therefore, the Committee stated that the issue needs to be
followed up.
21305 Saxony’s reply to the Committee’s request for information about measures
taken to oppose any practices (unreasonably) discouraging the use of Upper Sorbian
in connection with economic or social activities:
In a joint letter of 25 February 2005 to the St Marienstern monastery the SMS and
SMWK asked the monastery to amend or annul the service instructions prescribing
the use of German in homes for people with a disability. Following another letter of
23 April 2007, the monastery explained that the instructions had already been
amended on 8 December 2005 in line with the wording proposed in the ministries’
joint letter. The instruction now reads as follows: “Common speech during working
hours at facilities for people with a disability of the St Marienstern monastery must
not exclude people from direct or indirect communication.” The Land considers that
this satisfies both the people with a disability and the Sorbian-speaking staff in these
facilities.
21306

Art. 13(1)(d) - Facilitating the Use of the Regional or Minority Language
d) to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by means
other than those specified in the above sub-paragraphs.
21307 The Committee of Experts did not comment on this undertaking as regards
Upper Sorbian in Saxony because it considered that it was fulfilled already in the
second evaluation report.
21308 In No. 254 of the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts refers to
No. 2061 of the Third State Report stating that the Land authorities provide some
financial support to promote the use of Lower Sorbian at church services. Therefore,
the Committee of Experts considers the undertaking partly fulfilled.
21309 The Committee asked for more practical examples how the use of Lower
Sorbian is encouraged in other economic or social fields in Brandenburg.
Brandenburg replies that at the moment, further examples cannot be provided.
21310

127

Article 13(2)
Paragraph 2
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the
public authorities are competent, within the territory in which the regional or minority
languages are used, and as far as this is reasonably possible:

Art. 13(2)(c) - Social Care Facilities c) to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and
hostels offer the possibility of receiving and treating in their own language persons
using a regional or minority language who are in need of care on grounds of illhealth, old age or for other reasons;
21311 In No. 185 of its third evaluation report the Committee of Experts revises its
previous conclusion and considers the undertaking not fulfilled because in No. 2064
of the Third State Report Brandenburg reported that in the Upper Sorbian region the
possibility of receiving and treating in their own language persons using a regional or
minority language in hospitals cannot be granted on a permanent basis, that none of
the physicians working at the Saxon hospital in Großschweidnitz speaks Sorbian
because all Sorbs are bilingual and that Sorbs living in the region do not affect the
daily life of the nursing home Heim für Menschen mit Behinderung “Anna Gertrud” in
Großschweidnitz. Comment by Saxony:
As compared to the last comment of 20 July 2006 the situation in hospitals in the
Upper Sorbian region has improved as regards Sorbian-speaking staff.
Number of staff speaking Upper Sorbian in the hospitals concerned:
1.

Oberlausitz hospitals in Bautzen and Bischofswerda:
12 staff

2.

Hospital in Hoyerswerda:
2 staff (1 physician, 1 nurse)

3.

Saxon hospital for psychiatry, psychotherapy and neurology in Großschweidnitz:
2 staff (1 psychologist, 1 social worker)

128
At the St Johannes hospital in Kamenz and the hospital in Weißwasser the staff’s
language skills are not recorded individually. It needs to be mentioned that in this
region it is difficult to even recruit staff with sufficient German language skills, in
particular for medical posts.
21312 In No. 184 of its third evaluation report the Committee of Experts underlined
that the current undertaking requires the authorities to ensure that Upper Sorbian is
used in these establishments which can only be achieved by a bilingual human
resources policy.
21313 The Committee asked whether measures were taken to ensure that social
care facilities can receive and treat the persons concerned in Upper Sorbian. Saxony
answers as follows:
Privately-run social facilities select their own staff. They must fulfil legal requirements
only as regards the staff’s aptitude to ensure quality. The facilities are subject to
supervision but the supervisory body cannot request a facility to employ Sorbianspeaking staff. Article 13(2) of the Charter obligates the Contracting Parties only to
the extent that “the public authorities are competent”. However, public authorities are
not competent in this area.

129
D.2.3

North Frisian in the North Frisian language area in Schleswig-Holstein

Article 8
Education
30801 With regard to Recommendation no. 2 of the Committee of Ministers
concerning Article 8 of the Charter (“take action to improve provision and allocate
adequate resources for regional or minority language teaching and in particular ...
develop and implement the educational model for North Frisian proposed by the
North Frisian speakers”) already issued in the second monitoring cycle and with
regard to the Committee of Experts’ finding in No. 791 of its third evaluation report
that this recommendation has not been implemented, Schleswig-Holstein responds in
its general remarks as follows to the undertakings under Article 8 of the Charter listed
below:
30802 With its new ordinance on Frisian at schools in the district of Nordfriesland
and on the island of Helgoland of October 2008, the Ministry of Education has
strengthened the position of Frisian at school. See Nos. 30811, 30815 and 30820.
30802a The reading competition “lees friisk” (Read Frisian) was held in 2009 for the
eighth time, under the patronage of the minister for education: Ten schools entered
their best young readers of Frisian in the final in Klockries. This competition, which
receives funding support from the savings banks, also helps preserve the Frisian
language.

Article 8 (1)
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such
languages are used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and
without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State:

Article 8(1)(a) - Pre-School Education
i)

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority

languages; or
ii) to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or

130
iii) to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to
those pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered
sufficient; or
iv) if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of preschool education, to favour and/or encourage the application of the measures
referred to under i to iii above;
30803 In Nos. 258 and 259 of its third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts
apparently noted only the following information from Nos. 3001 and 3002 of the Third
State Report:
that the Act on Children’s Day-Care Centres amended in 2005 was implemented
which “places particular emphasis on the regional or minority languages of
Schleswig-Holstein. However, the amended act itself does not seem to contain any
reference to regional or minority languages”;
and that “the responsibility for day care centres lies at the municipal level.
According to additional information provided by the authorities, the transfer of funding
of day-care centres from the Land to the local level did not require any specific
measures to ensure the teaching of North Frisian”.
30804 The Committee apparently did not notice the information that the number of
institutions with Frisian-language offerings increased from the 14 reported in the
Second State Report to 16 in the Third State Report (see No. 518 in the Second
State Report), meaning that at the time of the Third State Report, about 660 children
were receiving Frisian-language offerings. This result led Schleswig-Holstein, unlike
the Committee, to see the undertaking as fulfilled.
30805 Based on its findings, in No. 260 of its third evaluation report the Committee
“regrets that the recommendation of the Committee of Ministers for the adoption of a
systematic policy for North Frisian education has not been implemented by the
authorities in relation to pre-schools. Such a policy is needed in order to meet the
evident demand for pre-school education in North Frisian. The authorities should
urgently adopt and implement a systematic policy of support for North Frisian preschool education, taking account of the fact that an improvement for regional or
minority language education requires special measures and additional funding.”
30805a In No. 261 of its third evaluation report, the Committee states “that the
undertaking is still only partly fulfilled”.

131
30806 In requesting the present report, the Committee of Experts asked whether
the German authorities had followed its urging to “make available, systematically and
through adequate institutional and financial support, at least a substantial part of preschool education in North Frisian to those pupils whose families so request.”
30807

Schleswig-Holstein refers to the general information provided in No. 10814.

30808 In addition, it should be pointed out that the Schleswig-Holstein MinisterPresident’s Commissioner for Minorities wrote an article in the region’s local
government magazine drawing attention to the importance of multilingualism at an
early age and advocating the use of Frisian in nursery schools.
30808a The Federal Government Commissioner for Culture and the Media adds
that he supported projects aiming to provide advanced training for nursery school
teachers so that they can teach children Frisian during their language-acquisition
phase, almost exclusively in privately funded nursery schools.
In addition, Frisian nursery school teachers and volunteer Frisian language tutors
have the opportunity to take part in two weekend courses offering instruction in the
Frisian language and in teaching methods.

Article 8 (1) (b) - Primary Education
i) to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
ii) to make available a substantial part of primary education in the relevant regional
or minority languages; or
iii) to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to
those pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered
sufficient;
30809 In No. 263 of its third evaluation report, the Committee refers to the
information given in No. 3003 ff. of the Third State Report as having been “confine[d]
... to statistical information, according to which there has been a slight decrease in
the number of pupils receiving Frisian education since the last monitoring round” (in
the 2005/2006 school year, 1,455 pupils at 27 schools were enrolled in Frisian
classes taught by a total of 30 teachers).

132
30810 In Nos. 264 and 265 of its third evaluation report, the Committee states that
“[a]ccording to the information received by representatives of the Frisian-speakers,
North Frisian is still offered as an additional extra-curricular subject and not within the
normal curriculum. Furthermore, it is often only offered in third and fourth class” and
was difficult to offer North Frisian alongside English.
30811 In No. 265 of the third evaluation report, the Committee also states that “no
steps have been taken to identify the demand and offer North Frisian in a more proactive way”.
In October 2008, the Ministry of Education enacted a new ordinance on Frisian at
schools in the district of Nordfriesland and on the island of Helgoland. And the
Nordfriesland education authority conducts a survey of demand for Frisian classes
early every year. So far, the demand has always been met. Schleswig-Holstein
therefore assumes that the concerns of the Committee of Experts have been
addressed.
30812 Based on its findings, in No. 266 of its third evaluation report the Committee
“regrets that the recommendation of the Committee of Ministers for the adoption of a
systematic policy for North Frisian education has not been implemented by the
authorities in relation to pre-schools. Such a policy is needed in order to meet the
evident demand for primary education in North Frisian. The authorities should
urgently adopt and implement a systematic policy of support for North Frisian primary
education, taking account of the fact that an improvement for regional or minority
language education requires special measures and additional funding.”
30813 In No. 267 of its third evaluation report, the Committee declares that, given
the information received in the third monitoring round, it considers the abovementioned undertaking to be not fulfilled, even though No. 3004 of the Third State
Report indicated that in the 2005/2006 school year, 1,455 pupils at 27 schools were
receiving Frisian instruction from a total of 30 teachers.
30814 With regard to the Committee’s question whether the German authorities
had made North Frisian teaching available at least as an optional subject in the
normal curriculum, Schleswig-Holstein responds:
30815 The new ordinance for Frisian at schools in the district of Nordfriesland and
on the island of Helgoland went into force on 2 October 2008. The ordinance applies
to primary and secondary education. The ordinance requires schools to inform
parents that they may request that their child participate in Frisian instruction.

133

Art. 8 (1) (c) - Secondary education
i) to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
ii) to make available a substantial part of secondary education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or
iii) to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional
or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to
those pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number
considered sufficient;
30816 Based on the information contained in Nos. 3005 and 3006 of the Third
State Report, in No. 269 of its third evaluation report the Committee states that “apart
from two pilot projects carried out on the island of Sylt, the status of North Frisian in
the education system has remained unchanged. North Frisian organizations
therefore demand a legal basis for North Frisian [in addition to the Frisian Act] as a
matter of raising its status in education and ensuring a continuous provision, for
example by giving North Frisian the status of a Wahlpflichtfach (optional compulsory
subject).”
30817 In No. 270 of its third evaluation report, the Committee states that “[t]here is
a still lack of Frisian teachers at secondary schools” and in No. 272 considers this
undertaking not fulfilled.
30818 However, the Committee does not mention the information in Nos. 3005 and
3006 of the Third State Report indicating that the barrier to additional offerings in
North Frisian is not a lack of resources, but rather a lack of demand, and that the
above-mentioned projects failed due to this lack of demand; nor does the Committee
refer to the fact that the provision mentioned above requires North Frisian to be
offered in accordance with demand. Nor does the Committee explain why, in No.
271 of its third evaluation report, it “regards the inclusion of North Frisian in the
regular curriculum as a basic precondition for fulfilling this undertaking”.
30819 With regard to the Committee’s question as to which action the authorities
have taken to make available North Frisian teaching at least as an optional subject
within secondary education, Schleswig-Holstein responds as follows:

134
30820 Under the new ordinance, Frisian may be offered as an optional subject or
as a Frisian-language cultural project in the fifth and sixth classes. Starting in the
seventh class, Frisian may be offered in the framework of optional compulsory
subjects. At the upper secondary level, Frisian can be chosen as a substitute for a
foreign language, if sufficient staff is available.

Art. 8 (1) (d) - Technical and vocational education
i) to make available technical and vocational education in the relevant regional or
minority languages; or
ii) to make available a substantial part of technical and vocational education in the
relevant regional or minority languages; or
iii) to provide, within technical and vocational education, for the teaching of the
relevant regional or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those
pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered
sufficient;
30821 With regard to the obligations not accepted by Schleswig-Holstein, cf. No.
3007 of the Third State Report and No. 527 of the Second State Report concerning
Frisian offered as an optional compulsory subject at the College for Social Pedagogy
(Fachschule für Sozialpädagogik) in Niebüll.

Art. 8 (1) (e) – University and other higher education
ii) to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher
education subjects
30822 Based on the information provided in Nos. 3008 and 3009 of the Third State
Report, the Committee of Experts noted in Nos. 274 and 275 of its third evaluation
report that “despite the reform of university education, the study of North Frisian as a
higher education subject remains at Kiel University within the new system. The study
of North Frisian also forms part of the teacher training course at Flensburg
university”. The Committee considers this undertaking fulfilled.
30823 Schleswig-Holstein describes the current provision of North Frisian in
university and other higher education as follows: The universities of Kiel and
Flensburg offer Frisian classes.

135
The University of Kiel has the North Frisian Dictionary Institute and a chair of Frisian
philology.
The North Frisian Dictionary Institute has regular contacts with the Frisian Academy
of Leeuwarden, with the Mertens Institute at the Royal Netherlands Academy of
Sciences, with the professorial chairs for Frisian in Groningen and the University of
Amsterdam, and with the North Frisian Institute (Nordfriisk Instituut) in Bredstedt,
Germany.
Frisian philology may be taken at the University of Kiel to fulfil distribution
requirements in a two-subject bachelor course or as an additional subject in a twosubject bachelor teacher training course; it may be studied as part of a two-subject
master course leading to the Master of Arts degree, or as an additional subject in a
two-subject master course leading to the Master of Education degree.
The two-subject bachelor course is intended for students who plan to seek work or
continue higher education studies after receiving their bachelor degree. The
additional subject is intended for students in teacher training courses who would like
to learn more about a third subject. Successful completion of study of an additional
subject leads to a certificate.
The University of Flensburg has a Frisian Institute, where two honorary professors
and instructors currently offer ten semester hours of instruction. Thanks to the
extensive activities of the honorary professors in various Frisian organizations, there
is a great deal of cooperation with research and teaching institutions. For example,
the North Frisian Institute is an independent institution affiliated with the University of
Flensburg.
Following the introduction of the bachelor/master system at University of Flensburg, a
multi-disciplinary bachelors course in education was set up to prepare students to
teach at elementary, secondary modern and secondary technical schools and special
remedial schools. As part of this course of studies, proof of the successful completion
of a class in Low German or Frisian is required for admission to examinations in the
subject “German”. During the course students can choose other methodological
competences to study. Some of them are taught in the regional or minority
languages.
Since the 2008/2009 winter semester, the University of Flensburg’s Centre for
Advanced Training has offered a certificate course in Frisian studies open to students
in the teacher training course, guest students at the University of Flensburg and

136
teachers. This course builds on the relevant modules in the multi-disciplinary
bachelor course in education. Successful completion of the course qualifies
graduates to teach Frisian at schools in Schleswig-Holstein.
30824
Art. 8 (1) (f) - Adult education
iii) if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult education,
to favour and/or encourage the offering of such languages as subjects of adult and
continuing education;
30825 The Committee of Experts did not comment on this undertaking because it
did not pose any problems.
As indicated in No. 3010 of the Third State Report, see also Nos. 534 – 536 of the
Second State Report for the offerings of the North Frisian Institute. In addition, three
adult education centres in the district of Nordfriesland currently offer classes. In
2008, 64 persons took six classes at two adult education centres.

Art. 8 (1) (g) - Teaching of history and culture
g) to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture
which is reflected by the regional or minority language;
30826 The Committee of Experts did not comment on this undertaking because it
did not pose any problems.
As indicated in No. 3012 of the Third State Report, see also Nos. 537 – 539 and Nos.
179 – 184 of the Second State Report on the offerings to fulfil this undertaking.
These offerings have not changed.

Art. 8 (1) (h) - Basic and further training of teachers
h) to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement
those of paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;
30827 In no. 277 of its third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts states that
“[a]ccording to the information provided in the third periodical report (No. 3009), the
restructuring of the university system led to the abolition of the State Examination
courses of studies (i.e. the traditional teacher training courses) at the University of
Flensburg. These courses have been replaced by a bachelor degree course as the

137
first part of the teachers studies under the Bachelor’s/ Master’s programme. Under
this programme, North Frisian is not available as a subject in its own right, but the
attendance of at least one course in North Frisian or Low German is a compulsory
part of German as a subject.”
30828 In No. 279 of its third evaluation report, the Committee cited information from
representatives of the North Frisian-speakers indicating that “there is a lack of young
teachers to fill the posts of retired teachers”, for example in Fahretoft and Bredstedt.
30829 The Committee considers the undertaking partly fulfilled at present.
However, the Committee writes that the restructured university system “seems
inadequate to supply the teachers required to fulfil the undertakings under Art. 8” and
“there is a risk that if the current trend continues the undertaking will not be fulfilled at
all.”
30830 With regard to the Committee’s question whether action has been taken to
ensure that appropriate facilities for teacher training are in place to meet the needs
for education in North Frisian and to provide incentives aimed at increasing the
number of North Frisian teachers at all levels of education, Schleswig-Holstein refers
to No. 00771 ff. and the situation of higher education in Schleswig-Holstein described
in No. 30823.
30831

Art. 8 (1) (i) - Supervisory bodies
i) to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures
taken and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or
minority languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be
made public.
30832 With regard to the Committee’s findings in No. 281 ff. of its third evaluation
report that the above-mentioned undertaking was not fulfilled for North Frisian, and to
the Committee's question whether periodic reports (in addition to those currently
required) had been drawn up and published as urged by the Committee, see Nos.
00803 – 00813.
30833

138

Article 8 (2)
With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the
regional or minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the
number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage or
provide teaching in or of the regional or minority language at all the appropriate
stages of education.
30834 In No. 287 of its third evaluation report, the Committee states that it
considered this undertaking fulfilled because it had “received no complaints that any
demand for teaching in or of North Frisian elsewhere has been denied”. SchleswigHolstein reports that no subsequent demands for teaching in or of North Frisian have
been denied.

Article 9
Judicial authorities
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of
residents using the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified
below, according to the situation of each of these languages and on condition that
the use of the facilities afforded by the present paragraph is not considered by the
judge to hamper the proper administration of justice:

Art. 9 (1) (b) (iii) - Civil proceedings
iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;
30901 The Committee of Experts did not comment on this undertaking in its third
evaluation report because it did not pose any problems.
For further details regarding fulfilment of the aforementioned undertaking under the
established law, cf. No. 3019 of the Third State Report and No. 552 of the Second
State Report.
30901a The Federal Ministry of Justice explains: The Frisian Council’s desire to
amend Section 184 of the Judicature Act (GVG) to enable Frisians to use their

139
language before the courts in their home districts (see the comments of the Frisian
Council on No. 3021 in Part E of the Third State Report) should not be
accommodated. The current legal situation does not lead to intolerable results, nor
does it violate the principle of equal treatment. The current law also complies with the
European Language Charter.
30901b Schleswig-Holstein responds as follows: In No. 292 of its third evaluation
report, the Committee of Experts referred to the individual case of a Frisian youth
organization. The Frisian registered association Rökefloose submitted its new statute
in the Frisian and German languages to the local court with the proviso that in case
of doubt the Frisian text should prevail.
Under Section 184 first sentence of the Judicature Act (GVG), the official language in
court is German. This also applies to proceedings in local courts in matters of noncontentious jurisdiction, including the registration of associations. As a result, some
courts believe that the original version of an association’s statutes must be in
German (compare Palandt-Ellenberger, Civil Code, 68th ed., 2009, Section 57 No.
1). One exception with regard to Section 184 second sentence GVG applies to
statutes written in Sorbian in the Sorbian language area, which may be submitted to
the court with a German translation (ibid.).
With regard to Art. 9 (1) (b) (iii) of the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages, which in Germany has the status of simple federal law, it also seems
reasonable to submit association statutes in Frisian if accompanied by a (certified)
German translation.
Under Section 184 first sentence GVG, the entry in the register of associations must
be in German. This necessarily results from the fact that the register of associations
is a public register open to viewing by all under Section 16 of the ordinance on the
register of associations, for example to find out more about an association’s rules on
representation. If an entry in the register were made in Frisian, or the Frisian version
of the association’s statutes were entered as those binding for legal transactions, the
register information would not be accessible to the general public.
The same would be true if the register were kept by a local court located in an area
where the Frisian Act applies. It is in any case doubtful whether the Frisian Act
applies to the Land courts of Schleswig-Holstein when it comes to decisions on
register law. The Frisian Act does not require entries in public registers to be made in
Frisian (see Section 1 (3) of the Frisian Act).

140

Article 9 (1) (c) (iii) - Proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters
in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;
30902 The Committee of Experts did not comment on this undertaking in its third
evaluation report because it did not pose any problems.
For further details, cf. No. 552 and - with regard to the above branch of the judiciary No. 554 of the Second State Report, as indicated in No. 3020 of the Third State
Report.

Art. 9 (2) (a) - Validity of legal documents
The Parties undertake:
a) not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely
because they are drafted in a regional or minority language;
30903 The Committee of Experts did not comment on this undertaking in its third
evaluation report because it did not pose any problems.
For further details, cf. No. 552 and - with regard to the above branch of the judiciary No. 552 of the Second State Report, as indicated in No. 3021 of the Third State
Report.

Article 10
Administrative authorities and public services
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who
are users of regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below
and according to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this
is reasonably possible:
Art. 10 (1) (a) (v) - Submission of documents
v) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a
document in these languages;

141
31001 In No. 3022 of the Third State Report, the German side once again
explained that this undertaking does not extend to encouraging the public to use a
minority language when dealing with administrative authorities, but rather only grants
the right to submit a document, in this case in Frisian, to the authorities.
31002 Nonetheless, with the Frisian Act in 2004 Schleswig-Holstein created
additional possibilities for using Frisian in the public sphere in the district of
Nordfriesland and on the island of Helgoland. No. 3023 of the Third State Report
gives the results of a survey on the implementation of the Frisian Act roughly one
year after its entry into force.
31003 In Nos. 291 and 292 of its third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts
writes that a survey conducted after the entry into force of the Frisian Act had shown
that “North Frisian was used in oral communication with administrative bodies on the
Land and local level, but that there were no reports on written use. Other findings of
the survey related to the scarcity of Frisian-speaking staff members and the apparent
lack of knowledge of several authorities of the geographical scope of application of
the law.” For the last-mentioned finding, in No. 292 of its third evaluation report the
Committee cited the following example: A “document in North Frisian to register the
newly founded youth organisation was rejected by the district court whose
competency in this regard had been shifted from Niebüll to Flensburg which lies
outside the Frisian-speaking area. The law on the Frisian language has no effect on
this, since it only applies to the district of North Frisia.”
In No. 293 of its third evaluation report, the Committee therefore concluded “that the
undertaking is formally fulfilled but there remain practical problems with regard to the
implementation of this undertaking which must be addressed.”
31004 When requesting this report, the Committee asked
whether steps had been taken to resolve the practical problem of the
geographical scope of the Frisian Act, and
whether it is possible to submit a document in North Frisian to the local court in
Flensburg.
31005 Schleswig-Holstein responds
with regard to these questions, and
with regard to the Committee of Ministers’ Recommendation no. 5 (to “take
resolute action to establish a structured policy for making it practically possible to use

142
regional or minority languages in dealings with the administration and, where
relevant, in the courts”)
(in addition to the general information in No. 01004) as follows regarding the
implementation of the above-mentioned provision:
31006 The Frisian Act applies in the district of Nordfriesland and the island of
Helgoland. Thus the geographical scope of application is clearly defined. The Act
also extends beyond the Frisian language area in the narrower sense, as parts of the
district of Nordfriesland (Eiderstedt and eastern Geestrücken) are not part of the
Frisian language area. Various possibilities for language promotion are associated
with the Act, whether in dealing with the authorities (Section 1), hiring staff with
Frisian language skills as necessary to perform specific tasks (Section 2) or posting
building signs (Section 3) and town signs (Section 6). In this way, the Land has
already taken the action recommended by the Committee of Experts.
The individual case described by the Committee (Nos. 31003 and 31004) falls within
the area of the judicial authorities and thus Article 9 of the Charter. See No. 30901a
in that section.

Article 10 (2) (g) - Place-names in Frisian
g) the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official
language(s), of traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or minority
languages.
31007 In No. 294 of its third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts continues
to consider this undertaking fulfilled, after No. 3027 of the Third State Report stated
that fifteen local authorities had put up bilingual place names since January 2006.
The Committee concludes that “this seems to have occurred as a result of the
coming into force of the Frisian Law which, under Section 6, provides that the use of
bilingual signs in the North Frisia Kreis should be promoted.” The Committee also
noted that “bilingual railway station signs between Husum and Sylt have been
installed, with the financial support of the Federal Government.”
31008 Schleswig-Holstein reports the following new developments with regard to
the above-mentioned undertaking:
Since the Third State Report was presented, bilingual signs have been put up in two
more cases. However, due to mergers between municipalities, the overall number of
local authorities with bilingual place-name signs has not increased.

143
By order of 31 March 2009, the Ministry of Research, Economics and Transport
created the possibility of bilingual German and Frisian information signs (Sign 385,
StVO) and tourist information signs for special topographical features in addition to
bilingual place-name signs (Sign 310, StVO). This order superseded the previous
version of 11 June 2007.

Article 10 (4)
Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted
by them, the Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:

Article 10 (4) (c) - Appointment of public service employees having a knowledge of
the Frisian language
c) compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees
having a knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory
in which that language is used.
31008 With regard to this undertaking, which was found in the second evaluation
report to have been fulfilled (No. 288), see Nos. 564 – 568 of the Second State
Report and No. 3028 of the Third State Report on activities to consider Frisian
language skills when making hiring decisions. See also the statement that in certain
cases, knowledge of Frisian is requested and used as a selection criterion when
hiring, and that Section 2 of the Frisian Act allows the Land, the district of
Nordfriesland and the municipalities in that district and on the island of Helgoland to
consider Frisian language skills when hiring for the public service where needed to
perform a specific task.

Article 10 (5)
The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or
minority languages, at the request of those concerned.
31009 As indicated in No. 3029 of the Third State Report, see Nos. 220 – 225 of
the Second State Report with regard to this undertaking, which the Committee did
not mention in its third evaluation report.

144
Article 11
Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the
territories in which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each
language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are
competent, have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the
independence and autonomy of the media:

Art. 11 (1) (b) (ii) - Broadcasting of radio programmes
ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
31101 Although in its third evaluation report the Committee of Experts has changed
its position that this undertaking applies only to private radio broadcasters, with
regard to Frisian it did note in No. 299 of its third evaluation that “promoting regional
or minority language broadcasting through financial incentives, as is currently carried
out, for example, for cultural programmes, would not infringe ... German law. The
Committee of Experts encourages the German authorities to do so in the case of
North Frisian.”
31102
31103 With regard to public radio broadcasting, the Committee noted in No. 300 of
its third evaluation report that there is a weekly three-minute broadcast in North
Frisian.
31104 In No. 301 of its third evaluation report, the Committee finds that the
“authorities do not seem to have taken measures to encourage and/ or facilitate the
broadcasting of radio programmes” in North Frisian and therefore concludes that the
undertaking remains not fulfilled.
31105 With regard to whether the authorities have taken measures to encourage
and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in North Frisian on a regular
basis by private and public broadcasters, Schleswig-Holstein refers to the general
description of this issue in No. 01104 above and adds:

145
31106 The series “Frasch for enarken” (Frisian for all) is a classic programme on
NDR 1 Welle Nord. The series “SH Topographie” also features interviews with Frisian
speakers in their native language. NDR 1 Welle Nord occasionally produces hourlong programmes in Frisian. Of special importance for the Frisian language is the
storytelling contest, “Ferteel iinjsen”, which the North Frisian Institute and the radio
station NDR 1 Welle Nord put on every two years.
31106a The media authority Hamburg/Schleswig-Holstein (MA HSH) on 5 June
2009 called for bids for a private FM radio programme in the village of Oevenum on
the island of Föhr to provide broadcasting for the islands of Föhr, Amrum and
Langeness, the southern tip of Sylt and parts of the North Frisian mainland. The call
for bids was explicitly directed at providers of offerings which could help promote the
minority language Frisian in a special way. Bidders explicitly incorporated Frisianlanguage offerings into their planned proposals. In December 2009, the MA HSH
media council decided to award the FM frequency 96.7 MHz on Föhr to the Open
Channel Schleswig-Holstein (OKSH) for ten years. Public-service radio programmes
from the West Coast Open Channel are intended to help promote the Frisian
language. Cooperation between the OKSH and the Ferring foundation and between
the Ferring foundation and the Frisian Council (Frasche Rädj) is intended to ensure
the production of the Frisian programme. The OKSH hopes to expand Frisianlanguage programming to as many as seven hours a day. Federal funding for the
Frisian Council (Federal Government Commissioner for Culture and the Media) will
also be used to finance the programme.
31106b With a temporary permit from the MA HSH, the traditional North Frisian
festival “Amrumer Biaken” (19 – 23 February 2010) will be covered for the first time
by a local FM station. For this purpose, the local event radio channel Radio Öömrang
was granted the FM frequency 88.1 MHz.
31106c Radio Schleswig-Holstein (R.SH) occasionally incorporates Frisian features
in its programming.

Article 11 (1) (c) (ii) - Broadcasting of television programmes
ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
31107 While the Committee of Experts is no longer of the opinion that this
undertaking can be fulfilled only by the promotion of television programmes in the

146
private sector, in No. 303 ff. of its third evaluation report, it nonetheless finds that this
undertaking remains not fulfilled, stating that while “there is some coverage of the
Frisian minority and information about their language on public television, however,
there are no programmes in the language itself.”
31108 With regard to the Committee’s question whether the authorities have taken
measures to encourage and/ or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in
North Frisian on a regular basis, Schleswig-Holstein refers to its general explanations
in No. 01104 above and adds:
31108a Programmes produced at the NDR broadcasting centre in SchleswigHolstein (“SH-Magazin” and “SH 18:00”) regularly report on Frisian issues and
personalities. This also applies to the longer features in the programmes
“NORDstory” and “NORDabend” on the NDR television channel.

Art. 11 (1) (d) - Audio and audiovisual works
d) to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and
audiovisual works in the regional or minority languages;
31109 With regard to this undertaking, which the Committee already considers
fulfilled, we report that since 2003, a Frisian evening featuring the premiere of a
documentary film in Frisian has become a regular part of the Husum Film Festival. In
2009, a 30-minute documentary film by Medienbüro Riecken, Gåns natörlik, shot in
Frisian and Low German and with German subtitles, premiered at the festival.
Funding is provided by the Federal Government Commissioner for Culture and the
Media.

Art. 11 (1) (e) (ii) - Newspaper articles
ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the publication of newspaper articles in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
31110 In No. 307 ff. of its third evaluation report, the Committee noted that
“newspapers published in North Frisia by the publishing company SchleswigHolsteinischer Zeitungsverlag feature a page in Frisian/ Low German about once per
month.” However, it did not find the demand of then minister-president of SchleswigHolstein to implement this undertaking (reported in No. 3033 of the Third State
Report) sufficient encouragement as referred to in the above-mentioned provision

147
and stated that it had not been made aware of any form of encouragement or
facilitation towards a more frequent publication of newspaper articles. It maintains its
previous conclusion that this undertaking was not fulfilled, while noting that
“encouragement or facilitation need not interfere with the freedom of press ... but can
take the form of supporting journalist training, of providing different kinds of indirect
financial assistance, for example via the Frisian language associations.”
31111 With regard to the Committee’s question whether the authorities have taken
measures to encourage and/or facilitate the publication of newspaper articles in
North Frisian on a regular basis, Schleswig-Holstein refers to its general explanations
in No. 01104.
31112

Article 11 (1) (f) (ii) - Financial assistance for audiovisual productions
ii) to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual
productions in the regional or minority languages;
31113 Due to a lack of information, the Committee of Experts once again considers
this undertaking as not fulfilled.
31114 With regard to the Committee’s question as to how the subsidy fund allows
for the qualification of productions in North Frisian in practice, Schleswig-Holstein
responds as follows:
Organizations of the Frisian ethnic group have the possibility to submit grant
proposals for audiovisual projects to be paid from the project funds provided annually
by the Federation and Schleswig-Holstein. As the umbrella organization of the North
Frisians, the Frisian Council (Friesenrat Sektion Nord e.V.) is responsible for deciding
whether these proposals can be submitted to the authorities.
From 2007 to 2009, the Federal Government Commissioner for Culture and the
Media provided the Frisian ethnic group with about €175,000 for projects in this area:
new media applications, Frisian radio, web videos, multi-media presentations on the
Frisian language and culture.

Article 11 (2) - Freedom of direct reception of broadcasts, and freedom of expression
The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and
television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or

148
similar form to a regional or minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission
of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language.
They further undertake to ensure that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of
expression and free circulation of information in the written press in a language used
in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of the
above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be
subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by
law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security,
territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others,
for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the
authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
31115 In the absence of issues to address, the Committee did not comment on this
undertaking in its third evaluation report.

Article 12
Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries,
cultural centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as
literary work and film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals
and the culture industries, including inter alia the use of new technologies – the
Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used and to the
extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this
field:

Article 12 (1) (a) - Types of expression and access to works
a) to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority
languages and foster the different means of access to works produced in these
languages;
31201 Regarding the encouragement of initiatives on the cultural expression of
regional or minority languages, within the meaning of the above undertaking, by the
Land's promotional measures for Frisian institutions, the Committee of Experts did
not comment in its third evaluation report in the absence of issues to address. As

149
indicated in No. 3037 of the Third State Report, see Nos. 595 to 598 of the Second
State Report.

Article 12 (1) (b) - Access to works in the minority language
b) to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in
regional or minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, postsynchronization and subtitling activities;
31202 To follow up on Nos. 600 – 603 of the Second State Report and on No. 3038
of the Third State Report indicating that the Frisian films and videos (some dubbed,
some with subtitles) were produced with the help of federal funding, with regard to
the above-mentioned undertaking on which the Committee of Experts once again
commented in its third evaluation report, we respond as follows:
31203 The cultural work of the Frisian ethnic group receives substantial federal and
Land funding. All Frisian organizations may apply through the umbrella organization
of the North Frisians, the Frisian Council (Friesenrat Sektion Nord e.V.) for support
from the Land and the Federal Government Commissioner for Culture and the Media.
Funds are provided and approved with a particular view to implementing the
undertakings from the Charter. Lists of projects of the Frisian ethnic group which
have received funding may be provided to the Committee if it so desires.

Article 12 (1) (c) - Access to works produced in other languages
c) to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other
languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronization and
subtitling activities;
31204 As indicated in 3039 of the Third State Report, see No. 604, in conjunction
with Nos. 600 - 603, of the Second State Report.

Art. 12 (1) (d) - Taking account of the regional or minority language in cultural
activities
d) to ensure that the bodies responsible for organizing or supporting cultural
activities of various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the
knowledge and use of regional or minority languages and cultures in the
undertakings which they initiate or for which they provide backing;

150

31205 The Committee of Experts did not comment on this undertaking because it
did not pose any problems. As indicated in No. 3040 of the Third State Report, see
Nos. 605 and 606 of the Second State Report on the use of North Frisian in the
organizations of the Frisian language group. It should also be noted that at key
events, such as the biennial Schleswig-Holstein Day, the minorities are always
invited to participate actively and take advantage of this opportunity to present
themselves to the majority population.

Art. 12 (1) (e) - Employment of staff proficient in the language(s) concerned
e) to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organizing or
supporting cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of
the regional or minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest
of the population;
31206 No. 3041 of the Third State Report indicated that bodies other than the
Frisian associations could take advantage of government funding to hire staff with
Frisian language skills. In Nos. 314 and 315 of its third evaluation report, the
Committee states it “has not been made aware of how these subsidies are used in
practice or how the authorities promote measures to ensure that Frisian-speaking
staff is employed” and “considers that the undertaking remains partly fulfilled”.
31207 With regard to the Committee’s request for more information on how
subsidies for cultural activities are used in practice and how the authorities promote
measures to ensure that Frisian-speaking staff is employed, Schleswig-Holstein
refers to the procedure described in No. 31203.
31208

Article 12 (1) (f) - (h)
31209 In No. 47 of its second evaluation report, the Committee of Experts referred
to its finding in the first evaluation report that Schleswig-Holstein had encountered no
difficulties in fulfilling the three obligations under (f) through (h). As noted in No. 3043
of the Third State Report, see the description of the North Frisian Institute in
Bredstedt in No. 610 of the Second State Report and the discussion in Nos. 611 and
612 of the Second State Report.

151

Article 12 (1) (f) - Participation of representatives of the group speaking the given
language in cultural activities
f) to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given
regional or minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

Art. 12 (1) (g) - Creation of archive bodies
g) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for
collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the
regional or minority languages;

Article 12 (1) (h) - Translation and terminological research services
h) if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and terminological
research services, particularly with a view to maintaining and developing appropriate
administrative, commercial, economic, social, technical or legal terminology in each
regional or minority language.
Article 12 (2)
In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages
are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or
minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural
activities and facilities in accordance with the preceding paragraph.
31213 As in No. 3045 of the Third State Report, with regard to this undertaking, on
which the Committee of Experts did not comment in the absence of issues to
address, see Nos. 613 and 614 of the Second State Report.

Article 12 (3)
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy
abroad, for regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.
31214 In No. 317 of its third evaluation report, the Committee again considers that
the undertaking remains not fulfilled with regard to North Frisian in SchleswigHolstein.

152
31215 The Committee failed to recognize the following activities as fulfilling this
undertaking: the cross-border dissemination of Frisian culture by the Inter-Frisian
Council; the exhibition for the 50th anniversary of the 1955 Bonn-Copenhagen
Declarations shown at the Federal Foreign Office in Berlin in January and February
2005, which also dealt with legal protection for the minority languages Frisian and
Danish; and the federally funded 2006 inter-Frisian congress held in SchleswigHolstein, which included participants from Westfriesland (NL), all described in No.
3047 of the Third State Report.
31216 In the Committee’s view, the undertaking could be fulfilled by the Goethe
Institutes, however only through a structured approach to integrating the North
Frisian language in Germany’s cultural policy abroad.
31217 With regard to the Committee’s question as to whether the German
authorities make sufficient provision, in pursuing their (cultural) policy abroad, for the
North Frisian language and the culture it reflects, see No. 01202 ff. above.

Article 13
Economic and social life
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake within the whole
country:
a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without
justifiable reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to
economic or social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical
documents such as instructions for the use of products or installations;
b) to prohibit the insertion - in internal regulations of companies and private
documents - of any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or minority
languages, at least between users of the same language;
c) to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority
languages in connection with economic or social activities;
d) to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by means
other than those specified in the above sub-paragraphs.

31301 As already noted in No. 3048 of the Third State Report, see No. 617 and
Nos. 245 – 248 of the Second State Report with regard to the obligations accepted

153
under Art. 13 (1) (a) and (c). Further, it should be noted that the Committee of
Experts did not comment on the undertakings under (a) through (d) in the absence of
issues to address.
Article 14
Transfrontier exchanges
The Parties undertake:
a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the
States in which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if
necessary to seek to conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster
contacts between the users of the same language in the States concerned in the
fields of culture, education, information, vocational training and permanent education;

31401 In No. 318 ff. of its third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts states
that it is “not in a position to conclude on this undertaking” after noting that the Third
State Report (No. 3050) stated that the negotiations for a cultural agreement
between Schleswig-Holstein and the Netherlands came to an end in 2004 and the
Committee “has no information about current negotiations”.
31402 With regard to the Committee’s request for information about possible further
talks between Schleswig-Holstein and the Netherlands, for example in the framework
of the North Sea Cooperation, which could foster contacts between the users of the
same language in these two states, Schleswig-Holstein again refers to the difficulties
of adjusting obligations accepted under the Charter as discussed in No. 00301 of this
report.
31403 In addition, Schleswig-Holstein reports that the Nordic Institute at Christian
Albrechts University (CAU) in Kiel maintains close relations with the Frisian Institute
at the University of Groningen and the Fryske Akademy in Leeuwarden. For
example, CAU and the University of Groningen jointly publish a series of scholarly
papers. As part of their masters degree course, CAU students of Frisian philology
complete an internship at either the University of Groningen or the Fryske Akademy,
ensuring an active exchange at the level of students. Excursions to the Netherlands
are offered for bachelors students to encourage such exchange.

154
D.2.4

Sater Frisian in the Sater Frisian language area in Lower Saxony

Article 8
Education
40801 With regard to Article 8 as a whole, in No. 322 of its third evaluation report
the Committee of Experts expresses its view that the obligations accepted regarding
Sater Frisian in Lower Saxony are insufficient, as they cover only pre-school and
higher education and are missing essential components of primary and secondary
education.
40802 In this context, in No. 52 of its third evaluation report the Committee refers to
No. 3507 of the Third State Report which mentions the new curriculum of August
2006 making it mandatory to include the presentation of Sater Frisian in all types of
schools in Lower Saxony within the core curricula subjects of English and Low
German. However, according to the precise text of the curriculum, this only applies in
cases where a speaker of the respective language is a pupil of the class.
40803 In No. 53 of its third evaluation report, the Committee notes that language
encounter (Sprachbegegnung) is part of the general curricula at primary and
secondary level and that the authorities also referred to the possibility of offering
Sater Frisian as an optional class. This is apparently a reference to optional
compulsory classes at lower secondary level which emphasize language acquisition.
40804 These demands by the Committee to accept and fulfil additional educational
obligations concerning Sater Frisian should be seen in the context of
Recommendation no. 2 of the Committee of Ministers, formulated in the second and
third monitoring cycles: “to take action to improve provision and allocate adequate
resources for regional or minority language teaching and in particular: ... adopt
measures to improve teaching in and of Sater Frisian as a matter of urgency and
ensure continuity in educational provision in this language”.
40805 In No. 792 of its third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts “observes
that the authorities did not react positively to these recommendations” with regard to
Sater Frisian. The Committee states: “The orientation plan of 2005 mentions regional
languages, but it is not strong enough to have an effect on the situation of Sater
Frisian in education in any way. Consequently, the teaching of Sater Frisian
continues to depend on voluntary helpers and is insufficient in terms of the hours
devoted to it. There is no financial or institution-based support by the authorities.”

155

40806 In No. 54 of the third evaluation report, the Committee then quotes
representatives of Lower Saxony as stating “that no plans were envisaged to extend
the scope of Part III protection to Sater Frisian in the field of education.”
40807 In response, it is first necessary to note that the Council of Europe may insist
that existing obligations should be fulfilled, but may not insist that additional
obligations be assumed; in this case, the only possibility is voluntary action by the
Land. Because it is assumed that accepting additional obligations will result in
excessive burdens, it is not likely that the necessary majorities will be found to
support extending the scope of protection as recommended by the Committee.
Regardless of the general considerations above, Lower Saxony reports as follows:
The Saterland Frisian association Seelter Buund received project funding from Lower
Saxony amounting to €10,000 each year in 2008 and 2009. The projects funded
aimed among other things at teaching Sater Frisian in nursery and primary schools in
the Saterland municipality.
40808 Regarding educational measures for Sater Frisian taken under Art. 7 (1) (f)
rather than Art. 8, see Nos. 00746 – 753 above.

Article 8 (1)
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such
languages are used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and
without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State

Article 8 (1) (a) - Pre-school education
i) to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
ii) to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or
iii) to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those
pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient; or
iv) if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school
education, to favour and/or encourage the application of the measures referred to
under i to iii above;
40809

Lower Saxony has accepted the undertaking under (iv).

156

40810 In No. 3501 of the Third State Report we stated that, although the wording of
this provision does not specify the required extent to which such measures must be
favoured or encouraged, we respected the Committee’s concerns regarding the
continued existence of the Sater Frisian language. We also reported there that the
orientation plan of January 2005 on elementary education in Lower Saxony contains
the statement “that in regions where a regional language (including the Sater Frisian
minority language) is spoken, multilingualism is a good way of enhancing the
children's language comprehension and their speaking skills.”
40811 In No. 326 of its third evaluation report, the Committee stated that “[a]lthough
it acknowledges the new plan, it does not seem to have affected the situation of
Sater Frisian in education in any way” and maintained “its previous conclusion that
this undertaking is not fulfilled” (No. 328). The Committee’s finding is surprising,
given the fact that in Nos. 603 – 606 of its third evaluation report it welcomes the
same orientation plan with regard to Low German and sees the undertaking as partly
fulfilled.
40812 With regard to the Committee’s question as to whether adequate institutional
and financial support was provided for pre-school education in Sater Frisian to those
pupils whose families so request, Lower Saxony responds as follows, in addition to
the information given above in No. 00753:
Lower Saxony does not have pre-schools. Pre-school education is provided at daycare centres/nursery schools. Lower Saxony does not run its own centres. There are
five nursery schools in Saterland, four of which are run by the Catholic Church, while
the fifth is run by the local authority. Volunteers teach one hour of Sater Frisian per
week at the nursery schools to familiarize the children with the language. The Seelter
Buund supports this volunteer activity by providing teaching materials, training
courses and subsidies for travel expenses.

Article 8 (1) (e) (ii) - University and other higher education
ii) to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher
education subjects
40813 In No. 329 ff. of its third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts
considered that this undertaking was not yet fulfilled, as the professorship for
German philology at the University of Oldenburg with a focus on Low German and a

157
responsibility to teach Sater Frisian was still in the recruitment stage (No. 3503, Third
State Report).
40814 In No. 795 of its third evaluation report, with regard to its Recommendation
no. 3 (“reverse the decline in study and research opportunities for ... Sater Frisian ...
and improve facilities for teacher training”) the Committee found that the “decline in
study and research of these languages has not been reversed but it has been put on
hold”.
40815 At the same time, the Committee expressed its concern that, due to “the twin
impact of budgetary pressures in Higher Education and the Europe-wide Bologna
Process leading to a standardized Bachelor and Master degree structure ... regional
or minority languages are in danger of disappearing as higher education
programmes”, with a particularly harmful impact on teacher training.
40816

With regard to this concern, see No. 00767 above.

40817 In No. 331 of its third evaluation report, the Committee asks the authorities
to provide further information on the establishment and activities of the language
centre for Dutch, Low German and Sater Frisian at the University of Oldenburg and
the exact extent to which Sater Frisian is offered. Lower Saxony reports on this and
on other developments as follows:
40818 Lower Saxony shares the Committee’s concern about preserving Sater
Frisian and has therefore worked hard to establish a new position for a professor of
German at the University of Oldenburg with a concentration on Low German and
Sater Frisian.
In contrast to the Committee’s description, there is no language centre for Dutch,
Low German and Sater Frisian at the University of Oldenburg, but rather an institute
for German philology with a concentration on Low German and Sater Frisian,
established in late 2007. The chair is held by Professor Peters (Professor of
Germanic linguistics, linguistic pragmatics and sociolinguistics/Low German). With
Land funding, the university also set up a laboratory of language sciences and
musicology, where experiments, for example in the field of acoustic phonetics, can
be conducted.
A class in the Sater Frisian language was offered at the university for the first time in
August 2009. Two seminars on Sater Frisian will be offered in winter semester
2009/2010, in the framework of the course leading to a Master of Arts degree in
language sciences offered in cooperation with the University of Bremen.

158
An academic research project dealing with the analysis of historical audio recordings
from Saterland was completed. The University of Oldenburg is currently planning a
grant-funded project on variations and language contact in Saterland: Prosody of
Sater Frisian, Low German and High German. This project aims to lay the
groundwork for long-term research on Sater Frisian at the University of Oldenburg.
As a measure to preserve Sater Frisian, the University of Oldenburg is preparing a
bilingual project (language immersion) at the St Jakobus nursery school in Ramslow
and the Scharrel primary school. The second edition of the Sater Frisian dictionary by
Dr Marron Fort is also in preparation. This dictionary is important for research
purposes as well as for future measures of language cultivation and preservation.

Art. 8 (1) (g) - Teaching of history and culture
g)

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture

which is reflected by the regional or minority language;
40819 As reported in No. 3507 of the Third State Report, in 2006, a new curriculum
entered into force for the subjects German and English for all types of schools in
Lower Saxony which calls for using Sater Frisian in class for linguistic studies and
comparison. The core curriculum for German also further specifies the competence
profiles.
40820 In No. 336 ff. of its third evaluation report, the Committee then reminded that
“[t]his undertaking does not primarily concern making first acquaintance with the
specificities of the language itself, but rather with the teaching of the history and
specific traditions related to the language” and that “the new core curriculum could be
seen as a step towards the fulfilment of this undertaking if it also applied to classes in
which there is no speaker of Sater Frisian”; the Committee found that this
undertaking remained partly fulfilled.
40821 With regard to the Committee’s question whether the teaching of the history
and culture reflected by Sater Frisian had been extended to all schools in Saterland
as it had recommended, Lower Saxony responds as follows:
40822 All new core curriculum since 2006 requires departments in all subjects to
take the regional context into account when choosing topics and units for the
teaching of skills. This applies especially to German, history and geography; the
curriculum for these subjects also mentions the local area and region in formulating
competences.

159
The extent to which Saterland’s schools are committed to teaching about Sater
Frisian culture is demonstrated for example by the fact that since March 2008 the
Scharrel primary school has had a bilingual name: Litje Skoule Skäddel –
Grundschule Saterland (Saterland primary school).

Art. 8 (1) (i) - Supervisory bodies
i) to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures
taken and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or
minority languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be
made public.
40823 With regard to the Committee’s finding in Nos. 341 – 345 of its third
evaluation report that this undertaking remains unfulfilled in the absence of the
periodic reports referred to in this provision, and with regard to its finding in No. 796
of the third evaluation report that none of the Länder had implemented
Recommendation no. 4 of the Committee of Ministers (“ensure that an effective
monitoring mechanism exists in the field of education for all regional or minority
languages covered under Part III”) with regard to any of the protected languages and
that therefore none had fulfilled this undertaking, see Nos. 00803 – 00813 and Nos.
10833 and 10834.
40824 In addition, Lower Saxony reports the following in connection with the
structural changes in the field of education and the function of the specialist adviser
for Sater Frisian referred to in No. 3509 of the Third State Report, in response to the
Committee of Experts’ question whether periodic reports (in addition to those
currently required) had been drawn up and published as urged by the Committee:
40825 As described in No. 3509 of the Third State Report, the issue of a
supervisory body and the related reporting requirement will be covered in the
updated decree “Die Region im Unterricht” (The region in classroom instruction). This
decree is currently being revised.

Article 9
Judicial authorities
Paragraph 1

160
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of
residents using the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified
below, according to the situation of each of these languages and on condition that
the use of the facilities afforded by the present paragraph is not considered by the
judge to hamper the proper administration of justice

Art. 9 (1) (b) (iii) - Civil proceedings
in civil proceedings:
iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations
40901 As indicated in No. 3510 of the Third State Report, with regard to this
undertaking, on which the Committee of Experts did not comment in its third
evaluation report, we refer to No. 643 of the Second State Report stating that current
legislation already fulfils this undertaking without further measures.

Article 9 (1) (c) (iii) - Proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters
in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;
40902 The information provided in No. 40901 above applies to this sub-paragraph
as well. In addition, as indicated in No. 3511 of the Third State Report, see No. 645
of the Second State Report concerning the obligation of administrative courts to
conduct ex officio investigations.

Art. 9 (2) (a) - Validity of legal documents
The Parties undertake:
a) not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely
because they are drafted in a regional or minority language
40903 The information provided in No. 40901 above applies to this sub-paragraph
as well.

161

Article 10
Administrative authorities and public services
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who
are users of regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below
and according to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this
is reasonably possible:

Art. 10 (1) (a) (v) - Submission of documents
v) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a
document in these languages;

Article 10 (1) (c) - Drafting of documents
c) to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in a regional or
minority language.
41001 With regard to the two undertakings mentioned above, in Nos. 3514 and
3515 of the Third State Report, we indicated that the authorities do not see a need
for additional regulations and are not planning any to implement these provisions,
among other things because they only refer to “allow[ing]” and because of the aim to
reduce regulation. In No. 3516 of the Third State Report, we further explained that
because regulation in this area would constitute intervention in the right of local selfgovernment, it would require formal legislation or an ordinance on the basis of a law.
41002
that

In response, in No. 347 ff. of its third evaluation report the Committee argued

“these undertakings concern administrative bodies and public services
responsible for Saterland that are answerable to the Land of Lower Saxony or the
Federal authorities (such as employment offices)”,
there are other possibilities besides issuing directives or formal guidelines, for
example issuing informal guidelines,
however, “as long as current legislation prescribes German as the official
language of administration, an explicit clause ... is needed”, and
these undertakings are not fulfilled.

162

41003 With regard to the Committee’s question whether the necessary steps had
been taken to ensure that the users of Sater Frisian may validly submit a document
in Sater Frisian and to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in Sater
Frisian, we respond as follows:
41004 As argued above in No. 01004, in the German view, structural measures
pursuant to the above-mentioned provision, for example to allow applications to be
submitted to administrative authorities in minority languages, make sense only on the
basis of identifiable demand; as explained in No. 216 of the Second State Report,
such measures are considered only in regions inhabited traditionally or by large
numbers of members of the language groups.
With regard to the federal authorities mentioned by the Committee in No. 347 of its
third evaluation report, there are no plans to implement the undertakings under Art.
10 for Sater Frisian also for the reason that, while these authorities may occasionally
work on behalf of members of the Sater Frisian language group, these authorities are
not located in the Sater Frisian language area.
41005 Lower Saxony adds its comments on the above-mentioned undertakings, the
above-mentioned question of the Committee, and on the Committee’s statement in
No. 798 of its third evaluation report that Recommendation no. 5 of the Committee of
Ministers (“take resolute action to establish a structured policy for making it
practically possible to use regional or minority languages in dealings with the
administration and, where relevant, in the courts”) made in the second and third
monitoring cycles had not been followed:
41006 According to a study by Prof. Stellmacher in 2000, a maximum of 2,250
residents of the Saterland municipality speak Sater Frisian. According to this survey,
only 325 persons responded that they were able to write in Sater Frisian. The small
number of residents who are users of this minority language does not justify the
measures under Art. 10 (1) of the Charter aimed at the administrative districts of the
State. Given the clause “as far as this is reasonably possible”, the obligations in (1)
(a) (v) and (c) can be applied only to the local authorities in the Saterland municipality
and not to federal administrative districts or administrative districts of Lower Saxony.
With this in mind, Lower Saxony reports that the Saterland municipality ensures that
users of Sater Frisian may submit documents in Sater Frisian. The Saterland
municipality points out that this rarely if ever happens. The Saterland municipality
also reports that administrative texts in Sater Frisian are available but are almost

163
never requested. In view of this lack of demand, there is no need which would justify
the effort required to establish a structured policy as urged by the Committee.
41007
41008

Article 10 (2)
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of
residents who are users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the
measures specified below, the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
Article 10 (2) (a) - Use of a regional or minority language
a) the use of regional or minority languages within the framework of the regional or
local authority
41009 With regard to this undertaking, on which the Committee has again not
commented because no major issues were raised, we refer to Nos. 652 and 653 of
the Second State Report on the use of Sater Frisian, as indicated in No. 3517 of the
Third State Report.

Article 10 (2) (b) - Submission of applications
b) the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written
applications in these languages;
41010 With regard to No. 353 of the third evaluation report in which the Committee
notes that it was possible to submit applications to the municipality in Sater Frisian
but said that the Committee was still unclear about the actual practical
implementation of this undertaking, Lower Saxony responds as follows:
41011 The authorities are obligated only to allow and/or encourage oral and written
applications in Sater Frisian to be submitted. The Saterland municipality offers this
possibility, while noting that in practice, applications are almost never submitted in
Sater Frisian.

164
Article 10 (2) (c) - Publication by regional authorities of official documents in the
Frisian language
c) the publication by regional authorities of their official documents also in the
relevant regional or minority languages;
41012 Regardless of the fact that in No. 356 ff. of its third evaluation report, the
Committee of Experts points out that “not all publications need to [be] published in
Sater Frisian, but for example, key documents or documents related to Sater Frisian”,
we still disagree with the Committee’s findings on this provision.
41013 The Committee’s view that “in order to comply with this undertaking, a
certain degree of practical implementation must follow the mere ‘allowing’ of
publications in Sater Frisian” contradicts the wording of the provision, which with
Germany's participation was deliberately limited. Because the possibility of
publication was allowed, we reject the Committee’s finding that the undertaking was
not fulfilled.
41014

Art. 10 (2) (d) - Publication by local authorities of official documents
d) the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in the
relevant regional or minority languages;

41015 Regardless of the fact that the Committee’s finding in No. 359 of its third
evaluation report that this undertaking was not fulfilled must be rejected for the
reasons given in Nos. 41012 and 41013 above, Lower Saxony responds as follows to
the Committee's question as to whether the relevant documents are published:
41016 The Saterland municipality publishes official documents in German, which is
the official language.

Art. 10 (2) (e) - Use by regional authorities of the minority language in debates in
their assemblies
e) the use by regional authorities of regional or minority languages in debates
in their assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s)
of the State;

165

41017 In Nos. 361 and 362 of its third evaluation report, the Committee states its
view that, in place of the municipal district (Bezirk) level dissolved in the recent
reform of public administration, this undertaking applies also to the Kreis level; in the
absence of any positive evidence that Sater Frisian is used in debates in the
assemblies of the Kreis (Kreistag), the Committee finds that this undertaking is not
fulfilled. We disagree with this opinion, because the provision specifies only that the
“Parties undertake to allow” the use of the minority language, which was never in
question.
41018 Nonetheless, Lower Saxony responds as follows to the Committee’s
question as to whether Sater Frisian is used in the assemblies of the Kreistag:
Out of a total of 48 members of the Kreistag for the county of Cloppenburg, who
represent the 13 towns and municipalities belonging to the county, four members are
from the Saterland municipality. Of these four, only one speaks Sater Frisian. Out of
consideration for the members of the Kreistag and committees who do not speak
Sater Frisian, only German is spoken at their meetings. Any contributions to
discussions made in Sater Frisian are not refused but translated for the remaining
members of the Kreistag and committees.

Article 10 (2) (f) - Use by local authorities of the minority language in debates in their
assemblies
f) the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in
their assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of
the State;
41019 This undertaking was deliberately worded so that it may be fulfilled by simply
allowing the use of the minority language. As already reported in No. 327 of the Third
State Report, Sater Frisian is not used in the council meetings of the Saterland
municipality because neither the mayor, his deputy nor the majority of council
members have a command of Sater Frisian. Thus the Committee’s remarks in Nos.
364 and 365 of its third evaluation report and its finding that the undertaking is only
formally fulfilled seem odd, and its question as to whether Sater Frisian is now being
used in meetings of the municipal council can only be understood as asking whether
the composition of the council has now changed to the extent that it has freely
decided to make the extra effort of holding its meetings in Sater Frisian with German
translation.

166
41020 Lower Saxony responds as follows:
As before, the majority of the democratically elected members of the council of the
Saterland municipality does not speak Sater Frisian. By agreement of all council
members, council and committee meetings are held in German as the language
which all council members speak. Any contributions to discussions made in Sater
Frisian are not refused but translated for the remaining members of the municipal
council and committees.

Article 10 (2) (g) - Place-names in Frisian
g) the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official
language(s), of traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or minority
languages.
41021 In No. 368 of its third evaluation report, the Committee considers this
undertaking fulfilled, after noting that “all four districts of the Saterland municipality
have posted bilingual signs [and] street name signs in Sater Frisian have also been
put up, especially in the new building areas”.

Article 10 (4)
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted
by them, the Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:

Article 10 (4) (a) - Translation or interpretation
a)

translation or interpretation as may be required;

41022 With regard to this undertaking, on which the Committee of Experts did not
comment in its third evaluation report because no major issues were raised, we refer
(as already in No. 3530 of the Third State Report) to the possibilities for translation
and the resulting effort described in No. 661 of the Second State Report.

Article 10 (4) (c) - Appointment of public service employees having a knowledge of
the Frisian language

167
c) compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees
having a knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory
in which that language is used.
41023 We disagree with the Committee’s conclusion in Nos. 370 and 371 of its
third evaluation report that this undertaking is not fulfilled in the absence of personnel
incentives: As already stated in No. 3531 of the Third State Report, we disagree with
this conclusion because there is no evidence to suggest that any requests for
appointment within the meaning of this undertaking were not granted (rather, such
wishes have not even been made known) and because the above undertaking only
calls for compliance with requests to this effect, but not for any other action, e.g.
awakening any such wishes.
41024 Nonetheless, Lower Saxony responds as follows to the Committee’s
question as to whether the authorities have complied as far as possible with requests
from public service employees who are Sater Frisian speakers to be assigned in
Saterland:
Six employees at the town hall of the Saterland municipality speak Sater Frisian.
They mainly work in areas with a high level of public interaction. A sign in Sater
Frisian on their office doors indicates that they speak Sater Frisian (“Hier wäd uk
seeltersk baalt”). This demonstrates that the Saterland municipality assigns staff in
line with their linguistic skills and complies as far as possible with their wish to use
these language skills at work.

Article 10 (5)
The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or
minority languages, at the request of those concerned.
41025 The Committee of Experts did not comment on this undertaking because it
did not pose any problems.
In this respect, see also the comments in No. 664, in conjunction with Nos.
220 to 225 of the Second State Report, as referred to in No. 3533 of the Third State
Report.

Article 11
Media

168
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the
territories in which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each
language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are
competent, have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the
independence and autonomy of the media:
Art. 11 (1) (b) (ii) - Broadcasting of radio programmes
ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
41101 Although in its third evaluation report the Committee of Experts has changed
its position that this undertaking applies only to private radio broadcasters, with
regard to Sater Frisian it did note in No. 374 of its third evaluation that “promoting
regional or minority language broadcasting through financial incentives, as is
currently carried out, for example, for cultural programmes, would not infringe ...
German law. The Committee of Experts encourages the German authorities to do so
in the case of Sater Frisian.”
41102 In No. 375 of its third evaluation report, the Committee stated that it was not
aware of any broadcasting on public radio channels in Sater Frisian.
41103 In No. 373 of its third evaluation report, however, the Committee refers to
information provided in the third periodical report about the weekly programme
“Saterland aktuell” which is broadcast in Sater Frisian on the non-commercial radio
station Ems-Vechte-Welle and developed in close cooperation with the Sater Frisian
organization Seelter Bund. Representatives of the Sater Frisian speakers informed
the Committee of Experts that the programme was set up with financial support from
Lower Saxony although the programme itself is carried out on a voluntary basis.
Representatives of the Sater Frisian-speakers said they would welcome an increase
in the broadcasting time and a shift of the programme to another time slot.
41104 In No. 376 of its third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts stated that
it “nevertheless considers the undertaking fulfilled”.
41105 With regard to the current status of support for broadcasting of Sater Frisian
radio programmes, Lower Saxony adds the following information to the general
discussion in No. 01104 above:

169
It is not possible for the government to exert influence on the broadcasting of Sater
Frisian radio programmes, because broadcasters have autonomy in their
programming decisions. However, Seelter Bund is able to take the initiative and
submit proposals to the Ems-Vechte-Welle radio station for producing and
broadcasting Sater Frisian programmes. Under the guidelines of Lower Saxony’s
media authority, financial support is possible in the form of institutional or project
funding to promote non-commercial radio.
As a measure to support regional and minority languages in private radio
broadcasting, Lower Saxony is examining the possibility of adding a provision to its
Media Act to strengthen regional and minority languages.
Further, in a personal letter to radio broadcasters and print media companies of 18
September 2009, the minister-president of Lower Saxony praised their efforts to
preserve the minority languages and encouraged them to continue and increase their
activities in this area, because regional and linguistic identity is an important part of
cultural and social diversity.

Article 11 (1) (c) (ii) - Broadcasting of television programmes
ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
41106 In No. 3537 of the Third State Report, we reported with regard to this
undertaking that no amendment of media law to ensure the regular broadcasting of
Sater Frisian television programmes should be expected, as this would violate
constitutional law; that the above undertaking, too, is already fulfilled by
"encouraging" broadcasting of such programmes; that the undertaking does not
require ensuring the success of such encouragement; and that "encouragement" can
be advisable only where it is not manifestly pointless.
41107 In Nos. 379 and 380 of its third evaluation report, the Committee considers
that the undertaking remains not fulfilled because it was “not aware of any television
programmes in Sater Frisian broadcast on public or private channels”.
41108 With regard to the Committee’s question whether positive measures aimed
at encouraging and/ or facilitating the broadcasting of television programmes in Sater
Frisian on a regular basis had been taken, as the Committee urged, Lower Saxony
refers to the general description of the difficulties in No. 01104 above and adds the
following:

170
41109 On 29 August 2008 at 19.30, NDR aired a feature about Saterland in the
programme “Radeln mit Lars und Ludger” on its Lower Saxony channel. The feature
included an interview with the incumbent mayor which provided information about the
Sater Frisian language. On a set designed to look like a classroom, questions about
Sater Frisian words were raised and explained. See also No. 41105 about the letter
by the minister-president of Lower Saxony.
On 16 August 2009, ARD aired a three-part programme about Saterland in its
morning show. The programme reported on Sater Frisian culture and schools where
Sater Frisian is the language of instruction. In an interview with Ems-Vechte-Welle
radio, the chair of Seelter Buund, who also produces and hosts Sater Frisian
programmes for that radio station, discussed the special geographical situation of
Saterland and the unique aspects of the Sater Frisian language.

Art. 11 (1) (d) - Audio and audiovisual works
d) to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and
audiovisual works in the regional or minority languages;
41110 In No. 3540 of the Third State Report, we reported with regard to this
undertaking that Lower Saxony is willing to give preferential treatment in practice to
funding applications for the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in regional or minority languages without needing special regulations to do so,
but that so far no such applications for works in Sater Frisian had been submitted;
and that under budget rules, it is not appropriate to use further proactive measures to
create artificial demand where none otherwise exists.
41111 In Nos. 382 – 384 of its third evaluation report, the Committee replied that
“the encouragement of audio and audiovisual works is also important with regard to
the implementation of the above undertakings concerning radio and television
broadcasting” and that the undertaking remains not fulfilled.
41112 With regard to the Committee’s question as to whether the authorities had
taken steps to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and
audiovisual works in Sater Frisian, Lower Saxony responds as follows:
41113 Despite targeting potential applicants, no relevant applications were
submitted. We therefore regard the information given in No. 3540 of the Third State
Report as sufficient encouragement.

171

Art. 11 (1) (e) (ii) - Newspaper articles
ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the publication of newspaper articles in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
41114 In No. 386 of its third evaluation report, the Committee states: “From the
statement given in the third periodical report (paragraphs 3541 – 3543), the
Committee of Experts understands that no measures have been taken by the
authorities to encourage and/ or facilitate the publication of newspaper articles in
Sater Frisian. According to additional information received from the authorities, of the
three regional newspapers mentioned in the periodical report, the General-Anzeiger
Rhauderfehn publishes weekly articles in Sater Frisian.”
41115 In No. 387 of its third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considers
that the undertaking is fulfilled, but “nevertheless encourages the authorities to take
steps to facilitate the publication of newspaper articles in Sater Frisian”.
41116 To respond to the Committee’s question whether the authorities had taken
the appropriate steps, Lower Saxony refers to the discussion of this issue in No.
01105 above.
41117

Article 11 (1) (f) (ii) - Financial assistance for audiovisual productions
ii) to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual
productions in the regional or minority languages;
41118 With regard to Nos. 389 and 390 of the third evaluation report, in which the
Committee “understands that no measures have been taken by the authorities
towards a practical implementation of this undertaking” and thus finds that the
undertaking has not been fulfilled; and with regard to the Committee’s question about
how “existing measures of financial assistance were designed in such a way that
programmes in Sater Frisian could qualify for them in practice”, Lower Saxony refers
to Nos. 41112 and 41113 above and adds the following:
41119 No financial assistance for audiovisual productions has been granted
because no applications for such assistance were submitted.

172

Article 11 (2) - Freedom of direct reception of broadcasts, and freedom of expression
Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and
television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or
similar form to a regional or minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission
of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language.
They further undertake to ensure that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of
expression and free circulation of information in the written press in a language used
in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of the
above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be
subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by
law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security,
territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others,
for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the
authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
41120 The Committee of Experts did not comment on this undertaking because it
did not raise any issues. See also Nos. 226 and 239 of the Second State Report.

Article 12
Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries,
cultural centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as
literary work and film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals
and the culture industries, including inter alia the use of new technologies – the
Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used and to the
extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this
field:
Article 12 (1) (a) - Types of expression and access to works
a) to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority
languages and foster the different means of access to works produced in these
languages;

173
41201 The Committee of Experts did not comment on this undertaking because it
did not raise any issues; see No. 3548 of the Third State Report for a description of
support for the promotion of Sater Frisian literature (measures to promote production,
distribution, reception) in Lower Saxony and advising for the Saterland municipality.
Lower Saxony reports the following new developments:
41202 Lower Saxony promotes Sater Frisian cultural projects by application
through the Lower Saxony Ministry for Research and Culture, through the regional
associations (Landschaften and Landschaftsverbände) and through the adult
education system. The Sater Frisian organization Seelter Buund works with the
Ministry for Research and Culture in this area.

Article 12 (1) (b) - Access to works in the minority language
b) to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in
regional or minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, postsynchronization and subtitling activities;
41203 The Committee of Experts did not comment on this undertaking because it
did not raise any issues; as indicated in No. 3550 of the Third State Report, see Nos.
684 and 685 of the Second State Report.

Article 12 (1) (c) - Access to works produced in other languages
c) to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other
languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronization and
subtitling activities;
41204 The Committee did not comment on this undertaking in its third evaluation
report because it did not raise any issues; as indicated in No. 3551 of the Third State
Report, see Nos. 684 and 685 of the Second State Report.

Art. 12 (1) (d) - Taking account of the regional or minority language in cultural
activities
(d) to ensure that the bodies responsible for organizing or supporting cultural
activities of various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the
knowledge and use of regional or minority languages and cultures in the
undertakings which they initiate or for which they provide backing;

174

41205 The Committee considers that this undertaking is fulfilled. In No. 392 of its
third evaluation report the Committee asks what effect transferring the task of
promoting regional culture to the Landschaftsverbände, and in the case of Sater
Frisian to the Oldenburger Landschaft e.V. has had in practical terms on the
promotion of the Sater Frisian language. Lower Saxony responds that regional
promotion of culture in Lower Saxony has seen a very positive development since
2005, when the transfer took place.

Art. 12 (1) (e) - Employment of staff proficient in the language(s) concerned
e) to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organizing or
supporting cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of
the regional or minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest
of the population;
41206 The Committee of Experts did not comment on this undertaking because it
did not raise any issues; see No. 3553 of the Third State Report on activities
promoting language learning, especially those carried out by the Saterland Catholic
Educational Association (Katholisches Bildungswerk Saterland) and on Sater Frisianspeaking staff. See also Nos. 684 and 685 of the Second State Report.

Article 12 (1) (f) - Participation of representatives of the group speaking the given
language in cultural activities
f) to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given
regional or minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;
41207 The Committee did not comment on this undertaking because it did not raise
any issues. As indicated in No. 3554 of the Third State Report, see No. 691 of the
Second State Report on the engagement of Sater Frisian speakers and their
opportunity to participate in the Day of the People of Lower Saxony.

Art. 12 (1) (g) - Creation of archive bodies
g) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for
collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the
regional or minority languages;

175
41208 The Committee considers that this undertaking is fulfilled. In No. 392 of its
third evaluation report the Committee asks what effect transferring the task of
promoting regional culture to the Landschaftsverbände, and in the case of Sater
Frisian to the Oldenburger Landschaft e.V. has had in practical terms on the
promotion of the Sater Frisian language. For Lower Saxony’s response, see No.
41205 above.

Article 12 (2)
In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages
are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or
minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural
activities and facilities in accordance with the preceding paragraph.
41209 The Committee did not comment on this undertaking because it did not raise
any issues. As indicated in No. 3557 of the Third State Report, see No. 694 of the
Second State Report. We also note that cultural activities and facilities as referred to
in this undertaking which are within the framework of general laws are allowed in any
case.

Article 12 (3)
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy
abroad, for regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.
41210 In No. 396 in conjunction with Nos. 103 – 106 of its third evaluation report,
the Committee considers that this undertaking is not fulfilled with regard to Sater
Frisian: In the Committee’s view, the undertaking could be fulfilled by the Goethe
Institutes, however only through a structured approach to integrating the North
Frisian language in Germany’s cultural policy abroad.
41211 With regard to the Committee’s question as to whether the German authorities
make sufficient provision, in pursuing their (cultural) policy abroad, for the Sater
Frisian language and the culture it reflects, see No. 01202 ff. above.
41212 Lower Saxony also reports as follows:
Lower Saxony is considering organizing an event at its representation in Brussels
devoted to Low German and Sater Frisian. The Land has not yet reached a decision.

176

Article 13
Economic and social life
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake within the whole
country:
a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without
justifiable reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to
economic or social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical
documents such as instructions for the use of products or installations;
b) to prohibit the insertion - in internal regulations of companies and private
documents - of any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or minority
languages, at least between users of the same language;
c) to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority
languages in connection with economic or social activities;
41301 The fact that the Committee did not comment on the undertakings under (a)
and (c) because they did not raise any issues can be attributed to the fact that
German law already meets these requirements, as indicated in No. 3561 of the Third
State Report and the reference there to No. 697 of the Second State Report.

Article 13 (1) (d) - Facilitating the use of the regional or minority language
d) to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by means
other than those specified in the above sub-paragraphs.
41302 In view of No. 3562 of the Third State Report describing support for converting
the Scharrel railway station into a cultural centre in Saterland, the Committee did not
comment on this undertaking because it did not raise any issues.

177
D.2.5

The Romani language in the federal territory and the various Länder

50001 In No. 724 of its third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts referred to
its assessment of the application of Part III of the Charter to the Romani language of
the German Sinti and Roma in Hesse (Nos. 744 and 755 of its second evaluation
report), stating that there was a significant gap between the undertakings chosen and
the level of legal and practical implementation, also due to the fact that the Romani
language has so far not been codified, in accordance with the wishes of a number of
speakers.
In No. 725 of its third evaluation report, the Committee observes that the difficulties
encountered above still persist during the present monitoring cycle.
50002 In response, one can only refer to No. 4001 of the Third State Report
explaining that while this gap is an especially striking example in this context, in
general such gaps can always emerge because international conventions to protect
specific categories of persons can be interpreted and applied only in consultation
with the persons concerned; the Contracting State cannot be held responsible for any
implementation deficits that may result.
Article 8
Education
50800 We refer to No. 4002 of the Third State Report. With regard to the
fundamental differences between the wishes of groups of German Sinti and Roma on
the type and extent of protection for themselves and their language(s), see the
general remarks on the Romani language in Nos. 00112 – 00115 above and Nos.
704 – 706 of the Second State Report indicating that many speakers oppose
outsiders teaching and learning Romani within the public education system. While
the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma is in favour of extra instruction in
Romani at school and outside of school provided by members of the minority for
members of the minority, the Sinti Alliance of Germany is not.
Article 8 (1)
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such
languages are used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and
without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State
Article 8 (1) (a) - Pre-school education
i) to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or

178
ii) to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or
50801

Both obligations have been accepted by the Land of Berlin.

50802 As already indicated in No. 4004 of the Third State Report, the
implementation of these undertakings is not being pursued, in agreement with the
Berlin-Brandenburg Land Association of German Sinti and Roma.

Article 8 (1) (a) (iii) - Pre-school education
iii) to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those
pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient; or
50803 With regard to all undertakings in the field of education accepted by Hesse,
in No. 727 of its third evaluation report the Committee refers to No. 4006 of the Third
State Report, in which “the Hesse authorities state that the Land provides both
institution based and project based support to the Hessian Land Association of
German Sinti and Roma, which in turn manages the major part of these funds
independently, according to the priorities defined by the Land Association itself. Such
priorities lie currently in the field of social inclusion of Sinti and Roma on the one
hand, and awareness raising with regard to the history and culture of Sinti and Roma
among the majority population on the other.”
50804

In No. 728 of its third evaluation report, the Committee then noted

-

that no Romani education is apparently taking place in Hesse,
that the Hessian authorities are willing to provide the means and the general
framework for Romani education, if a demand for such was ascertained,
that the Education Bureau for National Minorities in Marburg which, according to
the authorities is supposed to carry out works in relation to Romani, appears to be
focusing exclusively on raising awareness of the history and culture of Sinti and
Roma in education and erasing prejudices.
Hesse comments as follows:
The Education Bureau for National Minorities: Sinti and Roma (Pädagogische Büro
nationale Minderheiten: Sinti und Roma) has been modified and further developed
based on experience gained in the area of advanced teacher training since its
founding in 1989. A cooperation agreement between Hesse (represented by the

179
Office for Teacher Training) and the Department of History and Cultural Studies at
the University of Marburg was concluded in summer 2005. As part of the
reorientation of teacher candidate training, in addition to its previous tasks the
Education Bureau offers in particular education seminars and specialized seminars
on the history and culture of the Sinti and Roma for teacher candidates. These
seminars are also open to students in other degree courses to familiarize additional
target groups with these topics. These seminars are elements of a module and are
conducted in cooperation with other departments. In this way, the seminars reach a
broad student audience each semester, presenting these topics as potential subjects
of instruction and practising them in applied exercises. So a growing implementation
of this topic can be seen, demonstrated by an increasing number of student projects,
exam questions and publications. Advanced training for teachers also continues to
be offered, developing potential synergies between training for teacher candidates
and further training for practising teachers. It should also be noted that the Education
Bureau for National Minorities: Sinti and Roma never carried out works in relation to
Romani.
50805 In No. 729 of its third evaluation report, the Committee then states that “in
the view of the Committee, priority setting must not exclude the development of
Romani language education if financial and human resources were expanded,
especially given the demand for such education. The Committee of Experts has been
informed that teaching in or of Romani takes place in other Länder” (see No. 00758).
50806 With regard to the Committee of Ministers’ Recommendation no. 2 of the
second monitoring cycle (Recommendation no. 3 in the third monitoring cycle) (“take
action to improve provision and allocate adequate resources for regional or minority
language teaching and in particular: ... adopt a structured policy with respect to
Romani in the field of education, in co-operation with the speakers”), in No. 794 of its
third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts stated, “[w]ith regard to Romani,
the authorities have not adopted a structured policy in the field of education. No
teaching in or of Romani currently takes place on any school level in the Land
Hesse.”
50807 With regard to Recommendation no. 2 above and the Committee of Expert’s
question as to whether the necessary action had been taken and adequate resources
allocated in order to organize teaching in or of Romani at all school levels in
cooperation with the speakers, Hesse responds as follows:
50808 Hesse clearly promotes the appreciation of special minority languages by
having made dealing with individual differences and socio-cultural difference a

180
priority of its education and care plan for children up to ten years of age. This plan
provides an orientation framework for the various sites where education takes place
(day-care centre, school, family). At Hessian day-care centres, children of different
cultural backgrounds are given appropriate attention and consideration within
educational processes. This education and care plan gives high priority to respecting
the child’s first language.
Improving the school-based integration and educational participation of the children
belonging to the national minority of German Sinti and Roma is another important
objective of Hesse, which is making enormous and exemplary efforts to ensure
lasting improvement in equal opportunity of children. It intends to further reduce the
number of children who do not finish school. As part of this effort, remedial German
language classes (pre-school classes and remedial and intensive classes for school
pupils so that they can participate successfully in school) for all children with
insufficient German skills are a special priority. These courses are generally open to
all pupils, i.e. also to children belonging to the national Sinti and Roma minority.
50809 In the 2009/2010 winter semester, the adult education centre in the city of
Marburg is offering a Romani class for adults which may also be open to children if
necessary. The class is not open to non-Romani speakers. The class is offered at the
initiative of the local adult education centre itself, which receives funding from the city
of Marburg. This initiative is the result of a social dialogue in Marburg to improve
relations among different segments of the population which has been pursued for
years.
50810 - 50813

Article 8 (1) (a) (iv) - Pre-school education
iv) if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school
education, to favour and/or encourage the application of the measures referred to
under i to iii above;
50814 As indicated in No. 4007 of the Third State Report, with regard to
implementation of the above undertaking by Baden-Wurttemberg, see Nos.
712 to 714 of the Second State Report that all nursery schools are open to Sinti and
Roma children and that the providing bodies of these nursery schools are free to
employ staff having a command of the Romani language if necessary, although this
option has not been used so far.

181

50815 In view of No. 794 of the third evaluation report in which the Committee of
Experts states that the authorities had not adopted a structured policy in the field of
education as recommended in Recommendation no. 2 (Recommendation no. 3 in the
third monitoring cycle) of the Committee of Ministers, Baden-Württemberg responds
as follows:
In the Land’s view, promotion of children/youth from Sinti and Roma families leaves
no questions open. In Baden-Württemberg, all children and young people have the
same access to the different types of education offered by the Land. These
educational offerings support and promote all children and young people equally at
the pre-school and school level according to their needs. It is decisive for successful
school careers that parents/guardians of the aforementioned target groups
understand the importance and value of regular school attendance. The subjectrelated and general skills conveyed through regular attendance lay the essential
foundation for successful completion of school. It is helpful and beneficial for parents
to encourage their children’s active participation in school. Parents' organizations can
help to increase awareness of the importance of parental support.
Baden-Württemberg supports the Baden-Württemberg Land Association of German
Sinti and Roma by financing a half-time position at the education counselling centre
in Mannheim.
Other Länder comment on the above undertaking as follows:
1. Hesse
50816

See the comments in No. 50807 above.

2. Rhineland-Palatinate
50817 In view of No. 794 of the third evaluation report in which the Committee of
Experts
states that the authorities had not adopted a structured policy in the field of education
as recommended in Recommendation no. 2 of the Committee of Ministers,
Rhineland-Palatinate reports as follows:
As described at length in No. 00756 above, the framework agreement concluded with
the Rhineland-Palatinate Land Association of German Sinti and Roma provides that
the measures for promoting the minority language Romani in the field of education
are to be developed by the association itself and carried out on its own responsibility.
This arrangement, explicitly desired and approved by the association and its

182
members is intended to ensure that, for example, also the Charter’s provisions are
not interpreted in a way contrary to the minority’s interests.
As the association has recently indicated, members of the minority do not currently
want such offerings to be provided in public institutions such as nursery schools,
schools or higher education facilities, etc., for fear that they would be identified
against their will as members of the minority.

3. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
50818 As indicated in No. 4011 of the Third State Report, Hamburg has not been
made aware of any relevant wishes by the members of this language group.
50819
Article 8 (1) (b) - Primary education
i)

to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
ii) to make available a substantial part of primary education in the relevant regional
or minority languages; or
iii) to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those
pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient;
1. Berlin
50820 As already stated in No. 4013 of the Third State Report, implementation of
the undertakings under (i) through (iv) accepted by Berlin is not being pursued, in
consultation with the Berlin/Brandenburg Land Association of German Sinti and
Roma.
50821
2. Hesse
50822 As regards the undertaking under (iv) accepted by Hesse, see No. 50807
above.

183

3. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
50823 With regard to the undertaking under (iv) accepted by Hamburg, No. 4016 of
the Third State Report stated that German Sinti in Hamburg do not receive instruction
in Romani, but that East European Roma (who, however, are not a national minority
protected in Germany under the Council of Europe Framework Convention for the
Protection of National Minorities and whose language is therefore not covered by the
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages) can take part, on a voluntary
basis, in state-provided Romani language activities.
50824 Further, No. 4017 of the Third State Report stated that a total of five Roma
and one Sinto are working at Hamburg schools for the special promotion of Sinti and
Roma, and that the schools were selected on the basis of urgency and willingness to
cooperate. The main tasks of Roma and Sinti teachers and social workers at schools
are to participate in classroom instruction and to advise and support their fellow
teachers as well as pupils and parents. In addition they act as contact persons for
other schools and for child and youth institutions. In this way, the activity of Roma
and Sinti teachers and school-based social workers reaches out to the respective city
district: District institutions and, above all, the resident Roma and Sinti families are
thus provided with an on-site point of contact. The German language is used in these
activities. (In this context, the Sinti Alliance of Germany wants to make it quite clear
that such a "Sinti teacher" is not a member of the teaching profession in the
traditional sense, but an assistant without professional teacher training.)
However, as indicated in the last State Report, in Hamburg no remedial German
classes are offered specifically for Sinti and Roma. Like all other pupils, Sinti and
Roma children and adolescents can take part in activities offered under the
provisions of the Language Promotion Concept which entered into force on 1 August
2006.
50825 In No. 4018 of the Third State Report, Hamburg also explained that the
instruction mentioned under No. 4016 of that report refers to teaching in the Romani
language of the East European Roma, and that the activities mentioned under
No. 4017 of that report are conducted in the German language and are offered to all
children needing extra tuition.
50826 In No. 58 of its third evaluation report, the Committee commended the
Hamburg authorities for the activities described in Nos. 4016 and 4017 of the Third
State Report, although the Romani language taught in Hamburg in optional courses if

184
at least five pupils demand it is the Romani of the East European Roma and is thus
not covered by the Charter or the Committee’s evaluation mandate. This is because
the German Sinti explicitly reject having their language taught in school and German
Roma have not requested such instruction.
A total of eight Roma and Sinti now work in Hamburg schools, successfully
supporting and promoting school attendance by Roma and Sinti children. Seven are
members of the Roma group and one is a member of the Sinti group. Of the eight, six
work as Roma and Sinti teachers and school-based social workers; one Rom is
active in the region’s advising and support centres (REBUS) and is available to help
colleagues with individual cases. Together they conduct family visits; the main
problem is absenteeism (see assistance in individual cases, below). The Sinto works
at schools and in the regions of Lurup and Osdorf.
Roma and Sinti teachers and social workers primarily participate in classes and
provide native language teaching, advising and support for teachers, students and
parents, as well as cooperating with REBUS. They also act as contact persons for
other schools and for child and youth institutions. In this way, the activity of Roma
and Sinti teachers and school-based social workers reaches out to the respective city
district: District institutions and, above all, the resident Roma and Sinti families are
thus provided with an on-site point of contact.
Some of the Roma school-based social workers incorporate Romani into subjectrelated instruction and in their counselling at schools. Native-language offerings at
school have significantly increased the children’s identification with and trust in
school and – according to the schools – improved their performance. This is
especially apparent from the fact that the children now usually manage the transition
to secondary school, unlike the past, when they transferred to remedial schools like
other family members before them.
There are no native-language offerings for Sinti children, as the German Sinti oppose
this.
50827 The following offerings in Hamburg for speakers of the Romani of the
German Sinti and Roma are listed in Nos. 12134 – 12137, 14078 and 14079 of the
Third State Report in accordance with Art. 25 (2) of the Framework Convention for
the Protection of National Minorities:
Various schools in Hamburg with a large proportion of Roma children employ Roma
as teachers and social workers. Their work focuses on the culture of Sinti and Roma

185
and on art. The Land Institute for Teacher Training and School Development
(Landesinstitut für Lehrerbildung und Schulentwicklung, LI) offers on-the-job training
to those Roma working at Hamburg schools. At eight Hamburg schools (primary,
secondary modern and secondary technical schools and one remedial school) six
Roma teachers and social workers provide assistance to pupils. In addition, Sinti
social workers provide homework assistance to Sinti students at two Hamburg
schools (Wilhelmsburg and Lokstedt districts). Measures not provided in German are
provided in the Romani of the German Roma but not in the Romani spoken by
German Sinti since the members of this part of the national minority oppose this.
Since 1993, the Land Institute for Teacher Training and School Development in
Hamburg has promoted and supported school education of Roma and Sinti children,
including:
- conceptual development of school programmes also for German Roma and Sinti
children;
- further training of teachers and of Roma employed in schools;
- the development of instruction materials in connection with the training of the
Roma teachers and social workers;
- the production of an information film on school-related issues for Roma and Sinti
parents, available in the three Romani dialects and provided to Roma and Sinti
parents on request;
- counselling for parents, pupils, schools and the competent authority.
The Hamburg Land Institute for Teacher Training and School Development also
takes care of the counselling of specialized teachers who receive further training or
additional qualification for teaching in the minority language Romani spoken by the
Roma. The Institute keeps a list of the relevant offerings of Hamburg schools;
information on such activities is given at irregular intervals in the periodical
LI Magazin. In consultation with the responsible authority, the Institute decides on
whether programmes should be expanded or revised.
For further information on the Hamburg curriculum for Roma without a school-leaving
certificate to qualify for university admission to become assistants in children and
youth organizations and schools, in particular for children from the minority, see No.
12189 and No. 04035. This aspect is relevant regarding both teacher training and
equal opportunities for Roma children.

Art. 8 (1) (c) - Secondary education

186
i)

to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
ii) to make available a substantial part of secondary education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or
iii) to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional
or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those
pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered
sufficient;
1. Hesse
50828

See the comments in No. 50807 above.

2. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
50829

See Nos. 50823 to 50827 above.

Art. 8 (1) (d) - Technical and vocational education
i)

to make available technical and vocational education in the relevant regional or
minority languages; or
ii) to make available a substantial part of technical and vocational education in the
relevant regional or minority languages; or
iii) to provide, within technical and vocational education, for the teaching of the
relevant regional or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those
pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered
sufficient;
50830

With regard to Hesse, see No. 50811 above.

Art. 8 (1) (e) – University and other higher education
i)

to make available university and other higher education in regional or minority
languages; or
ii) to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher
education subjects

187

50831 As already stated in No. 4024 of the Third State Report, implementation of
the undertakings under (i) and (ii) accepted by Berlin is not being pursued, in
agreement with the Berlin/Brandenburg Land Association of German Sinti and Roma.

Article 8 (1) (e) (iii)
iii) if, by reason of the role of the State in relation to higher education institutions,
sub-paragraphs i and ii cannot be applied, to encourage and/or allow the
provision of university or other forms of higher education in regional or minority
languages or of facilities for the study of these languages as university or higher
education subjects;
50832 For some of the Länder which accepted this undertaking (BadenWürttemberg, Berlin, Hesse, North Rhine-Westphalia, Rhineland-Palatinate), as
indicated in Nos. 4025 – 4030 of the Third State Report, this undertaking in the
alternative “to allow” is fulfilled by Art. 5 (3) of the Basic Law guaranteeing the
freedom of arts and sciences, research and teaching and the autonomy of higher
education based on this article. No further measures are necessary.
50833

Rhineland-Palatinate refers to Nos. 00756 and 50817.

50834
50835

Article 8 (1) (f) (iii) - Adult education
iii) if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult education,
to favour and/or encourage the offering of such languages as subjects of adult
and continuing education;
50836 After the Committee of Experts concluded in Nos. 749 – 750 of its second
evaluation report that this undertaking, accepted for the entire Federal Republic of
Germany, was not fulfilled, the German authorities insist, as argued in No. 4031 ff. of
the Third State Report, that funding from the Federation and from BadenWürttemberg (which is not obligated in this regard) for the Documentation and
Cultural Centre of German Sinti and Roma fulfils the undertaking under (iii) for the
entire country.

188

50837 With regard to the Committee’s conclusion in No. 732 ff. of its third
evaluation report that this undertaking remains not fulfilled in Hesse, and to the
Committee’s question whether the authorities had clarified whether there was a
demand for Romani education in the field of adult education, had taken necessary
measures and allocated appropriate funds with a view to favouring and/ or
encouraging the offering of Romani as a subject of adult and continuing education,
see No. 50813.
Art. 8 (1) (g) - Teaching of history and culture
g) to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which
is reflected by the regional or minority language;
50838 In view of the national activities to promote the teaching of the history and
culture reflected by the Romani of the German Sinti and Roma, including funding
from the Federation and from Baden-Württemberg for the Documentation and
Cultural Centre of the German Sinti and Roma, funding for the Land associations of
German Sinti and Roma, for example from Rhineland-Palatinate and Hesse, which
support such teaching, and the activities of educational institutions in Hesse
described in No. 4036 of the Third State Report, the Committee of Experts once
again did not comment on this undertaking in the absence of issues raised.
50839 The Länder report:
The Bavarian Ministry of Education and Culture/Land Office for Civic Education
provides annual institutional funding to the Bavarian Land Association of Sinti and
Roma in the amount of €180,000.
In Hesse, this issue is continuously implemented at schools in the subjects of history,
politics, economics and ethics through the advising activity of the Education
Bureau/Cooperation Model for teachers. In this regard, too, the further development
of the Education Bureau into a model for cooperation has proven effective and goaloriented. It is apparent that special projects devoted to this issue have increased the
number of presentations on the history and culture of the Sinti and Roma in the
Abitur school-leaving examinations. In 2010, for the first time pupils may complete a
special project on the music of the Sinti and Roma for credit in the Abitur.
To raise awareness among additional segments of the population, the Education
Bureau/Cooperation Model offers lectures at various institutions (e.g. also in private
industry) and organizes regular memorial events with pupils of Marburg schools to

189
remember the deportation of Sinti and Roma in 1943. For the 2010 memorial event, a
music project carried out by a Marburg school together with Sinti musicians and
funded by the city of Marburg is planned, in which the Sinti musicians teach the
pupils about the unique characteristics of their music and pupils and musicians
together put on a public concert.
Hesse is also planning a central further training class for school directors, teachers
and school administrators on the history and culture of the Sinti and Roma in Hesse.
The aim of this training is to gain multipliers who can help increase awareness of this
issue in the schools even more.
During the teacher training course (first training phase), Rhineland-Palatinate’s rules
for the first state examination for teachers in the subject of pedagogy include the
following: heterogeneity, individual, social and cultural diversity as conditions of
school and teaching, as well as social and intercultural differences as prerequisites
for education and learning. During preparatory service (second training phase),
seminars in history, social studies, German and religion, memorial work, interaction
with minorities and cultural diversity offer an opportunity to address issues of the
history and culture of the Sinti and Roma.
During further training for teachers (third training phase), a series of classes takes up
issues addressed in the first two phases and studies them in further detail. The
schools’ pedagogical service facilities also provide support in planning and
conducting in-house further training (e.g. study days) on these issues.
In the schools the history and culture of German Sinti and Roma, in particular their
persecution under the Nazis, are part of the history and social studies curricula.
The State Pedagogical Centre and the Land Agency for Civic Education, partly in
close cooperation with the Rhineland-Palatinate Land Association of German Sinti
and Roma, have produced informational materials on the Sinti and Roma as a
German minority. This material is available to the schools in this Land. To help use
this material in class, lesson plans have been developed, focusing especially on the
history, culture, traditions and civil rights movement of the German Sinti and Roma.
The Rhineland-Palatinate Land Association of German Sinti and Roma is the
schools' point of contact for all issues concerning the Sinti and Roma minority; on
request, it organizes seminars and conferences for education multipliers and
teachers on the Nazi persecution of the Sinti and Roma as well as on the history and

190
culture of the minority. The history curriculum for lower and upper secondary schools
and the social studies curriculum for comprehensive schools includes units for the
ninth and tenth grades covering local history during the Nazi period using group
projects with concrete materials and portraying the fates of individual Sinti and Roma
in the local area.
In 2008, the Rhineland-Palatinate Land Association of German Sinti and Roma
initiated close cooperation with the Land institution for professional teacher training
with regard to primary and lower secondary schools in Kaiserslautern. Department
heads were informed in detail about the history and culture of the minority. In the
area of values education, a class for teacher candidates on minorities using the
example of the history of Sinti and Roma was conducted in cooperation with the chair
of the Rhineland-Palatinate Land Association of German Sinti and Roma. This
cooperation is being expanded and continued at Land level.
The North Rhine-Westphalia Land Association of German Sinti and Roma is
engaged in a constructive dialogue with the Ministry of Schools and Further
Education concerning promotion of Romani. The Land Association is currently
developing a handbook on school and extra-curricular promotion of pupils from Sinti
and Roma families, including additional tuition in Romani. This handbook will be
given to the Ministry of Schools and Further Education to determine how it can be
implemented.

Article 8 (1) (h) - Basic and further training of teachers
h) to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement
those of paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;
50840 In Nos. 753 and 754 of its second evaluation report, the Committee of
Experts found that this undertaking, accepted for the Federal Republic of Germany,
was not fulfilled, and in Nos. 736 and 737 of its third evaluation report found that this
undertaking remains not fulfilled for Hesse. We refer to No. 4046 of the Third State
Report in which we argue that the Charter for Regional or Minority Languages can
only be implemented by mutual agreement with the persons concerned, and that it
has not been possible to report any demand for educational measures within the
meaning of (a) to (g) of Article 8 (1), at least with regard to the language spoken by
the German Sinti and Roma, which is the only Romani language of relevance to the
implementation of the Charter. This, in turn, might result from the fact that it is not
possible to offer measures under the public education system exclusively to German

191
Sinti or German Roma and that consequently many members of these groups accept
teaching of their language only within the family or group.
The efforts in Hamburg reported in No. 50827 above are the most that can be
provided to fulfil this undertaking, and only when several favourable factors, such as
a sufficient number of relevant persons, coincide.
50841 Hesse, which was the main focus of the Committee’s criticism, responds to
the Committee’s question as follows: There have been no requests from German
Sinti and Roma for teacher training with regard to teaching Romani.

Art. 8 (1) (i) - Supervisory bodies
i)

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures
taken and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of
regional or minority languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their
findings, which will be made public.

50842 With regard to the Committee’s finding in No. 738 ff. of its third evaluation
report that this undertaking, which was accepted by Berlin and Hesse, is not fulfilled
at least by Hesse, and with regard to the Committee's question whether steps have
been taken to monitor the measures taken and progress achieved in the teaching of
Romani and whether periodic reports have been drawn up, see Nos. 00803 – 00813
above and the statement in No. 4049 of the Third State Report that there is no
evidence of any demand for educational measures which would require monitoring.
50843 The Land of Berlin adds: In cooperation with the association Regionale
Arbeitsstellen für Bildung, Integration und Demokratie Berlin e.V. (RAA, Regional
workplaces for education, integration and democracy in Berlin), the Senate
Department for Education, Science and Research produces an annual newsletter for
teachers and education specialists, providing them with news and information about
further training opportunities. In addition, two specialist conferences are held every
school year for teachers in Berlin schools as well as private schools and youth
services offices. These conferences are designed and organized by the RAA.
50844 Hesse comments as follows: All curricular offerings in Hesse are subject to
appropriate supervision. For the reasons already given, there are no special remedial
measures specifically for Sinti and Roma speakers.

192
Article 8 (2)
With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the
regional or minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the
number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage or
provide teaching in or of the regional or minority language at all the appropriate
stages of education.
50845 With regard to this undertaking, which was accepted by Berlin, Hesse and
North Rhine-Westphalia, in No. 741 of its third evaluation report the Committee of
Experts states that it has received no further information with regard to this
undertaking and therefore urges the authorities to provide relevant information as to
whether the authorities encourage or provide teaching in or of Romani at all the
appropriate stages of education in territories other than those in which this language
is traditionally used.
50846 As already indicated in No. 4051 of the Third State Report, the alternative of
allowing such teaching, which is explicitly formulated in this undertaking, is fulfilled
nation-wide for all regional and minority languages, on the basis of Article 5 (3) of the
Basic Law (autonomy of higher education), and there are no obstacles to allowing
such teaching at all appropriate stages of education; however, there is little demand
for teaching in or of the minority language.
50847 We disagree with the Committee’s view that an undertaking is fulfilled only
when the most extensive alternative is fulfilled and consider this view to be contra
legem.

Article 9
Judicial authorities
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of
residents using the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified
below, according to the situation of each of these languages and on condition that
the use of the facilities afforded by the present paragraph is not considered by the
judge to hamper the proper administration of justice
Article 9 (1) (b) - Civil proceedings
in civil proceedings:

193
iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;
Article 9 (1) (c) - Proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters
in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;
50901 In view of the information given in No. 4054 of the Third State Report that
Baden-Württemberg and North Rhine-Westphalia, for example, maintain lists of
interpreters and translators for the courts and state prosecutors, in No. 743 of its third
evaluation report the Committee again considered “that these undertakings were
formally fulfilled as the domestic legal framework provides for that” and stated that
the “Committee ... has not been made aware of any examples that these formal
provisions in the law are followed by any degree of practical implementation”.
50902 With regard to its request for examples of the practical implementation of
these provisions involving the use of Romani in the justice system, we respond that
there will hardly be any such examples as long as Romani speakers believe their
language should not be used for communicating with non-speakers.
The provisions of law allowing the use of Romani in the justice system are
occasionally practically implemented in Hesse: For example, interpreters of the
Romani language have been used in isolated cases. Over the past four years, a
Romani-speaking interpreter was used in a criminal case before the local court of
Lampertheim. The interpreter was needed due to the various dialects of those
concerned. And at the administrative court of Frankfurt (Main) in 2002, an interpreter
was used to interpret into and out of Romani for the plaintiff, a member of the Roma
ethnic group, at the request of the plaintiff’s legal representative.
Art. 9 (2) (a) - Validity of legal documents
The Parties undertake:
a) not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely
because they are drafted in a regional or minority language;
50903 The Committee of Experts again did not comment on this undertaking. As
indicated in No. 775 of the Second State Report, this undertaking is fulfilled by the
legal system in Germany.

194

Article 10
Administrative authorities and public services
51001 With regard to Recommendation no. 5 of the Committee of Ministers (“take
resolute action to establish a structured policy for making it practically possible to use
regional or minority languages in dealings with the administration and, where
relevant, in the courts”), and with regard to its finding in No. 798 of the third
evaluation report that such a structured policy is still lacking, see No. 00252 and
01004 above explaining that there are no plans to take measures in the absence of
any conceivable demand. We also remind the Committee that such demand will
remain inconceivable as long as the persons concerned also speak German and in
particular as long as Romani speakers do not want their language used for general
communication accessible to persons outside the language group.
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who
are users of regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below
and according to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this
is reasonably possible:

Article 10 (1) (a) (v) - Submission of documents
v) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a
document in these languages;
51002 In its third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts did not comment on
this undertaking accepted for Romani and the other regional or minority languages
used in Schleswig-Holstein, following reference in No. 4056 of the Third State Report
to No. 776 of the Second State Report describing its fulfilment on the basis of
Section 82a (2) of the Land Administration Act, and to No. 777 of that report
providing information on the divergent opinions held by various groups of speakers
as regards acceptance of this undertaking.

Article 10 (2)
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of
residents who are users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the
measures specified below, the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:

195

Article 10 (2) (b) - Use of a regional or minority language, and applications to local
and regional authorities
b) the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written
applications in these languages;
51003 The Committee did not comment on this undertaking, accepted by
Schleswig-Holstein for the Romani of the German Sinti and the German Roma as
well as for Low German, in its third evaluation report.
As indicated in No. 4057 of the Third State Report, see Nos. 778 – 780 of the Second
State Report for a description of fulfilment on the basis of Section 82 of the Land
Administration Act and of the differing opinions on this undertaking held by the
speakers.
51004

Article 10 (2) (e) and (f) - Use of a regional or minority language in debates of their
assemblies
e) the use by regional authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in
their assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s)
of the State;
f) the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the
State;
51005 With regard to these undertakings, which Hesse accepted for its territory and
which are fulfilled by allowing the use of regional or minority languages, the Hesse
authorities stated that they have encouraged the local authority associations to make
arrangements at the regional level to allow the use of Romani in debates of the
assemblies at regional and local level. However, this statement did not change the
Committee’s view in No. 746 of its third evaluation report that that the undertakings
are only formally fulfilled.
51006 With regard to the Committee’s question whether Romani is now being used
in debates of the assemblies at regional and local level, we can only report that it is
impossible to fulfil the Committee’s wishes any further than described above as long
as no one appears willing to speak the Romani of the German Sinti or Roma at such

196
assemblies because the speakers themselves want to keep their language for
exclusive use within the group and not share knowledge of it with outsiders.
Article 10 (3)
Paragraph 3
With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other
persons acting on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which
regional or minority languages are used, in accordance with the situation of each
language and as far as this is reasonably possible:

Article 10 (3) (c) - Requests in the minority language
c) to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request in these
languages.
51007 As long as speakers of the Romani of the German Sinti and Roma want to
keep their language for exclusive use within the group, we will have to accept the
Committee’s view that this undertaking remains not fulfilled. See No. 4059 of the
Third State Report.
As a result, it is impossible to satisfy the Committee’s persistent request for
information on practical implementation, pertinent legal provisions and positive
measures with regard to this undertaking.

Article 10 (4)
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted
by them, the Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:

Article 10 (4) (c) - Appointment of public service employees having a knowledge of
the minority language
c) compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees
having a knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the
territory in which that language is used.
51008 Stating (in No. 751 of its third evaluation report) that it "has received no
information on any kind of positive practice or incentives or structural approach with
regard to this undertaking”, the Committee “therefore considers this undertaking
remains not fulfilled”, at least with regard to Hesse, even though the Land

197
government has declared its willingness to agree to any requests for transfer by
Romani-speaking public service employees to the territory in which that language is
used. This undertaking was accepted by Baden-Württemberg, Hesse and SchleswigHolstein. The German side regards this undertaking as applying only to existing
requests for transfer.

51009
See No. 51001
- with regard to Recommendation no. 5 (“take resolute action to establish a
structured policy for making it practically possible to use regional or minority
languages in dealings with the administration and, where relevant, in the courts”);
- with regard to the Committee’s finding in No. 798 of its third evaluation report that
measures “such as a human resources policy taking account of civil servants’
skills in regional or minority languages” are still lacking; and
- with regard to the Committee’s question whether the authorities (especially in
Hesse) have introduced positive practices or incentives or a structured policy to
enable public service employees with knowledge of Romani to be appointed in
the territory in which that language is used.
51010 In this regard, Baden-Württemberg reports that no public service employees
have made such requests. If any employees of the Land administration should make
such a request, the authorities will examine whether it can be fulfilled. We point out
that this undertaking applies only to the broadest possible agreement with existing
appointment requests.
51011 Hesse reports that it is not aware of any employees of the Hesse Land
administration having knowledge of Romani. No requests of this nature have been
submitted to the Land government.
51012

Article 10 (5)
The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or
minority languages, at the request of those concerned.
51013 The Committee of Experts did not comment on this undertaking, accepted
for the entire federal territory for the Romani of the German Sinti and Roma, in its

198
third evaluation report in the absence of any apparent issues. As indicated in No.
4062 of the Third State Report, see Nos. 220 – 225 of the Second State Report for
more information.
Article 11
Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the
territories in which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each
language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are
competent, have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the
independence and autonomy of the media:

Article 11 (1) (b) (i) - Radio broadcasting
i)

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one radio station in the
regional or minority languages; or

51101 As indicated in No. 4063 of the Third State Report, with regard to this
undertaking, accepted by Berlin, see No. 787 of the Second State Report stating that
its fulfilment is possible under the existing legal provisions, but that it has not been
fulfilled in practice in the absence of demand from the language group concerned.

Article 11 (1) (b) (ii) - Radio broadcasting
ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
51101a As reported by the Sinti Alliance of Germany, the Lower Saxony Land
Association of the Sinti Alliance of Germany has produced and funded a radio
programme by Sinti for Sinti and their friends since 2000. This music and cultural
programme, Latscho Dibes, airs every third Sunday of the month from 14.00 – 15.00
on five private radio stations in Lower Saxony, and in Kassel (Hesse), Tübingen and
Reutlingen (Baden-Württemberg). The programme ranges from interviews and news
to the presentation and review of relevant literature as well as a large variety of
Gypsy music in the Sinti language (Sintetikes).

199
Article 11 (1) (c) (ii) - Broadcasting of television programmes
ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
51102 See the description under No. 01102 ff. above with regard to the
undertakings accepted for Berlin, Hamburg, Hesse, Schleswig-Holstein and (with
regard to Art. 11 (1) (c) (ii)) Rhineland-Palatinate
- concerning the issues of fulfilment by public and private broadcasters;
- concerning the limits of government influence under German law; and
- concerning the measures taken and planned within these limits.
51103 With regard to Hesse, in No. 752 ff. of its third evaluation report, the
Committee of Experts concluded that the undertaking remains not fulfilled,
- despite the fact that Hesse’s Act on Private Broadcasters stipulates that
programmes shall contribute "to the protection of ethnic, cultural and linguistic
minorities";
- despite the Land government’s intention to inform the public broadcaster
Hessischer Rundfunk about Germany’s obligation and about its preparations to
initiate a dialogue between the broadcaster and the Hesse Land Association of
German Sinti and Roma;
and despite the information that
- according to the Hesse Land Association of German Sinti and Roma, Romani
speakers would welcome a Romani-language radio or television programme,
- but that the Committee was not aware of any positive measures taken by the
authorities to encourage the broadcasting of radio and television programmes in
Romani.
51104 With regard to the Committee’s question whether the authorities have taken
such measures in the meantime, Hesse reports as follows (see also No. 01102 ff.
above):
On the basis of German constitutional law (principle of government non-intervention
in broadcasting), no government may determine programming content. Thus the
Land has no way to exert influence on the design or selection of programmes.
Instead, Hesse has informed the broadcaster Hessischer Rundfunk about Germany’s
obligations accepted under Art. 11 (1) (b) (ii) and (c) (ii) and initiated a dialogue
between the Land public service broadcasting corporation and the Hesse Land
Association of German Sinti and Roma, while respecting the constitutional principle
of government non-intervention in broadcasting. However, according to Hessicher

200
Rundfunk, representatives of the Sinti and Roma have not asked the Land public
service broadcasting corporation for any programming in the Romani language.
51105 - 51107

Art. 11 (1) (d) - Audio and audiovisual works
d) to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and
audiovisual works in the regional or minority languages;
51108 With regard to the Committee’s conclusion in No. 758 of its third evaluation
report that this undertaking, accepted for the entire federal territory, remains not
fulfilled, and with regard to the Committee's question as to which measures have
been taken to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and
audiovisual works in Romani, we report (as already in No. 4097 of the Third State
Report) that the Federal Republic continues to believe, as indicated in No. 801 of the
Second State Report, that its funding for the Documentation Centre of German Sinti
and Roma fulfils this undertaking, regardless of the decisions made there concerning
the use of funds. In this case, too, we point out that the undertaking calls for
encouragement, but not for the success of such encouragement as well.
51109

Article 11 (1) (e) (i) - Newspapers
i)

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one
newspaper in the regional or minority languages; or

Article 11 (1) (e) (ii) - Newspaper articles
ii)

to encourage and/or facilitate the publication of newspaper articles in the regional
or minority languages on a regular basis;

51110 With regard to the undertaking under (e) (i) accepted for Berlin and Hesse,
and to the undertaking under (e) (ii) accepted for the entire federal territory, the
Committee of Experts found in No. 759 ff. of its third evaluation report that these
undertakings remain not fulfilled and asked for information about measures taken in
cooperation with Romani speakers to encourage the creation of at least one
newspaper in the Romani language.

201

51111

See No. 4098 of the Third State Report.

51112

Article 11 (1) (f) (ii) - Financial assistance for audiovisual productions
ii)

to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual
productions in the regional or minority languages;

51113 In Nos. 761 and 762 of its third evaluation report, the Committee found that
this undertaking, accepted for the entire federal territory, remained not fulfilled
- despite the reference in No. 4101 of the Third State Report to No. 808 in
conjunction with Nos. 226 – 230 of the Second State Report describing the
difficulties of direct financial assistance and to the funding for the Documentation
and Cultural Centre of German Sinti and Roma, mentioned in No. 810 of the
Second State Report, for this reason;
- and despite the information that the existing financial assistance is also to be
applied to productions in the Romani language.
The Committee justified its finding by stating that the applicability of this financial
assistance to the Romani of the German Sinti and Roma was not apparent.
51114

The comments in No. 4101 of the Third State Report continue to apply.

Article 11 (1) (g) - Training of journalists
g) to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using regional or
minority languages.
51115 With regard to the Committee’s conclusion in Nos. 763 and 764 that this
undertaking, accepted for the entire federal territory, remains not fulfilled, we
disagree again with the Committee’s view that fulfilling this undertaking requires at
least some degree of practical implementation. Instead, as already indicated in No.
4102 of the Third State Report referring to No. 811 of the Second State Report, we
believe that this undertaking is already fulfilled by the funding for the Documentation
and Cultural Centre of German Sinti and Roma.

202
51116 With regard to the Committee’s question whether the authorities have taken
measures to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using the
Romani Language, we report that no further measures are planned as long as the
speakers of the Romani of the German Sinti and Roma do not view their language as
a lingua franca.

Article 11 (2) - Freedom of direct reception of broadcasts, and freedom of expression
The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and
television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or
similar form to a regional or minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission
of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language.
They further undertake to ensure that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of
expression and free circulation of information in the written press in a language used
in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of the
above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be
subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by
law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security,
territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others,
for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the
authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
51117 The Committee of Experts did not comment on this undertaking, accepted
for the entire federal territory, in the absence of apparent issues. As indicated in No.
4103 of the Third State Report, see No. 812 in conjunction with Nos. 226 – 239 of the
Second State Report for a description of the legal framework conditions
corresponding to this undertaking.

Article 12
Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries,
cultural centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as
literary work and film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals
and the culture industries, including inter alia the use of new technologies – the
Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used and to the

203
extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this
field:

Article 12 (1) (a) - Types of expression and access to works
a) to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority
languages and foster the different means of access to works produced in these
languages;
51201 With regard to this undertaking, accepted for Baden-Württemberg, Berlin,
Hamburg, Hesse, Lower Saxony, North Rhine-Westphalia, Rhineland-Palatinate and
Schleswig-Holstein, in Nos. 765 – 767 of its third evaluation report the Committee of
Experts repeated that “in order to fulfil this undertaking, it is not sufficient to put such
promotion of regional or minority language on equal footing with mainstream
promotion, this being already covered by the principle of non-discrimination
enshrined in Article 7, paragraph 2” and concludes that the undertaking is not
fulfilled, at least in Hesse.
51202 In response to the Committee’s question whether the authorities have
undertaken any measures in the meantime to encourage types of expression and
initiative specific to Romani and foster the different means of access to works
produced in these languages, we point out (as in No. 4105 of the Third State Report)
that the undertaking is to be considered fulfilled by the existence of funding which
recipients are free to use for the above-mentioned specific purpose as well as other
activities aimed at raising awareness of issues related to this language group. In view
of Germany's recent history, there is no conceivable way of making allocation of
funds dependent on whether or not these will be used for a desired form of language
promotion.
51203 As in No. 4106 of the Third State Report, the following Länder report current
funding to be used at least in part as indicated in this undertaking:
51204 Lower Saxony provided funding for the annual Sinti music festivals in
Hildesheim each year from 2005 to 2008.
51205 North-Rhine/Westphalia has funded the Sinti and Roma counselling bureau
in Düsseldorf since 1985. This bureau is responsible for raising awareness and
providing further training in schools and workshops, for providing individual advice in
schools, for organizing commemoration days and for settling conflicts with other

204
institutions. The bureau, run by the North Rhine-Westphalia Land Association of
German Sinti and Roma, also assists Sinti and Roma in communicating with
authorities. Moreover, compensation for injustice suffered during the Third Reich has
become a key issue of counselling.
A new research project at the University of Bielefeld also deserves special mention:
Professor Bogdal, a literary historian, is planning a complete history of the “Gypsies”
in European literature from the 15th century to the present.
51206 Rhineland-Palatinate supports the Sinti and Roma music and cultural festival
“Aven” with funding from Kultursommer e.V. In 2008, for example, the RhinelandPalatinate Land Association of German Sinti and Roma displayed traditional Sinti
crafts and organized a concert featuring well-known Sinti musicians as part of the
festival focus on "Arbeitswelten-Lebenswelten" (worlds of work, ways of life). The
Land also provided funding for local one-time events, such as the world music
festival “Horizonte” in Koblenz. Municipalities also provide funding for cultural
projects.
Rhineland-Palatinate has also subsidized the cultural work of the RhinelandPalatinate Land Association of German Sinti and Roma for years in the framework of
institutional funding for its office and of special project funding for volunteer activities
by its members.
For information about funding for the Sinti Union of Rhineland-Palatinate, see No.
00756a.
51207 The Philharmonic Society of Sinti and Roma of Frankfurt, which aims to
preserve the musical heritage of the Sinti and Roma, received funding from the
Hesse government in 2004, 2005, 2006 and 2008.
51208

Article 12 (1) (d) - Taking account of the regional or minority language in cultural
activities
d) to ensure that the bodies responsible for organizing or supporting cultural
activities of various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the
knowledge and use of regional or minority languages and cultures in the
undertakings which they initiate or for which they provide backing;

205
51209 With regard to this undertaking, in No. 768 ff. of its third evaluation report the
Committee stated that during its on-the-spot visit in Hesse it did not receive any
information about bodies other than the Land Association of German Sinti and Roma
which are responsible for organizing cultural activities in relation to the Romani
language. As a result, it considers that the undertaking is only partly fulfilled.
51210 With regard to its request for information about measures taken to ensure
that the bodies responsible for organizing or supporting cultural activities of various
kinds (other than the Hesse Land Association of German Sinti and Roma) make
appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of regional or minority
languages and cultures, we refer to No. 4116 of the Third State Report:
In the view of the German authorities, this undertaking can be fulfilled only by
providing support for cultural activities of the associations of the respective language
groups or at the very least by involving these associations in such activities.
Particularly in view of the autonomy of associations as guaranteed under German
law, these associations - in accordance with their declared purpose - can be
assumed to make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge of their
language. As regards the Romani language of the German Sinti and the German
Roma, however, it must be borne in mind that knowledge of the minority language
should not be imparted to outsiders since the majority of speakers apparently wish to
confine use of the language exclusively to their families and their own group.
51211 This undertaking, too, can be fulfilled only through the activities mentioned in
No. 51203 ff. above.

Article 12 (1) (f) - Participation of representatives of the speakers
f)

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given
regional or minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural
activities;

51212 The Committee of Experts did not comment on this undertaking, accepted
for Baden-Württemberg, Berlin, Hamburg, Hesse, Lower Saxony, North RhineWestphalia and Schleswig-Holstein. As in No. 4117 of the Third State Report, we can
only reiterate that it can be fulfilled only when associations of Romani speakers are
involved in or independently organize the activities mentioned in No. 51203 ff.

206

Art. 12 (1) (g) - Creation of archive bodies
g) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for
collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the
regional or minority languages;
51213 With regard to this undertaking, accepted for the entire federal territory, in
light of the information provided by the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma
that the Documentation and Cultural Centre of German Sinti and Roma, which is
funded by the Federation and Baden-Württemberg, produces and collects works,
such as recordings of poetry, songs and theatre plays in the Romani language, in No.
771 ff. of its third evaluation report the Committee considers that this undertaking is
fulfilled.

Article 12 (2)
In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages
are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or
minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural
activities and facilities in accordance with the preceding paragraph.
51214 In Nos. 774 and 775 of its third evaluation report, the Committee stated that
it “was not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking”, accepted for
Baden-Württemberg, Hesse, North Rhine-Westphalia and Schleswig-Holstein, due to
a lack of information. With regard to this statement and to the Committee’s question
whether measures have been taken to allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate
cultural activities and facilities to promote the Romani language in territories other
than those in which this language is traditionally used, Germany is still of the view, as
explained in Nos. 4128 and 4129 of its Third State Report, that this undertaking can
be fulfilled by allowing such activities and facilities and that this undertaking is
therefore fulfilled as a matter of course due to the German legal system.
51215 If one agreed with the Committee’s view that fulfilling this undertaking
required positive measures of encouragement, it would have to be pointed out that
there are no territories in Germany where the Romani of the German Sinti and Roma
is traditionally used, because the members of the national minority of the German
Sinti and Roma do not live in clearly defined settlement areas, and because they
regard their language as a language for communicating within the group. As a result,

207
all of the funding measures mentioned above in No. 51203 ff. would have to be
regarded as measures of encouragement expected by the Committee of Experts.

Article 12 (3)
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy
abroad, for regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.
51216 The Romani of the German Sinti and Roma is the only minority language in
Germany for which the Committee did not consider that this undertaking is not
fulfilled.
51217 For this reason, it suffices to refer to No. 4132 of the Third State Report and
the statement by the Documentation Centre of German Sinti and Roma that the
cultural affairs division of the Federal Foreign Office, the German diplomatic missions
abroad and the branch offices of the Goethe-Institut in Hungary, the Czech Republic,
Poland and the United States provided extraordinary support for the preparation and
organization of the exhibition "The Holocaust against the Sinti and Roma, and
present-day racism in Europe", thereby clearly showing that they attach great
importance to this issue.
51218 The announcement that the Documentation Centre would continue to work
with these institutions was put into practice as follows: During the reporting period,
the German embassies and Goethe institutes in Stockholm and Bucharest were
involved in preparing, presenting and following up on (press releases, etc.) the
Documentation Centre’s international exhibition on the Holocaust and the Sinti and
Roma. The Documentation Centre had a very positive assessment of this
cooperation, which continues with the preparation of a presentation in Helsinki in
spring 2010.
Article 13
Economic and social life
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake within the whole
country:
a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without
justifiable reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents

208
relating to economic or social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in
technical documents such as instructions for the use of products or installations;
b) to prohibit the insertion - in internal regulations of companies and private
documents - of any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or minority
languages, at least between users of the same language;
c) to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority
languages in connection with economic or social activities;
d) to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by means
other than those specified in the above sub-paragraphs.
51301 In No. 776 ff. of its third evaluation report, the Committee considered that the
undertakings under (a), (c) and (d), accepted for the entire federal territory, were
fulfilled in view of the federal anti-discrimination act which continues in force
(Allgemeines Gleichbehandlungsgesetz, AGG).
51302 With regard to the undertaking under Art. 13 (1) (d), also accepted for the
entire federal territory,
- to the Committee’s statement in No. 779 ff. of its third evaluation report that this
undertaking also includes the facilitation of the oral use of the minority language
and could therefore be implemented despite the lack of a written form of the
Romani of the German Sinti, and that in the apparent absence of measures, the
Committee considers that this undertaking is not fulfilled, at least in Hesse; and
- to the Committee’s question whether measures had been taken in the meantime
to facilitate and/or encourage the use of Romani in connection with economic or
social activities,
Germany still considers that this undertaking is fulfilled by the funding for the
office of the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma.
51303 In a letter dated 18 September 2009, the Hesse Land government asked the
federation of Hesse employers’ associations to encourage its members to facilitate
and support the use of Romani in the context of economic activities of all kinds.

Article 14
Transfrontier exchanges
The Parties undertake:
a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the
States in which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if

209
necessary to seek to conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster
contacts between the users of the same language in the States concerned in the
fields of culture, education, information, vocational training and permanent
education;”
51401 In response to No. 4139 of the Third State Report stating that there is no
indication that speakers of the Romani of German Sinti and Roma are interested in
any agreements of the kind mentioned in this undertaking, which was accepted for
the entire federal territory, in Nos. 784 – 786 of its third evaluation report the
Committee found that the undertaking was not fulfilled, arguing that the “reason that
demand for such agreements has not yet been made by Romani speakers may lie in
the fact that they are not aware of the possibility to reach such agreements related to
the Romani language” and that there “was however an interest in ... the European
Roma Forum”.
51402 Germany disagrees with this statement, noting among other things that (as
reported in No. 4139 of the Third State Report) representatives of Germany’s Federal
Government participated from the very beginning in the Council of Europe working
group which drafted the Forum’s statutes and the cooperation agreement with the
Council of Europe.
The Federal Government forwarded subsequent information about the Forum without
delay to the federal organizations it was aware of, the Central Council of German
Sinti and Roma and the Sinti Alliance of Germany.
However, the Federal Government does not know who appointed the German
representative to the Forum for its first term. According to the statutes, every state is
supposed to sent a representative of the umbrella organizations of the Sinti and
Roma to be created in this state. According to the Federal Government’s information,
these two competing and non-cooperating organizations at federal level have been
unable to agree on a joint umbrella organization or on a joint representative to the
Forum.
51402 Germany is involved in efforts of all international organizations to promote
the Roma, such as the OSCE’s Roma Action Plan. Questions from other countries,
such as Hungary, about the promotion of Sinti and Roma in Germany have shown
that the framework conditions in the various countries differ so greatly that there does
not seem to be any point to cooperation. In particular, Germany has no plans for
agreements containing provisions for Roma who are foreign nationals which diverge
from the provisions of German law applicable to all foreigners.

210
D.2.6 Low German
60000 Low German is protected under Part III of the Charter in the following
Länder: Free Hanseatic City of Bremen, Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg,
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Lower Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein. In the
Länder of Brandenburg, North Rhine-Westphalia and Saxony-Anhalt, Low German
falls under the protection afforded under Part II, since the required quorum of 35
obligations has not been attained.
Article 8
Education
60801 With regard to the overarching obligations arising from Article 8 of the Charta
and with regard to the second Recommendation given by the Committee of Ministers
at the suggestion of the Committee of Experts during the second monitoring cycle,
which was “to take action to improve provision and allocate adequate resources for
regional or minority language teaching and in particular: increase the number of
hours devoted to, and provide clear guidelines for, Low German teaching in the
Länder concerned”, the Committee of Experts made the following statements in no.
793 of its Third Evaluation Report:
“With regard to Low German, the number of hours devoted to Low German have not
increased in any Land where Low German is spoken. In most cases, Low German
continues to be taught as a part of other subjects, which in practice limits the actual
amount taught to a minimum. Low German as a subject in its own right is only more
widespread in schools in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania. A new directive for preschools has been adopted in Hamburg, which strengthens the teaching of Low
German. In Lower Saxony, the decree which prescribed the teaching of Low German
has expired, and the new orientation plan seems to have a lesser level of
commitment to the teaching of Low German. In Bremen, the new framework
curriculum no longer mentions the teaching of Low German, although this is to be
redressed with guidelines. Most Länder have carried out surveys on the extent to
which Low German is taught in schools. Concepts for Low German education could
and should be developed based on the outcome of these. The Committee of Experts
has no information on the amount of Low German taught in those Länder where
Part II of the Charter applies (Saxony-Anhalt, Brandenburg and North-Rhine/
Westphalia).”
Land Saxony-Anhalt makes the following comments:

211
All types of schools offer optional courses in Low German. These offers cannot
always be recorded in the school statistics, especially when there are too few pupils
attending these courses. For instance, for the school year 2008/09, only one twohour Low German course is recorded, which was attended by nine pupils. Schools
seek to improve their recording of such courses in the school statistics for the school
year 2010/11.
60802 In no. 398 of its Third Evaluation Report, the Committee of Experts refers to
the information contained ad no. 5018 of the Third Periodical Report that a survey
was conducted in the Free Hanseatic City of Bremen to find out the extent to which
Low German was taught at schools in Bremen, including a register of the number
and location of teachers with Low German language skills. Based on the findings, a
concept for teaching Low German is to be developed and implemented together with
the Land Institute for Schools and the Low German Institute (INS).
The Committee welcomed this initiative and requested further information on the
development and implementation of this concept.
60803 With regard to the obligations pursuant to Article 8 and Hamburg's
compliance with these obligations, the Committee of Experts, in no. 469 of its Third
Evaluation Report, referred to the information given in nos. 470 – 477 of the
periodical report, where it says that the framework curriculum for German at primary
and secondary level requires schools in the Free Hanseatic City of Hamburg to
provide Low German lessons. In connection with a survey conducted at 333 schools
in Hamburg to look into the implementation of the curriculum it furthermore reported
that, excepting 45 schools, all schools met the requirement of providing Low German.
Finally the Committee stated that, at the time, 48 had taken part in the Low German
reading competition.
60804 With regard to the promotion of Low German in education institutions in
Lower Saxony, the Committee of Experts, ad nos. 50/601 of the Third Evaluation
Report, criticized that the German Part III ratification for Low German in Lower
Saxony pursuant to Article 8 covers only pre-school and higher education, and that
the essential components of primary and secondary education are missing.
The Länder addressed make the following comments with regard to the statements
and assessments made and the questions by the Committee of Expert:
60805

Brandenburg refers to the statements made in no. 00765.

212
60806
The Free Hanseatic City of Bremen refers to the information contained in
no. 00762. With regard to no. 60802 Bremen states that the linguistic-cultural
preconditions for the promotion of Low German at schools have deteriorated,
because those who speak Low German tend to live in rural the areas on the outskirts
of Bremen and not to move in school circles. That said, all the measures mentioned
in no. 00762 seek to draw attention to the regional language and give incentives for
Low German language teaching at school.
60807 The Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg refers to the comments regarding
the education levels defined in Article 8 (cf. nos 60812 - 60813, 60822 - 60823,
60835, 60849-60850, 60875 - 60876, and 60882).
60808a Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania refers to the statements in nos. 60 825
and 60 836.
60808b Lower Saxony refers to no. 40807, stating that the Council of Europe should
monitor compliance with existing obligations, and not make any additional demands;
Lower Saxony might take additional voluntary contribution, if it so wished.
In actual fact Lower Saxony has already taken such measures without having ratified
obligations under Article 8 in Part III of the Charter on Languages.
Lower Saxony strongly denies the statements by the Committee of Experts contained
in no. 60801 above, according to which in Lower Saxony the decree which
prescribed the teaching of Low German has expired, and the new orientation plan
seems to have a lesser level of commitment to the teaching of Low German. The
decree at hand “Die Region im Unterricht” was only intended as an appeal. The
curricula for German as a school subject issued in 2006 were the first to make Low
German language lessons in primary and secondary schools compulsory.
Furthermore, pupils at all types of schools may opt to learn Low German (during
activity groups or as required optional subjects); where the person entitled to bring up
the child approves, pupils may also be taught other subjects in Low German in total
immersion, a method approved by the relevant Land authorities.

Article 8, para. 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such
languages are used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and
without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
Art. 8 para. 1, sub-para. a) - Pre-School Education -

213
i) to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
ii) to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or
(iii) to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those
pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient; or
(iv) if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school
education, to favour and/or encourage the application of the measures referred to
under i to iii above;
60809 The Länder Brandenburg (cf. para. 849 seqq. of the second State Report),
the Free Hanseatic City of Bremen (cf. para. 854 seqq. of the second State Report),
the Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg (cf. para. 852 seqq. of the second State
Report), Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania (cf. para. 856 of the second State Report),
Lower Saxony (cf. para. 857 seqq. of the second State Report), Saxony-Anhalt (cf.
para. 859 seqq. of the second State Report) and Schleswig-Holstein (cf. para. 862
seqq. of the second State Report) have accepted the obligation under sub-paragraph
(a) (iv).
1. Brandenburg
60809a Brandenburg continues not to have statistical material showing to what
extent Low German is spoken at children’s day-care facilities. For this reason no
sustainable estimates can be made as to the number of learning groups which teach
rhymes or songs in Low German, create bilingual learning situations or use Low
German media. Pre-school education in Brandenburg is incumbent on the
municipalities, which are not required to report back to the Land level with regard to
Low German. It is safe to assume, though, that Low German is used in the day-care
centres in the districts Uckermark, Prignitz, Ostprignitz-Ruppin and Oberhavel when
speaking about local lore, events or places.
2. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
60810 In no. 401 et seqq. of its Third Evaluation Report, the Committee of Experts
stated that it had been informed, in no. 5003 of the Third State Report, that Low
German is used to some extent in pre-schools in areas bordering the Land of Lower
Saxony, and in other parts of Bremen mainly in the form of rhymes and songs.
However, it was not clear to the Committee of Experts whether the extent to which

214
Low German is used in the pre-schools located in the outskirts of Bremen meets at
least the requirement of a substantial part of education
60811 The Free Hanseatic City of Bremen comments as follows with regard to the
above-mentioned question and to the question raised by the Committee of Experts
whether or not the authorities have provided constantly Low German pre-school
education in line with demand, and in keeping with the need for a systematic
approach in the field of pre-school education in Low German:
At present, there is no demand for pre-school education in Low German beyond what
is presently on offer.
3. Free Hanseatic City of Hamburg
60812 In no. 471 of its Third Evaluation Report the Committee of Expert welcomed
the directive – mentioned in no. 5004 of the Third State Report – on “pre-school
education” (Richtlinie für die Bildung und Erziehung in Vorschulklassen), which was
issued by the Hamburg Senate on 15 June 2005 and makes the “cultivation of the
Low German language” in pre-schools legally binding. According to this directive, an
examination of the language shall be conducted where larger groups of children
speak Low German, in a suitable manner for children. For all other pre-school
classes in Hamburg, children should be acquainted with Low German through
rhymes and poems.
The Expert Committee in return stated that the wording of the directive does not
make it clear to what extent Low German should be taught at pre-schools and asked
the authorities for clarification and further information on the practical implementation
of the new directive.
60813 In reply, the following information is provided by the Free and Hanseatic City
of Hamburg:
The “Directive on pre-school classes” requires the learning institutions to create a
“great variety of learning situations enabling pupils to acquire the basic interaction
means and skills”. This also holds good for Low German where it is spoken as a
second language. The teaching time dedicated to the regional languages can
therefore not be determined without taking into account the actual learning group and
the language skills they start with.
All pupils who do not (yet) speak Low German, should be familiarized with suitable
texts. In pre-school classes, teachers tend to present Low German poems and
songs, as can be derived from the fact that schools have a high demand for song

215
books and recorded material (e.g. a playback CD). It can therefore be assumed that
the directive is implemented in a motivating manner.
4. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
60814 In no. 545 et seqq. of its Evaluation Report, the Committee of Experts
considered the undertaking only partly fulfilled:
According to information received from a representative of the Land authorities,
there is wide-spread use of Low German in pre-schools in Western Pomerania. In
Mecklenburg, Low German is offered in Mecklenburg-Strelitz and in Schwerin and in
some other towns.
Representatives of the Low German-speakers claimed that the offer of Low
German in pre-schools was patchy, though.
According to the information given in no. 5005 of the Third State Report, the
Zentrum für Niederdeutsche Sprache Vorpommern e.V. (Centre for Low German Western Pomerania e.V.) in Wilmshagen, which was founded in 2004 and receives
support from the responsible district, organizes Low German courses for nurseryschool teachers, in cooperation with the Landesheimatverband MecklenburgVorpommern e.V. (Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania Land Union for Local and
Regional Traditions). The Centre also supplies teaching material which is distributed
in some districts in Western Pomerania.
Furthermore, representatives of Low German speakers said that the Centre for
Low German is seriously understaffed and would need an increase of human and
financial resources to carry out its work.
60815 In reply to the above-mentioned questions and in response to the
Committee’s recommendations encouraging the authorities to provide adequate
resources to the Centre for Low German with a view to meeting the growing demand
for the teaching of Low German in pre-school education and offering Low German
more systematically, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania provides the following
information:
The 2004 Act to Promote Children in Day Care and Child-Minding
(Kindertagesförderungsgesetz - KifÖ-G-M-V) defines the framework for the
pedagogical work at the 1,077 day-care centres in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania.
97% of all three- to six-year-olds in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania attend daycare institutions, 70% of which are privately run, and 30% state-run.
The above-mentioned Act to Promote Children in Day Care defines, in its section 1,
the following as the aims and tasks of promoting “communication, speaking and

216
language(s)”: The 2004 Framework Plan lists as one of the tasks dealing with the
language of everyday communication. Low German is taught in all day-care centres
to varying degrees. It is up to the nursery school teachers to decide whether they
want to teach German, English, French, Polish or Low German as a second
language. The Landesheimatverband Mecklenburg-Vorpommern e.V. (MecklenburgWestern Pomerania Land Union for Local and Regional Traditions), the „Klönsnack
Rostocker 7“ association (Rostock Low German speaking association) or the
Volkskulturinstitut (Rostock Institute for Folk Culture) provide further training for
nursery and pre-school teachers. The voluntary contribution of Low German
speakers has helped in Low German teaching.
A total of 585 nursery children and pupils took part in the 2008/2009 all-MecklenburgWestern-Pomerania Low German competitions in the Hanse cities of Greifswald and
Rostock, in Stavenhagen and in the regional capital Schwerin. 50% of the
participants in regional competitions are children from day-care institutions.
Finally, the Zentrum für Niederdeutsche Sprache Vorpommern e.V. (Centre for
Low German - Western Pomerania e.V.) in Wilmshagen, has ceased its work owing
to internal considerations.
5. Lower Saxony
60816 603.
In their third periodical report (paragraph 5006), the authorities state
that according to the new Orientation Plan of January 2005 on elementary education,
“in those regions where a regional language is spoken (for example Low German),
multilingualism is a good way of enhancing the children’s comprehension skills and
language competence”. This is a fact welcomed by the Committee of Experts in the
Third Evaluation Report in no. 603 et seqq. Furthermore, the Committee stated, that,
according to the Land authorities, no surveys have been made with regard to the
extent to which Low German is available in practice; on the other hand, there were
60 bilingual nursery schools in East Frisia, a fact which the local speakers of Low
German were very happy about.
60817 The Committee therefore considered the undertaking only partly fulfilled and
requested concrete information regarding the situation of Low German at pre-schools
outside East Frisia; in response, Lower Saxony provides the following information:
Lower Saxony does not have pre-schools as such; pre-school education is provided
by privately- or publicly-run children’s day care centres. Lower Saxony does not run
its own centres. The region does not collect statistics about regional language

217
teaching in the day-care centres. It is part of the individual concept of each centre
and institution and in keeping with the Orientation Plan to use the regional language
in the everyday communication with the children. It is therefore obvious that the
number of bilingual nursery schools in East Frisia was stated by the Low German
speakers there, because they would be the ones to know best.
6. Saxony-Anhalt
60818 The Committee of Experts did not comment on Low German in the preschools in Saxony-Anhalt in its Third Evaluation Report.
Reference is made to paragraph 5007 of the Third State Report which stated that, in
early 2006, a Working Group on Low German (AG Niederdeutsch) was set up in the
Ministry for Culture, and that, in consultation with the officer from the Ministry of
Health and Social Matters responsible for pre-school education, the situation was
analysed. In 2006/07 an expert group was established which discussed targeted
measures to promote Low German in nursery schools in the various language areas
(further training measures for nursery school teachers; provision of teaching material
etc.).
Saxony-Anhalt provides the following information regarding the implementation of the
discussion results:
So far, the results have not been implemented on a broad basis, but only in individual
cases and on a voluntary basis. This is due to the fact that the focus has been on
other aspects of pre-school education, which have come with financial support from
the government. This is not suprising, as most day-care centres are run by the local
government.
7. Schleswig-Holstein
60819 In the absence of visible problems, the Committee of Experts once again
made no comments on Low German in the pre-schools in Schleswig-Holstein in its
Third Evaluation Report.
Reference is made to paragraph 5008 of the Third State Report which stated that
local public child and youth welfare agencies are responsible for day-care centres
and need to decide what, if any, regional or minority languages should be offered;
therefore, they also need to negotiate means of assistance with the district
concerned.

218
Furthermore, in no. 5008 of the Third State Report, it was pointed out that the
significance of the minority languages and the regional language of Low German has
been expanded into the “Leitlinien zum Bildungsauftrag von
Kindertageseinrichtungen” (Guidlines for the educational mandate in children’s daycare centres).
Reference is also made to the information provided there that the Centres for
Low German (Zentren für Niederdeutsch, ZfN) in Leck and Ratzeburg offer
assistance to the children’s day-care centres as regards the integration of
Low German (through further training courses, provision of teaching materials,
tutoring by external speakers of Low German).
In addition, Lower-Saxony provides the following information with regard to Low
German at their nursery schools:
Pre-school Low German education has come to be a focus for the Centres fo Low
German in Leck and Ratzeburg. Measures to co-ordinate and design Low German
education at pre-school level have been introduced, both at the regional and higher
level.
The ADS-Grenzfriedensbund e.V. (a border organization) offers Low German in
14 nursery schools as part of the language teaching concept “multilingualism in
nursery schools”. Please go to paragraph 10815 above for information concerning
organization and methodology.
On 24 November 2009, an event was held in the parliament of Schleswig-Holstein to
discuss Low German in day-care centres. The event was organized by the
parliament’s President. Papers and discussions were held with approx.
120 particpants, many of them nursery school teachers; experience was shared,
successful projects were presented and information was provided about new
methods to convey Low German. The speakers concluded the spokesperson of the
Federal Council for Low German.
Finally, it should be pointed out that the Minister-President’s Commissioner for
Minorities wrote an article in the region’s local government magazine, drawing
attention to the importance of multilingualism at an early age and advocating the use
of Low German and Frisian in nursery schools.

Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para (b) (iii) - Primary Education -

219
(iii) to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
60820 The Free Hanseatic City of Bremen (cf. para. 866 of the second State
Report), the Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg (cf. para. 867 seqq. of the second
State Report), Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania (cf. paras. 870-874 of the second
State Report) and Schleswig-Holstein (cf. para. 875 seqq. of the second State
Report) have accepted the above obligation.
1. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
60821
With regard to the Committee of Experts’s view stated in no. 404 et seqq. of its
Third Evaluation Report that this undertaking remains not fulfilled;
With regard to the question raised in the Third Periodical Report (paragraph
5010) whether or not the guidance material has been finalized in an attempt to make
up for the step backwards which new the Framework Curriculum presents on the
previous curriculum; and
With regard also to the question raised by the Committee of Experts whether or
not the authorities of Bremen have adopted a structured approach with a view to
ensuring that Low German is systematically taught within primary education with
regular school hours allocated to it, as encouraged by the Committee,
Bremen comments as follows:
Firstly, nursery school attendance is not compulsory, as opposed to school
attendance; secondly, children’s day-care institutions can only to a limited extent be
required to present specific contents. This is due to the structure and the legal
provisions of the Social Code, Book VIII.
The “Framework Plan for Elementary Education” (Rahmenplan für Bildung und
Erziehtung im Elementarbereich) adopted by Bremen makes “verbal and non-verbal
communication a focal area; however, the promotion of Low German has not been
mentioned explicitly, nor have other languages, for that matter. The Framework Plan
does not present a curriculum to be implemented by the day-care centres.
Nonetheless, Low German is promoted as described above.
Schools have been given teaching materials as mentioned in no. 0762 above. A
hand-out with texts for the reading competition and with didactic information is being
prepared.

220
Owing to what is called the core competences and tasks as regards lessons and
school development it is not possible to dedicate regular lessons to Low German or
to use some of the regular German lessons to teach Low German.
2. Free Hanseatic City of Hamburg
60822 In its Second Evaluation Report (see paragraph 473 et seqq.), the
Committee of Experts concluded that the undertaking was only partly fulfilled, despite
the new framework curriculum making the teaching of a degree of Low German in
Hamburg mandatory, as set out in no. 5011 of the Third State Report; however, Low
German should be taught as a separate school subject, and not only as part of the
general German lessons, which led to the tendency of it being neglected and
therefore did not constitute an integral part of the curriculum.
60823 Hamburg replies as follows to the above-mentioned statements and to the
Committee's question whether measures have been taken, in line with the abovementioned recommendation, to make Low German an integral part of the curriculum;
Hamburg also provides information about the provisio of Low German at primary
schools:
Current surveys (conducted by GETAS – Gesellschaft für angewandte
Sozialpsychologie und IPSOS – Ipsos GmbH; Society for Applied Social Psychology
and IPSOS) show that the number of Hamburg citizens speaking Low German has
gone down dramatically. It is against this background that the level of Low German
lessons required by the framework plans no longer suffices. Therefore the
responsible authority is planning to introduce courses for the acquisition of Low
German as of the school year 2010/11. The Framework Concept for Primary Schools
of February 2009 states: “Low German is at least provided in the rural areas which
are part of the Low German linguistic landscape (Finkenwerder, Neuenfelde, Cranz,
Vier- und Marschlande).” In these places, Low German is provided as a separate
school subject. The Land Institute for Teacher Training and School Development
(Landesinstitut für Lehrerbildung und Schulentwicklung) will present a Framework
Plan for Low German, which is currently being prepared for grades 1 - 6. The Institut
für Niederdeutsche Sprache (Institute for Low German) and Hamburg University
(Insitute for Germanistics I, Low German and Literature) are helping to prepare the
above-mentioned Framework Plan.
In addition, a group of members of the “Plattdüütsch in Hamborg e.V.” association
(an association of Low German speakers in Hamburg) have come together in the
Bergedorf district, especially in Vierlanden and Marschlanden, in order to actively

221
implement what they call the “Plattsnacker Vier- und Marschlande concept”. This
means that they hold Low German lessons, in consultation with the headmasters and
the relevant teachers,
The relevant authorities very much appreciate the voluntary work of the
“Plattsnackers“ at schools and nursery schools in Vierlande and Marschlande. The
schools provide teaching materials, where appropriate; expenses are reimbursed.
The Land Institute for Teacher Training and School Development (Landesinstitut für
Lehrerbildung und Schulentwicklung) co-operates with the “Plattdüütsch in Hamborg”
association. This association makes a contribution towards implementing the
objectives of the Languages Charter as a non-profit-making association; for this
reason, the authority for schools and occupational training grants it a lump-sum
financial grant for 2009/2010 upon application.
Furthermore, in 2008, Hamburg’s biggest reading event (“Seiteneinsteiger”) took
place as commissioned by the responsible authorities (schools and culture); Low
German readings and workshops for primary and secondary schools were offered to
an increasing extent. The same will hold good for 2009.
Specifally, these were as follows in 2008:
Gerd Spiekermann: "Hör mal'n beten to" ["Just listen for a bit"] Introduction into Low
German; songs and short stories (grades 5-6)
Jasper Vogt: Wilhelm Busch, Astrid Lindgren and fairy tales – all in Low German!
(grades 4-6),
Hartmut Cyriacks/Peter Nissen: Asterix snackt Platt – Low German from Asterix to
Harry Potter (as of grade 8),
Wibke Quast, from the Oldenburg State Theatre: Jenny Hübner greift ein – a
classroom play in High and Low German (grades 3-5),
Bolko Bullerdiek: Laat di wat vertellen (Reading and discussion as of grade 8),
Jutta Mackeprang: The Fisherman and His Wife
47 schools took part in the 2008/2009 “Jungs un Deerns leest Platt” reading
competition, 34 of which were primary schools (grades 3 and 4); the final event took
place in the “Ohnsorg” Theatre in Hamburg, which is famous for its Low German
productions.
3. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
60824 The Committee of Experts considered the above-mentioned undertaking
only partially fulfilled in its Third Evaluation Report, after stating, in no. 551 of the
Report,

222
that – according to findings of the Second Monitoring Cycle – Low German was
taught as part of other school subjects at primary and secondary schools, outside the
curriculum at secondary schools, as a required optional subject or as an optional
subject as of grade 7 in many different ways,
- that the administrative ordinance “Low German in the Classroom”
(Niederdeutsch in den Schulen) adopted in 2004 provides for several measures to
promote the teaching of Low German in primary and secondary schools, including
the appointment of Low German advisers at the L.I.S.A. (Land Institute for Schools
and Training), at some State education offices and at schools,
that it had not been informed in detail about the effects of the findings of the
survey mentioned in the Third State Report in no. 5012 and conducted at the
general-education schools regarding the situation of Low German,
that there is a Framework Plan for Low German and that optional Low German
classes are offered twice a week as of grade 7,
that, however, the numerous initiatives – many of which are run by voluntary
helpers – reach just about half the schools in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania,
that Low German competes with foreign language courses,
that, according to no. 5012 of the Third State Report, the education advisers are
involved in the further training courses for teachers, e.g. the certificate course
“Niederdeutsch für tätige Lehrer” (Low German for Teachers), in the course of which
86 teachers have so far been qualified to teach Low German at schools in
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania.
60825 Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania responds as follows to the statement of
the Committee of Experts that – despite the above-mentioned measures expressly
welcomed by the Committee – it seems to consider the undertaking only partially
fulfilled, and to the question whether the measures have been continued and - finally
- to the current use of German at primary schools: Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
continues to be committed to passing Low German on to the next generation and to
make various efforts in schools to this end. The region conducted a survey in the
school year 2003/2004 on the situation of Low German at all schools in MecklenburgWestern Pomerania providing general education. As a result, targeted administrative
measures have been taken to develop an overall concept for the promotion of Low
German. The tried and tested 2004 Administrative Ordinance „Low German at
School“ (Niederdeutsch in der Schule) and the Framework Plan on Low German lay
down how the use of Low German is promoted at schools. Also, the new School Act
for the region (Schulgesetz - SchulG M-V), adopted on 13 February 2006 and
amended by law on 28 January 2009, states in its section 2 (educational mandate of

223
schools), paragraph 3: “The attachment of pupils to their natural, social and cultural
environment, and the cultivation of the Low German language shall be promoted”.
What is vital for the region-wide, constant and high-quality provision of Low German
classes is the qualification of teachers. In spring 2009, 86 teachers from all types of
school passed the certificate course “Low German for Teachers”.
For Low German, there are the following offers as part of the Independent School:
1. An internal Low German curriculum can be drawn up for grades 1-4, i.e. for
primary schools. In order to make the plan compulsory for all pupils at primary
schools, German, social studies and music should be involved as subjects. There are
three ways to teach German:
Language encounter, which means that Low German is not taught as a separate
subject, but that other subjects are taught in Low German whenever an encounter
with Low German is deemed appropriate.
“Early immersion” lessons and bilingual education [immersion meaning that the
language is not the subject being taught, but the language is used to convey
contents. Some of the subjects are taught in Low German (e.g. social studies,
literature, philosophy, religion)];
early-age foreign language lessons: Once the children reach the primary level,
Low German is taught in a practical, situational and playful manner.
2. A school-related Low German curriculum in primary schools, across grades and
subjects, taking into account the following approaches:
language encounter
early immersion lessons and bilingual education.
In 2008/2009, too, a Low German competition took place for the whole of
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania. The regional competitions in Greifswald, Rostock,
Stavenhagen and Schwerin met with great interest. The regional winners took part in
the “Festival of Low German” in Neubrandenburg. A total of 585 (nursery) school
children took part in the 9th Low German competition in 2008/2009.
4. Schleswig-Holstein
60826 In Schleswig-Holstein, too, the Committee of Experts considered these
undertakings only partly fulfilled and encouraged the authorities to pursue their efforts
with a view to ensuring that Low German is systematically taught within primary and

224
secondary education to the extent envisaged by these undertakings, by adopting
clear guidelines and other structural measures.
60827 In this context, Schleswig-Holstein stated that the revision of the applicable
Low German decree is being prepared to promote and develop Low German offers at
schools and to accommodate the constant development of everyday school life.
60827a With the new school year 2009/2010, the Low German reading competition
“Schölers leest Platt” started anew.

Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para (b) (iv) - Primary Education iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those
pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient;
60828 The above undertaking was adopted by the Länder Brandenburg (para. 883887 of the second State Report) and Saxony-Anhalt (para. 888-894 of the second
State Report) and has resulted in special provisions in this respect.
60829

Brandenburg refers to number 00765.

60830 Saxony-Anhalt refers firstly to the measures mentioned in no. 5016 of the
Third State Report:
Assistance programmes/promotion directives:
1. Programme “Kultur in Schule und Verein” (Cultural activities pursued by schools
and clubs)
2. ”Richtlinie über die Gewährung von Zuwendungen zur Förderung von Kunst und
Kultur” (Directive on the Allocation of Grants for the Promotion of Arts and Culture) Circular instructions of the Ministry for Cultural Affairs of 22.12.08 (MBl. LSA 47/2008
of 8 August 2005, p. 878)
3. ”Richtlinie über die Gewährung von Zuwendungen für bildungsbezogene
Projekte und Angebote” (Directive on the Allocation of Grants for Educational
Projects/Offers) - Circular instructions of the Ministry for Cultural Affairs of 1 October
2004 (SVBl. LSA No. 13/2004 of 23 November 2004, p. 304)
reading competition “Schülerinnen und Schüler lessen PLATT”
Theaterwerkstatt “Niederdeutsch” (theatre workshop)
Low German theatre competition (alternating annually with the Low German
theatre workshop),

225
collecting school data on the number of pupils opting for Low German offers
such as activity groups or optional-subject courses
Intrdoduction and funding of the school book “Our Low German primer. Learning
Low German in Saxony-Anhalt” for grades 1 to 6.
and informs about the following more recent developments:
The edition “Our Low German primer. Learning Low German in Saxony-Anhalt”
(grades 1 – 6) has been very well received, not only in Saxony-Anhalt. A new edition
is planned for 2010.
Furthermore, a flyer “Plattdütsch för Kinner” (Low German for kids) has been
developed, which addresses bilingual education for very young children.

Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (c) - Secondary Education i) to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
ii) to make available a substantial part of secondary education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or
iii) to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional
or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
60831 The obligation under (iii) has been adopted by the Länder Free Hanseatic
City of Bremen (para. 895 of the Second State Report), Free and Hanseatic City of
Hamburg (para. 896-898 of the Second State Report), Mecklenburg-Western
Pomerania (para. 870-874 and para. 899 of the Second State Report) and
Schleswig-Holstein (para. 900-904 of the Second State Report) and relevant
measures have been taken.
1. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
60832 The Committee of Experts, in no. 407 et seqq. of its Third Evaluation Report,
considered that the Free Hanseatic City of Bremen had once again only partially
fulfilled the undertaking, after stating
that, in its view, and according to the information provided in no. 5018 of the
Third State Report, Low German was only taught outside the regular curriculum and
in the afternoons, leaving aside the minimum lessons prescribed in the curriculum in
the form of compulsory reading and language encounter,
that Low German is offered as a basic course at two out of 16 grammar schools,
but only in the last school year, as far as it could tell.

226

60833 Bremen provides the following information with regard to the assessments of
the Committee of Experts and concerning its question whether the necessary
measures have meanwhile been taken, in line with its recommendation, to make the
teaching of Low German within secondary education more systematic with regular
school hours allocated to it, and with regard to the latest developments in the field of
Low German education at secondary schools:
It is only where teachers are particularly qualified to teach Low German that this
language is taught at secondary schools beyond what is required by the curriculum in
the field of regional languages, language history, social dialects, a fact already
pointed out in no. 60821 above and all the more true for older pupils. The curricula
for the lower secondary grades are currently being revised in order to restore the
importance formerly attached to Low German. The plan is to earmark more funds for
Low German classes (projects or working groups) in the coming budget (which will
be valid for two years).
2. Free Hanseatic City of Hamburg
60834 In no. 476 et seqq. of its Third Evaluation Report, the Committee of Experts
firstly referred to the argument stated by the Hamburg authorities in no. 5020 of the
Third State Report that the undertaking did not oblige the authorities to enforce a Low
German education on pupils and parents against their will. The Committee of Experts
held that the authorities could envisage offering Low German as an optional subject
in a certain number of secondary schools, to ensure a systematic offer of Low
German.
Furthermore the Committee reflected the information provided by the Hamburg
authorities that the possibility of introducing Low German as a separate subject had
in fact already been examined, but that it could not be implemented, but that,
however, Low German was already offered as an optional subject at some schools in
the margin areas of Hamburg.
60835 Hamburg provides the following information with regard to the assessment of
the Committee of Experts that the undertaking has again only partially been fulfilled,
and concerning its question whether the necessary measures have meanwhile been
taken, in line with its recommendation, to make the teaching of Low German within
secondary education more systematic with regular school hours allocated to it, and
with regard to the latest developments in the field of Low German education at
secondary schools: With the introduction of primary schools in Hamburg as of the

227
school year 2010/11 (with 24 starter schools) and across the district as of 2011/12,
the acquisition of Low German will be offered, also in grades 5 and 6, in the rural
areas which are part of the Low German linguistic landscape (Finkenwerder,
Neuenfelde, Cranz, Vier- und Marschlande (cf. no. 60823 above).
3. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
60836 The Committee of Experts held that the undertaking was only partially
fulfilled with regard to secondary schools, stating the same reasons as with regard to
primary schools. Therefore, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania first of all wishes to
refer to what it stated in no. 60825 et seqq. above, and to provide the additional
information with regard to secondary schools:
The Independent Schools provide the following offers for Low German:
1. Acquisition of Low German as a second foreign language (grade 7) or as a third
foreign language (grade 9) with three lessons per week. The assessment and the
standard can be compared with those for a second foreign language (B2 of the
Common European Framework of Reference for Languages, CEFR);
2. Acquisition of Low German as a required optional subject: All pupils are required
to learn Low German for at least one year. After one year, pupils can opt out (entry
grade 7 as stated in no.1 above, CEFR: A3)
3. Low German as a required optional subject: Pupils opt for Low German for six
months; level comparable to that of Swedish, Danish etc for tourists as a language
encounter, which means that learners are made aware of linguistic and cultural
particularities;
4. Low German has its place in the full-day offerings, as an optional subject, in
working groups, project work, and as part of language encounters, which means that
it is not necessarily a subject in its own right, but that language encounters take place
where this is deemed appropriate.
5. A school-related Low German curriculum in secondary schools, across grades
and subjects, taking into account the following approaches:
language encounter
early immersion lessons and bilingual education.
A Plan to Promote Low German across Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
(Landesplan Niederdeutsch in Mecklenburg-Vorpommern) is to be drafted under the
leadership of the working group on Low German in Schools (Arbeitsgruppe
Niederdeutsch in der Schule), in order to promote Low German at general-education
schools and beyond.

228

Furthermore, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania established a “Centre for Low
German Language and Culture” (Zentrum für Niederdeutsche Sprache und Kultur) in
Haus Mecklenburg in Ratzeburg. The Land Commissioner for Low German was
allocated half a teaching post to set up this centre. The Centre for Low German
Language and Culture in Ratzeburg seeks to deepen co-operation with neighbouring
Schleswig-Holstein. The motto is “Two regions – one language without borders”
(Zwei Länder – eine Sprache ohne Grenzen), and the aim is to establish crossregional activities for Low German as the common regional language.
The Low German Bible Centre “St. Jürgen zu Barth”, which was visited by
12,000 persons in 2008 (among them 500 pupils from general-education institutions,
200 teachers, 200 eigth graders undergoing special religious education provided at
that age) is designed for exhibitions and lectures to inform about Low German, in
particular with regard to letterpress printing and the German Reformation. In this
context, information is also provided with regard to the history of the German Hanse
and its links to Northern Europe, and Low German as the language of communication
within the Hanse.
There are special offers for pupils in Neubrandenburg in 2009/2010 to mark the 200th
birthday of Fritz Reuter, one of the most famous poets writing in Low German.
A research expedition will be arranged to commemorate this anniversary, aiming to
inform about Fritz Reuter's life and achievements and to document the times he lived
in by telling about important events, inventions, discoveries, and contemporaries.
As part of the 2010 Reuter year, pupils can deepen their information skills, acquire
knowledge, do independent research, engage in team work to test whether they are
team players and take their work results home. They will find support in using Low
German.
Interested classes and groups of pupils can experience these different topics as a
voyage back in time and use the offerings of the regional museum, the regional
library and the Fritz-Reuter Society free of charge to help them with project work at
Neubrandenburg schools.
4. Schleswig-Holstein
60837 The Committee of Experts held that the undertaking was only partially
fulfilled with regard to secondary schools, stating the same reasons as with regard to

229
primary schools. Therefore, Schleswig-Holstein first of all wishes to refer to what it
stated in no. 60827 above, and to provide the additional information that a new
decree regarding Low German in schools will concern both primary and secondary
schools.

Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (c) (iv) - Secondary Education iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those
pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered
sufficient;
60838 This obligation has been accepted by two Länder. In addition to the
measures referred to in no. 905 (Brandenburg) and nos. 906 – 908 (Saxony-Anhalt)
of the Second State Report, the following information is provided in compliance with
the above-mentioned obligation:
60839

Brandenburg refers to the statements made in no. 00765.

60840 Saxony-Anhalt provides the following information:
Activity groups or optional courses in Low German are offered at all types of schools.
These offers cannot always be recorded in the school statistics, especially when
there are too few pupils attending these courses. For instance, for the school year
2008/09, only one two-hour Low German course is recorded, which was attended by
nine pupils. Schools seek to improve their recording of such courses in the school
statistics for the school year 2010/11.
In 2007/2008, a reading competition called “Kinder lesen Platt” (Children Read Low
German) was held, in which 48 children from 24 schools (grade 3 and 4), 14 children
from 11 schools (grades 5 and 6) and five pupils from five schools (grades 7 – 9)
took part.

Art. 8, para 1, sub-para. (d) (iii) - Technical and Vocational Education iii) to provide, within technical and vocational education, for the teaching of the
relevant regional or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum;
60841 The Committee of Experts, in nos. 481 and 482 of its Third Evaluation
Report, stated that Hamburg once again failed to fulfill this undertaking, after finding
that the authorities failed to examine whether Low German could be offered at
catering schools training, and that there were several different kinds of technical and

230
vocational schools in Hamburg for social pedagogy and other relevant fields where
Low German could be included in the curricula.
60842 Hamburg replies as follows to the above-mentioned statements and to the
Committee's question whether measures have been taken, in line with the abovementioned recommendation, to make Low German an integral part of the curriculum
for vocational schools:
So far, Low German has not been made an integral part of school curricula, but the
plan is to include it in the future. Some vocational schools use elements of the Low
German culture and language or make reference to them. It has to be kept in mind,
though, that the core tasks of vocational schools include job-related skills, teaching
maths, German and English.
60843 With regard to Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, the Committee of Experts,
in nos. 556 and 557 of its Third Evaluation Report, stated that it was once again not
in a position to conclude on this undertaking, after finding
that, admittedly, it had been informed, in no. 5030 of the Third State Report, that
the Low German Framework Curriculum (Rahmenplan für Niederdeutsch) also
applied to vocational training and
and that, in 2007, a survey was conducted to assess the situation of Low
German education in technical and vocational education
but that it had not been informed about the results of the survey.
60844 Mecklenburg provides the following information with regard to the abovementioned requests for information:
In Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, there are 35 public vocationan schools, which
are governed by the new School Act for the region (Schulgesetz - SchulG M-V), of 28
January 2009, and have the following mandate, in line with section 2 of the above act
(educational mandate of schools), paragraph 3: “The attachment of pupils to their
natural, social and cultural environment, and the cultivation of the Low German
language shall be promoted”. In this context, Low German is part of the subject
German and of the field of communication. The students attending vocational schools
learn about the linguistic history, and sociology, and about the Low German culture
and history of the region.

Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (e) (ii) - University and Other Higher Education ii) to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher
education subjects

231

60845 This is an undertaking given by Bremen, Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western
Pomerania, Lower Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein with regard to Low German. In
this context, the Committee of Experts made the Committee of Ministers recommend,
in the second evaluation cycle, that the Länder “ …reverse the decline in study and
research opportunities for (i.a.) Low German and improve facilities for teacher
training …” In no. 795 of its Third Evaluation Report, the Committee pointed out that
the decline in study and research of these languages had not been reversed but it
had been put on hold and that the regional and minority languages were in danger of
disappearing as higher education programmes due to the twin impact of budgetary
pressures in Higher Education and the Europe-wide Bologna Process leading to a
standardised Bachelor and Master degree structure. In particular, that might harm
teacher training.
First of all, reference is made to the general description of the problem in no. 00771
et seqq.
60846

The following is reported for the Länder bound by the obligation:

1. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
60847 In no. 411 et seqq. of its Third Evaluation Report, the Committee found that
the undertaking was fulfilled, after stating
that it was no longer possible to study Low German as a subject at Bremen
University (and had not been possible at the time of the second monitoring cycle),
but that the language Low German is “a regular element in the syllabus” of the
Department of Languages and Literary Studies,
and that, in October 2005, an agreement was signed between the University of
Bremen and the Institute for Low German (INS) according to which up to three
seminars related to Low German are to be offered per term.
60848

There is no new information to provide.

2. Free Hanseatic City of Hamburg
60849 After observing, in nos. 484 and 485 of its Third Evaluation Report,
that, in the course of the change-over to BA/ Ma courses, it seems that Low
German is no longer offered as a separate subject,
but that there is a Chair for Low German at Hamburg University so that students
who choose the subject German Literature and Language in the Bachelor course

232
have the possibility to focus on Low German studies, for which reason it considered
the undertaking fulfilled.
60850 It seems that the Committee of Experts did not receive any information
regarding master courses and teacher training during the third monitoring cycle. For
this reason, Hamburg provides the following information regarding recent
developments in the field of Low German studies:
Meanwhile, master courses have been introduced at Hamburg University. Students
can opt for a Low German profile both in the MA course “German linguistics” and in
the BA course “German language and literature”. Also, all students doing a teachers’
BA course in German can opt for Low German as a focal subject.
This is a positive picture blemished by the fact that Hamburg is currently not in a
position to make regular Low German language courses a part of the training
measure. Students may add Low German courses onto their regular studies. These
are offered by the university in co-operation with the Adult Education Centre, and are
open to students of all faculties. This means that the university is currently being
stretched too far.
For the current regulations governing the courses, please go to
http://www.slm.uni-hamburg.de/BA/DSL_5Aufl_DRUCK.pdf
for the BA course on German language and literature
http://www.slm.uni-hamburg.de/masterstudium/dateien/MA-GL_1Aufl_ONLINE.pdf
for the MA course on German linguistics
http://www.slm.uni-hamburg.de/ifg2/pdf/FSB_LA_DE_2.pdf
for the training course for German teachers.

3. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
60851 The Committee of Experts, in no. 559 of its Third Evaluation Report and
relating to information provided in no. 5034 of the Third State Report, stated that Low
German is not offered as an independent subject under the newly introduced
Bachelor (BA) and Masters (MA) studies at Rostock University, nor as a subject
within teacher training studies. Although the Chair for Low German Philology still
exists at Rostock University, Low German studies have been integrated into German

233
Philology studies. Within this frame, a MA degree in German with advanced studies
in Low German/ Cultural Anthropology is currently under preparation.
In no. 560 of its Third Evaluation Report, the Committee of Experts pointed out that
the Chair for Low German at Greifswald University was cut in 2003 and has been
replaced by a 50% lectureship position. Low German can be studied as a minor
subject within a BA degree and as a subsidiary subject for the teaching profession for
primary schools and various types of secondary schools
The Committee of Experts is concerned with the reduction of the offer of Low
German at both universities, against the further decline of which the students’
initiative Low German was launched in 2003, among other measures. It nevertheless
considered that the undertaking was fulfilled at the time.
60852 The Committee of Experts encouraged the authorities to take efforts against
a further decline; against this backdrop, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania reports the
following changes: Since 1 February 2009, the W2 chair “Low German Language
and Literature” at Rostock University has been held by a new professor. This chair
offers an integrated range of fields covering linguistics as well as literature. Low
German is a compulsory part of all teacher training courses, and also a compulsory
subject of choice in the BA and MA courses.
The Institut für Volkskunde (Institute of Cultural Anthropology) of Rostock University
(Wossidlo Archives) continues to be involved in seminars held by the Low German
chair.
In 2008, Rostock University marked the 150th anniversary of German studies –
including Low German studies. Tow projects have drawn attention to Low German
research: The exhibition “German studies and society. German philology in Rostock
from 1858 to 2008” and the meeting on "German studies in the GDR", which dealt
with the history of science.
Greifswald University introduced a two-semester continuation course of studies in
2007/08 to enable students to acquire a master in Low German. The BA course for
Low German was discontinued at the same time.
There are lectures, seminars, practice-related project surveys and practical language
courses, dealing with the study of the following mandatory modules: History of Low
German; forms of existence of Low German; practical training I; practical training II,
and Low German literature. The lectures and courses are covered by teaching

234
assignments, a lecturer working part-time (on a limited contract) at the Institue for
German Philology, and a research assistant working for the Pomeranian Dictionary
(Pommersches Wörterbuch).
Due to the low demand for the MA course (one graduate), the Institute for German
Philology has decided to offer Low German as a subsidiary subject and to integrate it
into the Low German teacher training course. The study regulations have been
amended accordingly. The plan is to open the study course for the winter semester of
2009/2010, and to discontinue the Low German Masters course at the same time.
Lecturers of various north German universities from several Länder (Greifswald,
Rostock, Magdeburg, Hamburg, Kiel) met at the suggestion of the Verein für
Niederdeutsche Sprachforschung (Association for Low German Language Research)
to discuss to what extent Low German currently has a fixed place in the teaching
courses of north German universities. Furthermore they looked into the
establishment of a decentralized Low German Masters course and the introduction of
a Low German Certificate. A Working Group has been set up to implement the
theoretical results.

4. Lower Saxony
60853 The Committee of Experts, in its Second Evaluation Report, thought that the
above-mentioned undertaking was not fulfilled in Lower Saxony, as the study course
“Low German Language and Literature” at Göttingen University was discontinued
and the chair for Low German had not been filled again; in no. 608 et seqq. of the
Third Evaluation Report, the Committee considered the undertaking partially fulfilled,
as, in the context of the assignment of a new professorship for German Philology at
the University of Oldenburg, a focus on Low German research had been assigned to
the new professor. Low German was not offered as a subject in its own right, but in
the form of modules within the German course of Bachelor and Masters studies; also,
a language centre for Dutch, Low German and Sater Frisian was to be established.
60854 The Committee of Experts observed that the extent to which Low German
was offered at Oldenburg university did not correspond to the requirement of this
undertaking, which was all the more important given the need for qualified teachers.

235
The Committee of Experts therefore considered that the undertaking was only partly
fulfilled at the time. It asked the authorities to provide further information on the
above-mentioned language centre in the next periodical report. Accordingly, Lower
Saxony provides the following information:
Since the beginning of the winter semester of 2008/09, students at the Insitute for
German Studies who study Low German and Sater Frisian can choose Low German
as the focus of their studies, embedded in the traditional BA and MA courses for
German studies. Students may thus acquire a “Low German BA Certificate” and a
“Low German MA Certificate”. Examination codes for the BA programme and the
various Master programmes have been adapted accordingly.
For the specialized studies, Low German modules were created. Since the
2008/2009 winter term, there has been a Low German advanced module for the BA
programme and a Low German master module for the MA programme. Moreover, in
the basic module there is at least one course on Low German per semester, which is
mandatory for obtaining the Low German Certificate.
Students doing Low German may learn to speak and write Low German at
Oldenburg University, which is a particular feature; special courses for beginners and
advanced learners have been introduced, and start every semester. These courses
are also open to other students. To this end, specific professionalization modules
have been set up.
The Low German modules are also open to German studies students not having
opted for Low German as a special subject area. Some other Low German seminars
are also open to guest students, unless they are fully booked by those doing German
studies.
Oldenburg University seeks to place students doing Low German as trainees. To this
end, the university has contacted various schools and the public radio and television
broadcaster for the North of Germany, NDR.
A co-operation agreement has been concluded with the Oldenburg State Theatre in
particular for students not wishing to become teachers. Students may do their
traineeship with the Low German department of the State Theatre. Students
particularly deserving promotion may get paid jobs assisting the director. In return,
amateur actors may attend Low German lessons as part of the general education
programme at Oldenburg University.
Also, seeing Low German theatre plays has been made an integral part of Low
German literature studies. This includes plays produced by Oldenburg State Theatre;
tickets are funded from students’ fees.
Since 2006, four students’ writing their doctoral theses have been supported in the
university’s research field, and two externally funded projects have been conducted.

236
The research project on language contact based on written information, Transcribing
High and Low German. Furthermore, Oldenburg University engages in measures to
preserve the Low German language. It is planned to conduct a project in which
laymen and –women make voice recordings of Low German, in co-operation with the
Kreisheimatbund Bersenbrück. The aim is to record the local dialects as spoken by
members of 31 local clubs working for the preservation of local traditions. These
recordings are to be made available for research and teaching purposes and to be
provided on a Web portal or as audiobooks. Furthermore, a survey is being prepared
to cover the immersion language classes at Warstade-Hemmoor Grammar School
(grades 5 and 6), in 2009/10 and 2010/11.
With regard to the information requested by the Committee of Experts concerning the
language centre for Dutch, Low German and Sater Frisisian, reference is made to
no. 40818 above.

5. Schleswig-Holstein
60855 After stating, with regret, that Low German is no longer provided as a subject
in its own right as part of the new Bacherlor and Masters Degrees, the Committee of
Experts continued to consider the undertaking fulfilled, as it had found
that Kiel University has a chair for German linguistics with a focus on Low
German language and literature,
that Low German is offered as a module within the Bachelor degree at Kiel
University, and
that Low German seminars are offered within German studies at Flensburg
University.
60856 Schleswig-Holstein reports the following changes:
A half-time position for a research assistant has been created at Flensburg
University.
Low German can be selected at Kiel University as a focal subject in the two-subject
BA course, as part of the two-subject MA course, or as an additional subject to
supplement the two-subject MA of Education course. The two-subject bachelor
course is intended for students who plan to seek work or continue higher education
studies after receiving their bachelor degree. The additional subject is intended for
students in teacher training courses who would like to learn more about a third
subject. Successful completion of study of an additional subject leads to a certificate.

237

Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (e) (iii) - University and Other Higher Education iii) if, by reason of the role of the State in relation to higher education institutions,
sub-paragraphs i and ii cannot be applied, to encourage and/or allow the provision of
university or other forms of higher education in regional or minority languages or of
facilities for the study of these languages as university or higher education subjects;
60857 North-Rhine/Westphalia wishes to point out the following new aspects, after
highlighting the fact that the above-mentioned undertaking is already fulfilled by
admitting lessons in Low German, and after referring to nos. 937 and 938 of the
Second State Report and no. 5037 of the Third State Report (where reference is
made to the activities of the Germanistisches Institut of Münster University regarding
“Alt- und mittelniederdeutsche Sprache” (Old and Middle Low German Language), to
the research activities regarding the micro- and macro-linguistic status of Low
German, Low German grammar and Low German in other states and eras carried
out by the the Faculty of Linguistics and Literature at Bielefeld University):
The Department for Low German Language and Literature at Münster University has
the following new focal research areas:
•
the Project “Middle Low German Body of Glossaries” (Mittelniederdeutsches
Glossarienkorpus), which aims to collect and publish the terms and words contained
in late Middle Age Latin-Middle Low German glossaries and Middle Low German –
Latin glossaries;
•
the project “Atlas frühmittelniederdeutscher Schreibsprachen” (Linguistic atlas of
early Middle Low German written languages), which seeks to give a cartographic
description of the regional Low German written languages of the 14th century;
•
the research into historic urban languages;
•
the collection of early Low German prints, forming the basis for the history of
literature of the late Middle Ages;
•
the edition of Middle Age autographs and prints.
The Faculty of Linguistics and Literature of Bielefeld University has also launched a
new research project:
•
“Repertory of Middle Age Authorities (Middle High German and Middle Low German)”
(Repertorium der mittelalterlichen Autoritäten (mittelhochdeutsch und
mittelniederdeutsch).
It is meant to provide concrete and easily understandable examples of how literature
conveyed important knowledge in pre-modern times. Furthermore, prints and
autographs from the Middle Ages make the project a case study of intermediality in
the Middle Ages.

238
Both universities take part in the DFG-funded project on linguistic variations in
Northern Germany (SiN), alongside Hamburg, Kiel, Potsdam and Frankfurt/Oder.
This is the first large-scale survey to document and analyze the conditions in 18
regions within the Low German language area and to take stock of the everyday use
of Low German. For instance interviews and discussions within the family or among
friends will be recorded, providing authentic material and yielding findings about the
current situation of Low German dialects, the Berlin dialect, and about the High
German spoken in the North of Germany, and allowing a comparison of the linguistic
features of the regions involved.
Both universities continue to offer lectures and seminars on Low German, which
meet with great interest also beyond the academia.
The following changes have occurred in terms of staff:
Professor Dr. Honemeann, who used to run the Department for Low German
Language and Literature at Münster University together with Professor Dr. Macha on
a rotation basis, has retired. The selection process for the new head of department is
currently underway. Low German will be considerably upvalued, also in official terms:
Professor Dr. Honemann used to hold a chair for German literature of the Middle
Ages, but the post has now been advertized as a "professorship for linguistics, with
Low German as a focal area". Also, the professorship is designed to take particular
account of Low German as a contemporary language.
Professor Dr. Wirrer, of Bielefeld University, has retired, but will continue to support
the Low German studies project. As for the rest, the field of Low German has been
and will be run by Professor Dr. Seelbach until the appointment of a new head.

Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (f) (i) - Adult Education Di) to arrange for the provision of adult and continuing education courses which are
taught mainly or wholly in the regional or minority languages; or
60858 With regard to this undertaking adopted by the Free Hanseatic City of
Bremen, reference is made to para. 939 of the second State Report - as already
pointed out in no. 5038 of the Third State Report - where it is noted that courses on
Low German language and literature are organized by adult education centres in the
region; in addition the following newer trends are reported: The adult education
centre in Bremerhaven has also introduced a Low German course. Due to the lacking
demand, no courses were held at the adult education centre in Bremen in the last
two semesters. Courses are still on offer, though.

239
The Institut für Niederdeutsche Sprache (InS) has for the first time designed a Low
German language course for adult learners, which is called "Plattdeutsch lernen” and
is available on CD. Furthermore there are some associations in Bremen which
regularly meet to speak Low German.

Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (f) (ii) - Adult Education ii) to offer such languages as subjects of adult and continuing education
60859 In its Third Evaluation Report, the Committee of Experts once again did not
comment on this undertaking adopted by the Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg,
after it had been noted in no. 5039 of the Third State Report that the Low German
courses offered by the Hamburg adult education centre had continuously been
increased due to a rise in demand in recent years.

Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (f) (iii) - Adult Education iii) if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult education,
to favour and/or encourage the offering of such languages as subjects of adult and
continuing education;
1. Brandenburg
60860 In its Third Evaluation Report, the Committee of Experts once again did not
refer to the fulfilment of this undertaking.
Reference is also made to no. 5040 of the Third State Report and to the information
provided in nos. 941 and 942 of the Second State Report where it is noted that statesupported adult education in the adult education centres in Uckermark, Prignitz,
Ostprignitz-Ruppin and Oberhavel, in line with the freedom of action of schools, also
extends to courses in Low German.
2. Lower Saxony
60861 The Committee of Experts did not comment again on the above-mentioned
undertaking in Lower Saxony in its Third Evaluation Report; the following information
is provided with regard to Low German courses: In 2007, 5,905 Low German lessons
were held in adult education. Of these, 4.660 were eligible for funding; Lower Saxony
paid out 23,000€ to promote these measures.

240
3. Schleswig-Holstein
60862 The Committee of Experts once again did not refer to the fulfilment of this
undertaking, because it considered it fulfilled; for this reason, the institutions and
offers mentioned in nos. 945 - 948 of the Second State Report generally continue to
exist, as has already been noted in no. 5042 of the Third State Report.
Schleswig-Holstein continues to provide a wide range of further training opportunities
for those wishing to keep up or learn Low German. Apart from the centres for Low
German in Leck and Ratzeburg there are a number of adult education centres which
offer Low German courses. In 2008, 27 adult education centres offered a total of
54 courses, attended by 580 learners. This compares well with 1998, when there
were only 36 courses with 478 participants. These courses also include groups
where participants meet to speak Low German The latest information about Low
German courses can be searched at www.sh.kursportal.info.

Art. 8 Abs. Art. 8(1)(g) - Teaching of the History and Culture Education (g) to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture
which is reflected by the regional or minority language;
60863 Brandenburg, the Free Hanseatic City of Bremen, the Free and Hanseatic
City of Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Lower Saxony, and SchleswigHolstein – the Länder which adopted the above obligation – provide the following
information:
1. Brandenburg
60863a In its Third Monitoring Report the Committee of Experts did not comment on
this obligation; for this reasons reference is made, as has been done in no. 5044 of
the Third State Report, to the information provided in nos. 951 and 952 of the Second
State Report, which is still valid.

2. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
60864 It had been noted in the Third State Report (no. 5045), that the planned
overall concept on Low German intends to lead to compliance with the requirements
of the Charter, including the teaching of the history and culture related to Low
German, whereupon the Committee of Experts, in no. 415 of its Third Evaluation

241
Report, had requested further information on this concept and how it ensures the
teaching of the history and culture of Low German. Bremen in return provides the
following information:
60865 Curricula are increasingly designed as broad-based education plans, both in
Bremen and elsewhere. This is in keeping with the growing responsibilities of
schools, also with regard to the teaching contents, and also with the increasing focus
on skills-oriented standards. Therefore, Low German can be listed as a compulsory
subject area, but it would not be possible to prescribe details.
It is safe to assume, though, that Low German lessons – when taught in a meaningful
and inspiring manner – would be bound to look at the history, culture, and socioculture involved. The increase in the number of Low German books and magazines
for children and adolescents, and of didactic publications on the history and situation
of Low German in the region may benefit Low German in schools.
3. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
60866 Hamburg refers to the information stated in no. 955 of the Second State
Report, as already pointed out in no. 5046 of the Third State Report, namely that in
Hamburg, the Low German culture was flourishing primarily at the time of the
Hanseatic League.
4. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
60867 The Comittee of Experts, in no. 562 et seqq. of its Third Evaluation Report,
considered that the obligation continued to be fulfilled, based on the information
given in no. 5047 of the Third State Report according to which Low German history
and culture is taught at all educational levels and is part of the certificate course, and
that teaching materials are provided in the form of hand-outs relating to the
framework curriculum for Low German. Against this backdrop, Mecklenburg-Western
Pomerania provides the following information: Low German history and culture
continue to be taught comprehensively in the region. The “cultural” portal for Low
German in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania also provides information about
questions concerning the Low German history and culture.
5. Lower Saxony
60868 In no. 612 et seqq. of the Third Monitoring Report, the Committee noted that,
according to no. 5048 of the Third State Report, the decree “Die Region im

242
Unterricht” (the region in classroom instruction) expired, and that a new decree had
so far not been adopted. It also noted that a new core curriculum entered into force in
August 2006, but was not relevant for the teaching of Low German culture and
history. Against this backdrop it considered that the undertaking had ceased to be
fulfilled and requested information as to whether the authorities ensured that the new
decree regulates the teaching of the history and culture related to Low German, as
the Committee recommended.
60869 All new core curricula since 2006 require departments in all subjects to take
the regional context into account when selecting topics and units for the teaching of
skills. This includes linguistic, historic, and cultural aspects. The above-mentioned
decree was only intended as an appeal, whereas the new core curricula are binding
on all schools. Currently, there are no further-reaching provisions, as the decree is
currently being updated.
6. North Rhine-Westphalia
60870 Reference is made to no. 5049 of the Third State Report and to no. 00762
above.
In addition, attention is drawn to the fact that, when new curricula are drafted for
German as a school subject, specifically under the aspect of “reflections on
language” (Reflexion über Sprache), express mention is to be made to Low German
under the heading “language varieties and language change” (Sprachvarianten und
Sprachwandel).

7. Saxony-Anhalt
60871 Reference is made to no. 969 of the Second State Report, as had been made
in no. 5050 of the Third State Peport; as for the rest, reference is made to no. 60830.
8. Schleswig-Holstein
60872 The curricula of publicly maintained schools provide for many ways of
including Low German in classroom instruction. Reference is made to the Decree for
Low German in School (Erlass für Niederdeutsch in der Schule), which has already

243
been mentioned before, and to no. 970 of the Second State Report read together
with nos. 875 – 882 and 900 – 904 of said Report.

Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para. (h) - Basic and Further Training of Teachers h) to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement
those of paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;
1. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
60873 The Committee of Experts, in no. 418 of its Third Evaluation Report, stated
that the above-mentioned undertaking was not fulfilled, after it had found
that, according to the information provided in no. 5052 of the Third State Report,
retired teacher trainers had not been replaced and that the offer of further training
courses was to be transferred from the Land Institute for School to external
providers, and
that there continues to be no offer of basic teacher training.
60874 Bremen provides the following information with regard to the Committee's
question as to whether provision has been made for the basic and further training of
Low German teachers, in line with its recommendation:
Optional Low German modules continue to be provided as part of teacher training at
Bremen University.
Both municipalities in the region (Bremen and Bremerhaven) have increased and
consolidated their commitment regarding further training for Low German instruction
and school life, as stated in no. 00762 above. There are currently no further training
offers.
2. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
60875 In spite of the low demand, the Committee of Experts, in no. 486 et seqq. of
its Third Evaluation Report, considered the above undertaking fulfilled, because
the Hamburg Land Institute for Teacher Training and School Development
(Landesinstitut für Lehrerbildung und Schulentwicklung) incorporated the promotion
of the Low German language into a series of advanced training courses with
mandatory participation for teachers and educators of pre-school classes,
teachers are supported by means of a training programme for Low German
established by the Land Institute for Teacher Training and School Development, as
set out in no. 5011 of the Third State Report,

244
and that a series of follow-up training courses are offered mainly for teachers in
lower secondary education who will receive a certificate upon successful completion
of the course, as stated in no. 5021 of the Third State Report.
The following subsequent developments are to be noted:
The Land Institute for Teacher Training and School Development (Landesinstitut für
Lehrerbildung und Schulentwicklung) supplies professional and voluntary teachers
with the handout "Low German books for children and adolescents" issued by the
Low German Institute (INS). The handout contains information regarding suitable
books in Low German for children and adolescents in primary and secondary
education.
60876 Hamburg provides the following information in response to the Committee of
Experts' question as to how the authorities meet the requirements under the Charter
when seeking to reform teacher training:
At present, there are no concrete plans. However, as Hamburg provides Low
German language acquisition classes in primary education, it currently looks into
whether and how their hiring policies can give preference to teachers of German who
have done Low German language and literature as an optional required university
module.
3. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
60877 Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania refers to the detailed information provided
in no. 5054 of the Third State Report; further, the following is noted:
86 teachers have successfully attended the certificate course Low German for active
teachers. In October 2006, the course started with teachers from all types of school
from across Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania. The certificate was formally handed
out to 86 teachers on 31 January 2009. This further training measure has already
proved very effective: Low German is already taught to a much larger extent at
schools, because these teachers have taken part in the further training measure.
The regional Low German Commissioner offers 60-hour Low German language
acquisition courses in Schwerin-Mueß and in Greifswald; the B2 courses are
designed for teachers and pre-schools teachers and will start in March 2010. The two
language acquisition courses correspond to module I of the certificate course, and
provide a continuation of the Low German teacher training course within the meaning
of a subsidiary subject.
In October 2010, the “evaluation meeting of Low German teachers - New schemes
for Low German” will be held (“Evaluationstreffen Niederdeutschlehrer und Erzieher –
Neue Konzepte für Niederdeutsch”) at Güstrow University of Applied Sciences. The

245
aim is to look into whether the authorities set Low German education on the right
track when introducing the certificate course. The further training measures receive
funds from the regional Institute for Quality Development (Institut für
Qualitätsentwicklung Mecklenburg–Vorpommern). The future funding is secured.
4. North Rhine-Westphalia
60878 North-Rhine/Westphalia refers to the detailed information provided in
no. 5055 of the Third State Report; further, the following is noted:
The situation of university education is stable. The training of future German teachers
provides the basic premise for dealing with Low German. Target agreements have
been concluded with the region to secure teacher training at universities. The
Ministry of Schools and Further Education will seek to uphold this situation in the next
round of target agreement talks to be held as of 2010. What is important here is that
colleges for the professional training of teachers should be run by senior teachers
who actually speak Low German. That would ensure that classroom instruction is
accompanied didactically. Young and interested teachers need such yet-to-be
established expert assistance. Creating a further training offer with or without a
certificate is conceivable.
5. Saxony-Anhalt
60879 Saxony-Anhalt refers to no. 5056 of the Third State Report, read together
with no. 983 of the Second State Report; further, the following is noted:
Annual further Low German training measures for teachers from all types of school
were provided by the Arbeitssstelle "Niederdeutsch" of Magdeburg Otto von Guericke
University and the Landesheimatbund.
6. Schleswig-Holstein
60880 Schleswig-Holstein refers to no. 5057 of the Third State Report, read
together with no. 5036 of the Second State Report and nos. 984 – 987 of the Second
State Report; further, the following is noted:
In 2004, a provision was introduced requiring future teachers of German to take part
in a Low German training module. It is not clear to what extent graduates
subsequently taught Low German in their lessons.

Art. 8, para. 1, sub-para (i) - Supervisory Bodies -

246
i) to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures
taken and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or
minority languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be
made public.
60881 To the extent that the Committee of Experts considered the abovementioned undertaking not fulfilled also for Low German in its Third Monitoring
Report, reference is made to the general reply made in nos. 00803 – 00813.
60882 - 60885

Article 8 (2)
With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the
regional or minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the
number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage or
provide teaching in or of the regional or minority language at all the appropriate
stages of education.
60886 In no. 5062 of the Third State Report it had been stated anew that, as
regards university education, this obligation - in the sense of “undertake ... to allow” is met for the entire territory of the Federal Republic by virtue of Article 5, para. 3, of
the Grundgesetz (Basic Law) on the autonomy of institutions of higher education.
60887 In no. 683 of its Third Evaluation Report, the Committee of Experts asked
the authorities again to clarify whether there are territories within the Land where Low
German is not traditionally used.
With regard to Danish and North Frisian, the two minority languages, the language
areas coincide largely with the settlement areas of the two national minorities or
ethnic groups. The spread and use of regional languages is difficult to assess. It is
safe to assume that Low German is spoken across Land Schleswig-Holstein, if less
so in towns and cities and by younger persons. The actual facts therefore make it
impossible to implement the obligation. Reference is made to no. 00301.

Article 9
Judicial authorities

247

Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of
residents using the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified
below, according to the situation of each of these languages and on condition that
the use of the facilities afforded by the present paragraph is not considered by the
judge to hamper the proper administration of justice

Art. 9, para 1, sub-para. (b) - Civil Proceedings iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;
60901 In its Third Evaluation Report, the Committee of Experts did not comment on
this undertaking, which was adopted by Bremen, Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western
Pomerania, Lower Saxony, North-Rhine/Westphalia and Schleswig-Holstein.
See no. 1007 of the Third State Report in correspondence with no. 213-215 of the
Second State Report concerning the compliance with the undertaking by the
procedural provisions for the courts.

Art. 9, para 1, sub-para. (c) - Proceedings before Courts concerning Administrative
Matters in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;
60902 In its Third Evaluation Report, the Committee of Experts did not comment on
this undertaking, which was adopted by Bremen, Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western
Pomerania, Lower Saxony, North-Rhine/Westphalia and Schleswig-Holstein.
See no. 5064 of the Third State Report in correspondence with no. 1008 read
together with nos. 213 – 215 and no. 1009 of the Second State Report.

Art. 9, para. 2, sub-para. (a) - Validity of Legal Documents The Parties undertake:

248
a) not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely
because they are drafted in a regional or minority language;
60903 In its Third Evaluation Report, The Committee of Experts did not comment
on this undertaking, which was adopted by Brandenburg, Bremen, Hamburg,
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Lower Saxony, North-Rhine/Westphalia, SaxonyAnhalt and Schleswig-Holstein.
See no. 5065 of the Third State Report in correspondence with no. 1008 read
together with nos. 213 – 215 and no. 1009 of the Second State Report.
Article 10
Administrative authorities and public services
61000 After the second and third evaluation cycle, the Committee of Ministers
adopted the following recommendation no. 5, at the suggestion of the Committee of
Expers: “take …action to establish a structured policy for making it practically
possible to use regional or minority languages in dealings with the administration …”.
In no. 798 of the Third Evaluation Report, the Committee of Experts noted that, in its
view, such a policy was lacking.
61001 Reference is made to the general reply in no. 01004 above, where it was
stated that such measures can only be taken if there is sufficient demand and in
areas where there is a sufficiently large number of persons belonging to the minority
group. Also, information is provided with regard to the use of Low German in
communication with authorities in connection with the below-mentioned provisions.
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who
are users of regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below
and according to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this
is reasonably possible:

Art. 10, para. 1, sub-para. (a) (v) - Submission of Documents v) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a
document in these languages;
61002 The perception already expressed in paras. 1011-1018 of the second State
Report relative to Bremen, Hamburg and Lower-Saxony that the above undertaking

249
does not require any particular administrative decrees because the Charter
constitutes directly enforceable law in Germany applies to all Länder, as had already
been pointed out in no 5066 of the Third State Report. Consequently the finding that
Bremen (nos. 420 – 423 of the Third Evaluation Report) and Hamburg (495 – 498)
did not fulfil the undertaking, and that Schleswig-Holstein (no. 685) fulfilled it only
formally, is once again refuted. As to whether future measures are intended: this is
not the case. The statements of the Committee of Experts generally applies to all
other Länder; for some of them some additional information is provided below:
1. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
61003 In nos. 5069 - 5071 of the Third State Report, Mecklenburg-Western
Pomerania explained that its citizens knew from its PR work
that “Low German as the regional language is the second official language in the
Land ...”;
in no. 569 of the Third Evaluation Report the Committee stated that it was not
clear,however, whether citizens had been made aware specifically of the possibility
to submit documents in Low German through the PR work or other campaigns.
Mecklenburg expressly reiterates that it does not see itself under such obligation and
that it does not intend to take such measures.
2. Lower Saxony
In. no. 621 et seqq. of its Third Evaluation Report the Committee of Experts found
that Lower Saxony did not fulfill this undertaking; Lower Saxony replies as follows,
taking into account the above-mentioned provision and supplementing the
information provided in no. 61002 above: The Lower Saxonian Ministry of the Interior,
Sport and Integration, in November 2007 and August 2009, informed all regional
units, including the regional capital Hanover and its surrounding region, and the city
of Göttingen, of the above-mentioned assessment by the Committee of Experts. The
letter informed the authorities primarily about the region’s obligations with regard to
Low German as a regional language, and to Sater Frisian as a minority language.
In response to the two letters, examples where given showing that speakers of Low
German can validly submit legal documents in Low German. For instance: The rural
district of Soltau-Fallingbostel accepts legal documents drafted in Low German, as
does the rural district of Wittmund. Visbek municipal administration also ensures
unconditionally that documents written in Low German can be validly submitted.
Emden guarantees that, if need be, legal documents in Low German can be validly
submitted. Documents drafted in Low German are validly recognized by the

250
municipality of Lindern. Celle district administration accepts legal documents in Low
German.
With regard to the statement of the Committee of Experts in no. 624 of its Third
Evaluation Report concerning the abolition of the administrative level of the
government region (Bezirksregierung), reference is made to the position stated in
no. 00708 above.
Due to the lack of more detailed information, Lower Saxony does not comment on
the statement of the Committee of Experts in no. 625 of its Third Evaluation Report
that some tax offices refused documents drafted in Low German. The endeavours of
the Land authorities to look into the matter have not led to any result.

Art. 10, para 1, sub-para. (c) - Drafting of Documents c) to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in a regional or
minority language.
61004 The Committee found that Bremen (in nos. 424 et seqq. of the Third
Evaluation Report) and Hamburg (499 et seqq.), Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
(nos. 571 et seqq.), Lower Saxony (no. 627 et seqq.) and Schleswig-Holstein (686 et
seqq.) did not fulfil the undertaking, and asked whether the authorities had
meanwhile drawn up documents in Low German or taken measures that may lead to
the practical implementation of the above obligation (in keeping with its views). The
regions in question repeat their stance according to which the above provision
constitutes directly enforceable law in Germany which is complied with through being
permitted and does not prescribe further measures.
In addition, some Länder provide the following information:
1.

Mecklenburg-Vorpommern

61005 Local and regional politicians frequently speak Low German on occasions
which concern the local culture and Low German, sending a signal to the population.
The tendency to speak Low German in the administrative context has risen. Citizens’
letters drafted in Low German continue to be answered in the same language, and
local and regional administrative letters (documents, speeches, letters, words of
greeting etc) which concern Low German are also drawn up in the regional language.
2. Lower Saxony

251
61006 The rural district of Wittmund accepts documents drafted in Low German.
The town of Emden guarantees the drafting of documents in Low German. The
municipality of Holtriem is in a position to draft documents in Low German, if need
be; such need has, however, not arisen so far. The municipality of Wardenburg
accepts documents drawn up in Low German. Lindern local administration draws up
documents in Low German when necessary.

Article 10 (2)
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of
residents who are users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the
measures specified below, the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:

Art. 10, para. 2, sub-para. (a) - Use of a Regional or Minority Language a) the use of regional or minority languages within the framework of the regional or
local authority
61007 As with all undertakings in Art. 10 para. 2, the above undertaking is already
fulfilled by allowing the use of the language. It does not require active
encouragement but only refraining from forbidding its use, so that the framework
conditions for each Land set forth in paras. 1034-1051 of the second State Report
suffice to fulfil the undertaking, as had already been pointed out in no. 5079 of the
Third State Report. The findings of the Committee in its Third Evaluation Report that
the undertaking was not or not fully fulfilled (Bremen no. 427 et seqq., Hamburg
no. 502 et seqq., Lower Saxony no. 630 et seqq. of the Third Evaluation Report) are
therefore once again refuted.
61008 Some Länder provide the following information in this paragraph in response
to the Committee’s question whether additional measures are conducted or planned
to implement the undertaking; this does not mean that they recognize a legal
obligation to do so.
Lower Saxony refers to no. 61003 above and no. 61306 below, and gives the
following examples:
In the municipality of Rhauderfehn many local government officials speak Low
German – all of them understand the language. Low German is used in the
administration on a daily basis. The use of the language is promoted by the Low
German Commissioner. The same applies to the rural district of Soltau-Fallingbostel.

252
In Ostrhauderfehn, Low German is used in the local administration in the day-to-day
work. Low German is promoted through the appointment of Low German
Commissioners who - in close co-operation with the “Plattdütskbüro” of the
Ostfriesische Landschaft, a public-law corporation - support and encourage the use
of the regional language within the administration. The municipality co-operates
closely with almost all East Frisian municipalities who have Low German
Commissioners in place. In 2009 the Ostfriesische Landschaft – Plattdütskbüro
conducted a campaign called “Septembermaant in Plattdütskmaant”. The head of the
Plattdütskbüro co-ordinates the measures taken by the municipalities, towns and
rural districts in East Frisia to implement the language charter. The town of Uelzen
applies the principle that every citizen may voice his or her concerns in Low German,
in keeping with the Charter. The same applies to the exchange among administrative
units and the town’s public bodies. In 2001, the rural distric of Lüneburg installed a
Commissioner for the Preservation of Low German. The municipality of Gellersen
permits the use of Low German within the municipal administration. In the rural
districht of Wittmund Low German is frequently spoken in the administrative offices,
both among staff members and with the citizens. The district has two Low German
Commissioners who have been mandated to maintain Low German in the
administration (“in de Amtsstuuven to behollen”). The municipality of Friedeburg has
taken part in the “Low German at work” campaign. Most of the municipal staff
members speak Low German. On 1 August 2009 the municipality appointed a
Commissioner for Low German who is immediately subordinate to the mayor and
maintains contact with the Commissioners in Wittmund, the neighbouring
municipalities and the “Plattdütskbüro” run by the Ostfriesische Landschaft, an
association of municipal authorities. He supports those concerned with the
implementation of the undertakings adopted with the European Language Charter.
He also seeks to ensure that Low German is increasingly used as the second
language in the day-to-day work of the administration, in the public, and in local
government work. Furthermore he should enable staff members to take part in
courses in order to learn to speak and to write Low German. Furthermore he seeks to
encourage the municipal authorities to accept Low German as the second language
and to actually use it in their daily work. Visbek municipality encourages its citizens to
use Low German in the local administration offices. To this end signs saying “Ick
schnack platt. Du uck?” have been applied to the doors to offices of all those staff
members who speak Low German. Low German is spoken as often as possible –
also with members of neighbouring authorities (“Daun dait Lern!”). Furthermore, the
regional language is frequently used in conversations with young colleagues, above
all trainees. The mayor and his deputies address their audiences in Low German,
when appropriate. Civil registry office weddings are held in Low German, if the

253
couples so wish. All staff members of the Holtriem local administration understand
the regional language (and 90% of them actually speak it). The town of Emden
permits the use of Low German within the town administration and uses it in its dayto-day work. Staff members attended language courses and were encouraged by the
Low German Commissioner to practice the language at work. The central proposals,
ideas and complaints office is staffed with persons speaking Low German, and
therefore accepts letters drafted in Low German. The information office set up within
the citizens‘ advice office is the first contact point to be able to communicate in the
regional language. Emden’s local government press spokesperson speaks Low
German and represents the town in the regional language, when appropriate. Civil
registry office weddings in Low German were introduced in 2007. For the municipality
of Wardenburg it goes without saying that Low German is spoken. The use of the
language is promoted. In Fredenbreck, civil registry office weddings are held in Low
German. Furthermore, the town hall has Low German speakers who act as persons
of contact. The townhall of the municipality of Hage informs its visitors by means of a
board stating that Low German is spoken there. Most of the municipal government
officers speak Low German. The municipality has appointed a Low German
Commissioner, via whom it participates in the working group of the Ostfriesische
Landschaft. The municipality of Hesel has appointed a Low German Commissioner;
civil registry office weddings are held in the regional language. There are town hall
persons of contact who speak Low German. The municipality of Zeven also conducts
civil registry office weddings in Low German. The town of Schneverdingen has Low
German speaking persons of contact and provides Low German internet courses. In
the rural district of Friesland Low German is spoken in some authorities. The doors of
offices are marked with stickers saying “Wi schnacken platt” (We speak Low
German) and two Low German Commissioners have been appointed who work on a
voluntary basis – measures designed to promote the regional language. Some staff
members in Ostrhauderfehn local administration are able to write in Low German. In
October 2009 writing-in-Low-German courses will be held at county level and in cooperation with the adult education centres. The municipality of Hollenstedt has a Low
German Commissioner who is active in the administration. Lindern local government
has permitted the use of Low German in the administration. 70% of the staff
members speak Low German – and most of the others understand the regional
language. Delmenhorst municipal administration has staff members who speak the
regional Low German language. Celle rural district has permitted the use of Low
German in the local administration as long as the partners are able to communicate.
There is a person of contact for Low German. Some municipalities belonging to the
rural district have appointed an official person of contact for Low German. The rural
district of Landkreis Osterholz has permitted the use of Low German within the local

254
administration. The use of Low German is common in the municipal administration of
the rural district of Emsland. Staff members are encouraged to use their Low German
whenever appropriate. The Low German Commissioner who works at the tourist
office of Salzhausen has been mandated by the rural district of Harburg to cover the
whole district. The staff members of Salzhausen local administration are encouraged
to speak Low German with the citizens. Administrative staff members in the
associated municipalities speak only Low German with a great number of citizens.
Staff members are permitted to take part in Low German further training measures,
which are paid for from local funds. Stickers were handed out to staff members
indicating that they speak Low German.
61009 Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania provides the following information:
The use of Low German in regional and local authorities continues to play a positive
role. For instance, the deputy member of parliament for the constituency of
Mecklenburg-Strelitz addressed the audience in Low German when she spoke on the
occasion of the Fritz-Reuter Society in Neustrelitz on 19 April 2008. The speech has
meanwhile been published in volume 19 of the contributions of the Fritz-Reuter
Society.
Regional representatives (e.g. the Minister for Education, Science and Culture; the
rtd Minister-President; the President of the regional parliament) use Low German
when they speak about the local tradition, culture, literature and history, seeking to
promote the use of the regional language.
61010
Art. 10, para. 2, sub-para. (b) - Submission of Applications b) the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written
applications in these languages;
61011 As the Länder - according to the comments in nos. 1052-1063 of the Second
State Report - have made provisions for the submission of applications but almost no
use is being made thereof and because the Committee - in addition to the wording of
the Charter - generally considers that the undertaking has not been fulfilled (cf.
paras. 429 et seqq. of the Second Evaluation Report for Bremen, paras. 506 et seqq.
of the report for Hamburg and paras. 633 et seqq. for Lower Saxony, and 689 et
seqq. for Schleswig-Holstein) the same as in Art. 10 para. 2 sub-para. (a) applies
with regard to the above undertaking. This position had already been put forward in
no. 5086 of the Third State Report.

255
Notwithstanding, two of the Länder concerned have provided the following additional
information:
61012 Brandenburg
The local and regional authorities continue to accept written or oral applications in
Low German.
61013 Lower Saxony
Reference is made to no. 61003 above. The following examples illustrate how the
undertaking is implemented:
In Emden written applications in Low German are much less frequent than oral ones.
The town of Uelzen introduced the option of submitting oral or written applications in
Low Germany in 1999. The rural distric of Soltau-Fallingbostel accepts applications in
Low German. Where this poses a problem, Low German speakers are consulted.
Most applicants shy away from using Low German in the townhall. The municipality
of Gellersen (in the rural district of Lüneburg) allows Low German speakters to
submit oral applications in the regional language. In the rural distric of Wittmund
citizens may submit their concerns in Low German, either orally or in writing. The
town halls in the rural district of Friesland permits oral applications in writing. In the
rural district of Osterholz, written and oral application in Low German are permitted,
and oral applications have actually been submitted. Oral and written applications in
Low German are also permitted in Friedeburg, Visbek, Wardenburg, Lindern,
Salzhausen, and in Delmenhorst.
61014

Art. 10, para. 2, sub-para. (c) – Publication of Official Documents of the Regional
Authority in the Regional Language
c) the publication by regional authorities of their official documents also in the
relevant regional or minority languages;

Art. 10, para. 2, sub-para. (d) – the publication of official documents of the regional
authority in the regional language
(d) the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in the relevant
regional or minority languages;

256

61015 The above undertakings are already fulfilled in terms of granting permission,
as are the undertakings mentioned in Art. 10 para. 2 sub-para. (a). This view had
already been stated in no. 5093 of the Third State Report. The negative findings
stated by the Committee in in Third Evaluation Report (nos. 423 et seqq. regarding
Bremen and 636 et seqq. regarding Lower Saxony) are also rejected.
61016 In no. 638 of its Third Evaluation Report the Committee held that Lower
Saxony did not fulfil the undertaking because there was no concrete evidence
showing that regional or local authorities published documents in Low German. In
response, Lower Saxony states the following:
61017 Land authorities do not present regional authorities within the meaning of the
Language Charter – a stance taking into account the view held by the Federal
Ministry of the Interior. This means that official documents issued by the Land
authorities are not governed by Art. 10 para. 2 sub-para. (c) of the Language Charter.
Against this background official documents issued by the Land authorities are not
published in Low German. The following regional or local authorities, for instance,
publish official documents in Low German:
The municipality of Wardenburg will in future publish such documents also in Low
German. Friedeburg translates official documents and notifications into Low German,
if necessary, and publishes them.
61018
61019

Art. 10, para. 2, sub-para. (e) - Use of the Minority Language by Regional Authorities
in Debates in their Assemblies e) the use by regional authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in
their assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of
the State;
61020 Bremen, Hamburg and Lower-Saxony adopted the above-mentioned
undertaking. They state that it is fulfilled as soon as it is permitted, also because the
Charter and its provisions constitute directly applicable law.

257

61021 In no. 639 et seqq. of the Third Evaluation Report, the Committee found that
the undertaking was only partially fulfilled , in Lower Saxony. It asked the Land if any
measures had been taken to encourage the use of Low German by regional
authorities in debates in their assemblies, and if it could provide examples. The
following is in reply to this question:
61022 Lower Saxony refers to no. 61003 above and provides the following
examples:
The rural district of Wittmund has held Council meetings in Low German. Most
recently, though, there has not been any demand for meetings in Low German. That
said, any Council member and any citizen may make oral contributions in Low
German. Parts of the Council meetings in the rural district of Friesland are sometimes
held in Low German. The rural district of Harburg permits Council meetings in Low
German. So far, one meeting was held in the regional language. The rural district of
Celle permits local government meetings in the regional language provided all
members and the audience speak Low German. The use of the regional language at
local governmet meetings is permitted in the rural district of Osterholz. The Council
meetings in Soltau-Fallingbostel are not held in Low German, in contrast to the
Council meetings held in the municipalities belonging to the district. In the rural
district of Lüneburg, some Council motions were tabled in High and Low German.
On 15 October 2007, the Council of the rural district of Stade decided to hold a
meeting in Low German once a year as of 2008. The minutes regarding this item of
the agenda were drawn up in Low German. As a result, a suitable agenda item is
selected and discussed in Low German every year. (In 2008, this was “Budget rules
and budget plan for 2008 – lowering the credit line”. In 2009, it was: “Election of the
representatives to the Third Assembly of the Region of the Duchies of Bremen and
Verden for the legislative period of 1 January 2010 to 2015.”)

Art. 10, para. 2, sub-para. (f) - Use of the Regional Language by Local Authorities in
Debates in Their Assemblies f) the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the
State;
61023 In its Third Evaluation Report, the Committee of Experts did not comment on
this undertaking, which was adopted by Bremen, Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western
Pomerania, Lower Saxony, and Schleswig-Holstein.

258
It is pointed out, to be on the safe side, that the above undertaking constitutes
directly enforceable law and that all Länder fulfil it simply by permitting the use of
regional languages in their assemblies.
In addition, the following information is provided by Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
and Lower Saxony:
61024 With regard to Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania it is once more confirmed
that Low German is being used extensively, and often exclusively, in local Council
meetings, especially in rural areas.
61025 Lower Saxony lists the following examples:
In Wittmund, Council and committee meetings are partly held in Low German. Visbek
Council meetings may be held in Low German; sometimes the regional language is
used to make individual statements. All meetings of the culture committee were held
in Low German in 2007/2008. The closed meetings of the management committee
are generally held in Low German. In Holtriem, Council meetings are held in the
regional language, provided all Council members speak Low German. If not, the
meeting is held in High German. In Wardenburg, Council meetings are held in Low
German. The regional language is used in Uelsen to hold offical meetings and
Council meetings. Low German is spoken at Council meetings in Ostrhauderfehn,
provided all Council meetings agree. The Council members will switch to High
German if and when one of those present so wish. In Friedeburg, one Council
meeting per year is held in Low German. Low German is generally spoken at closed
management committee meetings in Visbek. In 2007, Visbek organized the “Year of
Low German”. The municipality for instance held all meetings of the school, youth
and culture committees (and the meetings of the management committee) in the
regional language. Delmenhorst holds Council meetings in Low German on demand.
In 2009, as part of question and advice time at Delmenhorst townhall, a citizen made
her contribution in Low German. In Hagermarsch and Berumbur, which are part of
Hage district, Council meetings are held in the regional language. Low German is
used in Schneverdingen to hold Council meetings, and to draw up papers and
minutes. In Dötlingen, Council meetings are held in High German, but the use of Low
German is permitted. During question time, Low German may be used; answers will
also be given in the regional language. Salzhausen holds one Council meeting per
year in Low German. Lindern permits the use of Low German in its Council and
committee meetings.

259
Article 10 (2) (g) - Place-names in Low German
(g) the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official
language(s), of traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or minority
languages.
61026 Although Schleswig-Holstein has not accepted this obligation for Low
German, with its order of 11 June 2007 the Ministry of Research, Economics and
Transport allowed for the possibility of bi- or multi-lingual town signs. Several
municipalities in Schleswig-Holstein have actually introduced bilingual town signs,
using High and Low German. By order of 31 March 2009 superseding the previous
order, the Ministry added the possibility for bilingual High and Low German
information signs (Sign 385, StVO) and tourist information signs for special
topographical features, and not only town signs (Sign 310, Road Traffic Regulations
(StVO)).

Article 10 (3)
With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other
persons acting on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which
regional or minority languages are used, in accordance with the situation of each
language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
a) to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in the provision of the
service; or
b) to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request and receive
a reply in these languages; or
c) to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request in these
languages.
61027 In its Third Evalution Report, the Committee of Expert did not comment on
this obligation regarding letter c), which Brandenburg accepted. This obligation is
fulfilled as the submission of requests in regional or minority languages has not been
prohibited and is thus permitted – a view already put forward in no. 5106 of the Third
State Report and nos. 1080 and 1081 of the Second State Report.

Ad Article 10 (4)
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted
by them, the Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:

260

Article 10 (4) (a) - Translation or interpretation
a) Translation or interpretation as may be required;
61028 As regards the undertaking adopted by Lower Saxony, the statement in
para. 5107 of the Third State Report that no shortcomings in the use of Low German
have become known still applies.

Art. 10, para. 4, sub-para. (c) - Appointment of Public Service Employees having a
Knowledge of a Regional Language c) compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees
having a knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory
in which that language is used.
61029 In nos. 508 et seqq. of its Third Evaluation Report the Committee of Experts
held that the obligation was not fulfilled in Hamburg due to a lack of positive practice
or a structured approach regarding the compliance with assignment wishes of staff
members. In reply, Hamburg reiterates its stance according to which it does not have
to create but only to comply with assignment wishes staff members may have, and
that wishes to be employed in the Low German language environment have not been
rejected.
61030 In no. 574 et seqq. of its Third Evaluation Report, the Committee of Experts
held that the obligation was only formally fulfilled in spite of the information provided
by Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, that, when transferring positions from the Land
administration and the subordinate institutions to the districts and municipalities, Low
German proficiency is taken into consideration to the greatest extent possible. The
Committee held that there was a lack of practical implementation of this undertaking.
In response, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania states that it does not have to create
but only to comply with assignment wishes staff members may have, and that wishes
to be employed in the Low German language environment have not been rejected.
61031 In response to the stance taken by the Committee of Experts in nos. 574 et
seqq. of its Third Evaluation Report that the obligation has only formally been fulfilled
in Lower Saxony and that there is a lack of practical implementation of this
undertaking, Lower Saxony states that it does not have to create but only to comply
with assignment wishes staff members may have, and that wishes to be employed in
the Low German language environment have not been turned down. Furthermore,

261
the Committee of Experts enquired whether public service employees with Low
German competence had been asked whether they wished to be appointed to
appropriate posts. Lower Saxony provides the following examples in reply:
The municipalities of Rhauderfehn and Ostrhauderfehn give the appropriate posts to
staff members speaking Low German, to accommodate citizens' needs and motivate
the staff members in question. The rural district of Friesland seeks to match the
assignment wishes of their staff members with the language demand of any job
involved. Low German speaking staff members at Friedeburg town hall are employed
in jobs where Low German language skills are an asset. The town of Cuxhaven
seeks to accommodate the assignment wishes of public service employees speaking
Low German.
61032 In no. 692 of its Third Evaluation Report, the Committee of Experts held that,
as it had not received further information on practical examples or any other
information on any kind of positive practice, incentives or structural approach with
regard to this undertaking, that this undertaking was not fulfilled. Schleswig-Holstein,
too, states that it does not have to create but only to comply with assignment wishes
staff members may have, and that wishes to be employed in the Low German
language environment have not been rejected. Assignment wishes of Low German
speakers wishing to be employed in the Low German language area have not known
become known. It would be surprising if such a wish was voiced, as the whole
regional territory belongs to the Low German language area. See also the comments
under nos. 60886 and 60887 above. The Committee of Experts is therefore
requested to examine whether the obligation is at least formally fulfilled.
Article 11
Media
61100 With regard to the undertakings under Article 11 relating to Low German, we
refer first of all to the description of general issues in No. 01104 ff. above.
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the
territories in which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each
language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are
competent, have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the
independence and autonomy of the media:

262
Art. 11 (1) (b) (ii) - Broadcasting of radio programmes
ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
61101 With regard to this undertaking, accepted by Brandenburg, Bremen,
Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Lower Saxony, Saxony-Anhalt and
Schleswig-Holstein: Although the Committee of Experts has changed its position that
this undertaking can be fulfilled only by promoting measures by private radio
broadcasters, it notes in No. 437 of its third evaluation report with regard to Low
German that promoting regional or minority language broadcasting through financial
incentives for private broadcasters would not infringe German law. The Committee’s
findings on the individual Länder are as follows:
1. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
61102 In No. 434 ff. of its third evaluation report, the Committee concludes that this
undertaking is fulfilled in Bremen, after the following was reported in No. 5116 of the
Third State Report:
that under the Land Media Act for Bremen, amended on 1 April 2005, broadcasts
in Low German are to be incorporated into the programming to an adequate
extent;
that the culture and information Nordwestradio station airs a radio play in Low
German every other Saturday between 19.05 and 20.00 hours, and that Low
German books, audio books and CDs are presented in the programme; that the
series “Gesprächszeit” features guests who are Low German speakers or
persons otherwise involved with Low German issues; and that the Nordwestradio
programme “Nordwestradio unterwegs” reports live on current Low German
issues, such as Low German teaching at schools;
that the radio station Bremen Eins broadcasts news in Low German every
weekday, and that the popular stations Bremen Eins and Bremen Vier also
present up-to-the-minute reports and features in or on Low German; and finally
that Bürgerrundfunk Bremen has been broadcasting the one-hour radio
programme “De Plattsnuten” once a month for the past nine years, and that a
team of four to six editors produces special broadcasts at irregular intervals.
2. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg

263
61103 With regard to Low German in Hamburg, the Committee of Experts
considers in No. 512 ff. of its third evaluation report that this undertaking is fulfilled
after having been informed
that the public broadcaster NDR, in cooperation with the Institute for Low
German in Bremen (INS), which is partly funded by Hamburg, broadcasts news daily
and another programme every two weeks (although according to the Committee, “the
representative of the INS informed the Committee of Experts that he was not aware
of such an agreement”); and
that there is currently a one-hour programme in Low and Standard German
every second Saturday on Hamburg citizens radio channel TIDE.
61104
3. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
61105 After having been informed in No. 5118 of the Third State Report of the
following, the Committee concluded in No. 577 ff. of its third evaluation report that
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania fulfilled this undertaking:
that NDR 1 Radio MV has a dedicated editor as a contact person for Low
German;
that apart from the Low German horoscope in the morning, Low German
interviews, radio plays and literary reports, the talk show “De Plappermoehl”,
which is broadcast from various places in the Land, airs 12 times a year on the
last Saturday of the month between 19.05 and 20.00 hours and repeats on the
following Friday between 21.05 and 22.00 hours; and
that on all other Fridays, NDR 1 Radio MV airs “Dat Beste ut de Plappermoehl”
in this time slot with highlights from past shows, and that this programme has
been very popular since 1983.
61106 Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania also reports the following new
developments:
At the meeting of Bund-Länder officials on Low German in Schwerin on 13-14 May
2009, the responsible editor from NDR 1 Radio M-V gave a presentation making
clear that nearly every subject was appropriate for broadcasts in the regional
language Low German. The focus is on Low German and the culture and history of
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania. NDR 1 Radio M-V radio listeners like the bilingual
(Low and Standard German) format.

264
A review of the week's news in Low German is produced regularly. Reports featuring
studio guests who speak Low German are very popular with listeners. For the 2009
Federal Horticultural Show (BUGA) in Schwerin, a new series in Low German was
created which reported on the show, the Land capital Schwerin and MecklenburgWestern Pomerania. With a variety of programmes and activities, NDR 1 Radio M-V
is helping to preserve Low German in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania.
With the successful initiative “Musik ut uns Land”, NDR 1 Radio M-V and the NDR
television programme “Nordmagazin” hope to present new music in Low German. In
spring 2009, NDR 1 Radio M-V and “Nordmagazin” started the “Musik ut uns Land”
campaign with the motto “Kennt ji all dat niege Lied?” with the aim of providing a
platform in NDR 1 Radio M-V and “Nordmagazin” for Low German language and
music and the relevant artists.
The radio Open Channels in Schwerin with branches in Greifswald and Malchin are
very interested in radio programmes produced by Low German speakers themselves.
The Land public service broadcasting corporation offers numerous options for
promoting media literacy, especially related to Low German. The “media mobiles” of
NB Radio Treff 88.0 are available free of charge and are very popular for projects.
They offer a media adviser to help those who are interested.
61107
4. Lower Saxony
61108 After having been informed in No. 5119 of the Third State Report of the
following, the Committee concluded in No. 645 ff. of its third evaluation report that
Lower Saxony fulfilled this undertaking:
that public broadcaster NDR 1 Niedersachsen has regular daily thematic
sections in Low German, including the religious programme “Plattdeutsche
Ansprache”. In addition, there are two one-hour thematic broadcasts in
Low German where all Low German dialects of Lower Saxony can be heard, as
well as two Low German radio plays per month. The two-hour weekly magazine
“Düt un Dat op platt” features presentations in Low German and music from the
north of Germany;
that open channels and local broadcasting stations provide for a number of
Low German broadcasts, some of them on a regular basis. Radio Ostfriesland
airs the magazine “Radio up Platt” and the weekly two-hour programme
“Pottkieker”. Radio Jade broadcasts the programme “Een Stünn up Platt” four
times a week. The private Ems-Vechte-Welle in Lingen features various

265
programmes on a regular basis, including the Low German “Starparade” and
the weekly magazine “Grenzenlos”. The station Oldenburg eins occasionally
transmits magazines and plays in Low German. Low German programmes can
also be heard every month on Radio ZuSa from Uelzen and osradio from
Osnabrück.
61109 Lower Saxony also reports the following new developments:
Citizens channels in Lower Saxony are currently broadcasting the following radio
programmes (all programmes last one hour unless otherwise indicated): Radio
Ostfriesland: “Klock twalf” (weekdays), “Wunschkantine” (weekdays), “Radio up platt”
(weekly), “All wat gaud is” (monthly); Ems-Vechte-Welle: “Früher gaft dat nicht”
(monthly), “Starparade” (Two hours every two weeks), “Mottokiste” (every two
weeks), “Knuet” (every two weeks), “Plattdeutsche Geschichten” (at irregular
intervals), “Grenzenlos” (weekly; only partly in Low German); radioweser.tv
“Plattdeutsche Nachrichten“ (weekly), “Von Guntsiet noh Guntsiet” (every three
weeks), “Johan & Sophie – tohus in Kötermmor” (at irregular intervals); Radio
Tonkuhle: “Die Adelschen Tanten” (weekly); o-eins: “Seniorenradio” (monthly; only
partly in Low German), “De plattdeutsche Hörtied” (monthly); Radio ZuSa: “Hüt
schnackt wie platt” (monatlich), “Enfach platt” (monthly; two hours); Radio Aktiv: “Düt
un dat un annerswat” (weekly); Radio Okerwelle: “Espresso – plattdeutscher
Wochenrückblick” (weekly), “Plattdeutsche Lesungen” (at irregular intervals); osradio:
“Wi küert platt” (every two weeks for about 30 minutes).
See No. 41105 with regard to possible measures to support regional or minority
languages in private radio broadcasting and about the letter by the minister-president
of Lower Saxony.
5. Saxony-Anhalt
61110 The Committee of Experts did not comment on Saxony-Anhalt in its third
evaluation report. See No. 5120 of the Third State Report describing a meeting
between the competent representative from the Ministry for Cultural Affairs and the
head of department of radio MDR 1 Sachsen-Anhalt Hörfunk, who is responsible for
Low German programmes, took place in February 2004 to discuss how to increase
the number and quality of MDR programmes in and on Low German.
Saxony-Anhalt is planning another meeting with the broadcaster MDR 1 SaxonyAnhalt in order to increase the number of programmes in and on Low German.
6. Schleswig-Holstein

266

61111 After having been informed in No. 5121 of the Third State Report of the
following, the Committee concluded in No. 695 ff. of its third evaluation report that
Schleswig-Holstein fulfilled this undertaking:
NDR radio (NDR 1 Welle Nord) broadcasts the following programmes in Low
German:
o “Hör mal’n beten to” (weekdays at 9.40): Commentary in Low German on
everyday life in Northern Germany,
o “Das Niederdeutsche Hörspiel” (every other Friday at 21.05): Radio plays
ranging from whodunnits to classics and comedy,
o “Von Binnenland und Waterkant” (daily at 20.05): Reports, features and
portraits in Low German and every Monday the Low German hour,
o “De Week op Platt” (Fridays at 17.40): The week in review in Low German,
o "Gesegneter Abend” (Mondays at 19.04): Some thoughts on the day,
o “Ünner’t Strohdack” (October to April): Readings in Low German;
and
with the Act on the establishment of a corporation under public law ‘Offener
Kanal Schleswig-Holstein (Gesetz über die Errichtung einer Anstalt öffentlichen
Rechts “Offener Kanal Schleswig-Holstein”, OK-Gesetz), the successful Open
Channel became a legal entity on 1 October 2006. Under the act, the Open
Channel is explicitly responsible for promoting regional and minority languages.
The Schleswig-Holsteinischer Heimatbund, which in Schleswig-Holstein
particularly represents the interests of Low German speakers, appoints a
representative to the five-member consultative council of the Open Channel.
61112 In addition, the Land reports:
Low German interviews and features are a regular element of programming at R.SH.
Starting at 18.00, the “Abendjournal” programme regularly has segments in Low
German. R.SH supports regional groups by announcing their concerts and
interviewing them in Low German.
Broadcaster NDR 1 Welle Nord has continued and expanded its extensive offerings
in Low German for Schleswig-Holstein, ranging from information to entertainment
such as reports on current issues in the news and magazines and the series “SH
privat” offering a behind-the-scenes look at prominent residents of SchleswigHolstein.

Art. 11 (1) (c) (ii) - Broadcasting of television programmes

267
ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
61113 In No. 42 of its third evaluation report, with regard to this undertaking the
Committee notes that its was informed by the authorities that the amendment of the
inter-state treaty on the public regional broadcaster NDR (Staatsvertrag über den
Norddeutschen Rundfunk) in May 2005 includes a section stating that its
programming mandate should take into account the diversity of the regions, including
culture and language.
The Committee also welcomes the information (No. 5123 of the Third State Report)
that from 1 – 8 October 2006, NDR presented a Low German week on television
which featured various cultural and regional programmes with a focus on Low
German. The Committee understands that a Low German week also took place in
October 2007.
61114 In its third evaluation report and taking into account the following findings,
the Committee nonetheless found that this undertaking was not fulfilled or only partly
fulfilled in the Länder that had accepted it (Brandenburg, Bremen, Hamburg,
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Lower Saxony, Saxony-Anhalt and SchleswigHolstein).
1. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
61115 In No. 441 ff. of its third evaluation report, the Committee refers to No. 5124
of the Third State Report with regard to this undertaking in relation to Low German in
Bremen indicating
that since 1998, the non-commercial open channel Bürgerrundfunk Bremen has
been recording and broadcasting one Low German play a year by the
Oberneulander Speeldiel;
that this programme is also broadcast later by Bürgerrundfunk Bremerhaven;
and
that the commercial broadcasters RTL and Sat.1 air reports in Low German
about the language or regions where Low German is spoken; and
that however there do not seem to be any Low German programmes on the
public television channel.
Bremen reports that it currently has no precise information on how private
broadcasters are implementing the provision.

268
2. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
61116 With regard to the promotion of Low German television programmes in
Hamburg, in No. 517 ff. of its third evaluation report the Committee stated that it had
no information on television programmes on public or private television in Low
German.
See No. 01104 ff. above for a response to the Committee’s question whether the
(Hamburg) authorities had taken any measures in the meantime to encourage or
facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in Low German.

3. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
61117 In No. 582 of its third evaluation report, the Committee notes that it had
been informed that the Rostock Open Channel ROK-TV broadcast a monthly 45minute programme in German and Low German which was repeated several times. It
received indirect financial support from the authorities. It had also been informed
about plans to broadcast Low German programmes on the Open Channels in
Neubrandenburg and Schwerin. Based on this information, the Committee found that
this undertaking was only partly fulfilled for Low German.
61118 With regard to the status of encouraging the broadcasting of Low German
television programmes and in particular to the Committee’s question whether
measures had been taken to encourage and/or facilitate it, more precisely: to expand
the presence of the Low German language on private broadcasters, with reference to
No. 01105 ff. the Land adds the following:
At the meeting of Bund-Länder officials on Low German in Schwerin on 13-14 May
2009 and at the conference “The Language Charter in Germany 10 years on: Praxis
and perspectives”, discussions with the media representatives of public and private
television broadcasters and the Open Channels focused on the framework conditions
for producing and broadcasting Low German television programmes, and the media
representatives were encouraged to broadcast more Low German television
programmes. As a result of the meeting of Bund-Länder officials on Low German,
the minister-president of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania wrote to the
representatives of public and private television broadcasters and the Open Channels
on 24 September 2009, encouraging them to pay greater attention to the regional
language Low German in their programming.
As legal supervising body, Hamburg assumed responsibility for writing to NDR (14
October 2009).

269

4. Lower Saxony
61119 In No. 649 ff. of its third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts
considered that this undertaking was not fulfilled for Lower Saxony, after noting that
“[a]ccording to the information provided in the third periodical report [No. 5126], the
public regional broadcaster NDR regularly broadcasts Talk op Platt, a programme in
Low German, along with other programmes in Low German throughout the year. The
Committee of Experts understands that the programme Talk op Platt was last
broadcast in 2006 and has been replaced by a new Low German programme.
However, it does not seem that this programme is still being broadcast.”
61120 With regard to the Committee’s question whether the authorities have in the
meantime encouraged and/or facilitated the broadcasting of television programmes in
Low German, the Land provides the following information in addition to the basic
explanation in No. 01105 ff.:
After the series “Talk op platt” ended in 2006, it was followed by the programme “Die
Welt op platt”. Twenty episodes have been broadcast since 2006. This series will
continue with six episodes in the second half of 2009 and beyond. So it is not true
that a Low German programme was discontinued and not replaced. The following
programmes are broadcast on private television channels:
• TV38: Low German theatre (at irregular intervals)
• radioweser.tv: Low German theatre (at irregular intervals); “Johan & Sophie –
tohus in Kötermmor” (at irregular intervals; includes Low German content)
• o-eins: Low German theatre/readings (at irregular intervals), “Snack up platt”
(every three months), “Bi Johan & Sophie” (at irregular intervals; includes Low
German content)
See also No. 41105 about the letter by the minister-president of Lower Saxony.
4. Schleswig-Holstein
61121 In No. 702 ff. of its third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts
“understood that there were no programmes in Low German on private television
channels ... the citizens television channel Offener Kanal Kiel-Fernsehen has a Low
German focus. The OK Kiel and OK Flensburg broadcasts recordings of Low
German stage-plays. However, these programmes seemed to be aired on an
irregular basis ... [and] it appears that Low German programmes are only broadcast
once per year on the regional public television broadcaster NDR”.

270
61122 With regard to the Committee’s question whether the authorities have in the
meantime encouraged and/or facilitated the broadcasting of television programmes in
Low German, the Land provides the following information in addition to the basic
explanation in No. 01105 ff.:
NDR offers an extensive and diverse range of television programmes in Low
German, which has steadily expanded over the years. Regional programmes
regularly report thoroughly on Low German issues. NDR has broadcast the
programme “Die Welt op Platt” since 2007. In autumn 2009, six new segments were
broadcast. For 30 years, NDR has broadcast plays staged at Hamburg’s OhnsorgTheater. There is “Neues aus Büttenwarder”, focus weeks on Low German and
much more.
The public television broadcaster ARD has filmed new versions of familiar fairy tales.
One of these films was dubbed into Low German for NDR television.

Art. 11 (1) (d) - Audio and audiovisual works
d) to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and
audiovisual works in the regional or minority languages;
61123 In its second evaluation report, the Committee considered that this
undertaking was not fulfilled by the Länder which have accepted it (Brandenburg,
Bremen, Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Lower Saxony, North RhineWestphalia, Saxony-Anhalt and Schleswig-Holstein), arguing that “it is not sufficient
to allow works in regional or minority languages to benefit from general promotion
measures for audiovisual works, this being already covered by the principle of nondiscrimination”. In its third evaluation report, the Committee considered that this
undertaking was not fulfilled by any Land except Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
because the Committee was not aware of any specific measures aimed at
encouraging and/or facilitating the production of audio and audiovisual works in Low
German.
Where the Länder referred to the activities of the media company nordmedia, for
which they provide funding, as specific measures, the Committee of Experts states
that “the Supervisory Authority’s form of promotion is only relevant in the context of
creating a support structure for private radio broadcasting, and that funds given by
nordmedia are relevant for Art. 11. 1. f)” only.
1. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen

271
61124 With regard to the Committee’s question following its findings in No. 445 ff.
of the third evaluation report whether the authorities had taken the positive action the
Committee believes necessary, Bremen responds as follows:
The media company nordmedia (Die Mediengesellschaft Niedersachsen/Bremen
GmbH) concentrates primarily on promoting film and television productions. In some
cases, this involves enhancing the film productions with Low German subtitles or
dubbing them into Low German. An example is the three-part documentary “Die
Ostfriesland Saga: Geschichten von der Ems” (The saga of East Frisia: Tales of the
River Ems) which combines recollections recounted by speakers of Low German
with historical photos and poetic contemporary footage.
2. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
61125 With regard to the Committee’s statement that “[a]ccording to the information
provided by the Hamburg authorities in the third periodical report, there is an
extensive range of Low German audio and audiovisual works in the free-market
private sector. However, the Committee of Experts has not been made aware of any
encouragement and/ or facilitation of the production of audio and audiovisual works
in Low German, for example by the Media Authority” (No. 521 of its third evaluation
report) and to its question whether the (Hamburg) authorities had taken such
measures in the meantime, Hamburg refers to its statement in No. 61138.
3. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
61126 In addition to No. 5133 of the Third State Report, the Land reports as
follows:
For the Wossidlo anniversary in 2009, a descendant of Richard Wossidlo (1859 –
1939) shot the film “Richard Wossidlo, der ‘Volksprofessor’” documenting the life and
work of Richard Wossidlo.
At the Fritz Reuter Literature Museum in Stavenhagen, his birthplace, a room for
viewing films was added in 2009 with Land funding. Visitors to the museum’s
permanent exhibition can view five feature films and a film series based on Reuter’s
works. The films were produced by NDR, DEFA and UFA.
4. Lower Saxony
61127 With regard to the question whether Lower Saxony has fulfilled this
undertaking, in No. 653 ff. of its third evaluation report the Committee repeats its view

272
that funds given by nordmedia are not relevant for this undertaking. With regard to
this view and to the Committee’s question whether the authorities have in the
meantime taken measures to encourage and/or facilitate the production and
distribution of audiovisual works in Low German, the Land responds that it regards
the general information in No. 3540 of the Third State Report as sufficient
encouragement.
5. Schleswig-Holstein
61128 The Hamburg Schleswig-Holstein film fund supports feature films and
unusual television productions in all genres. Film projects receive financial support
from the first draft of the script through production to distribution and festival
presentations. Criteria for funding include quality of the project and substantive
reference to Hamburg or Schleswig-Holstein. This includes filming in Hamburg and/or
Schleswig-Holstein and using local skilled labour and film technology companies.
Applications may be submitted to the Hamburg Schleswig-Holstein Film Fund GmbH
(www.ffhsh.de).

Art. 11 (1) (e) (ii) - Newspaper articles
ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the publication of newspaper articles in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
61129 With regard to this undertaking, accepted by Brandenburg, Bremen,
Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Lower Saxony, Saxony-Anhalt and
Schleswig-Holstein, the German authorities disagree with the Committee’s view,
already expressed in the second evaluation report, that this undertaking is fulfilled
only if measures taken to compensate for the economic weakness of print media in
Low German are effective and not purely symbolic or formal, and if the measures of
encouragement and/or facilitation actually result in regular publication, i.e. at least
once a week. Germany considers this view to be wishful thinking on the part of the
Committee and not based on the provision.
We also refer to the constitutionally guaranteed freedom of the press and limits to
government influence on the press described in No. 01104 ff., and to the fact that
there is no publicly subsidized print media in Germany.
1. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen

273
61130 In No. 447 of its third evaluation report, the Committee stated that Bremen
did not fulfil this undertaking after being informed of the following (No. 5139 of the
Third State Report):
“that the authorities from several Länder finance the Institute for Low German in
Bremen (INS), whose work includes the publication of news items. However,
the latter resembles a press service on topics related to Low German that is
issued a few times per month in German”; and
“that newspaper articles in Low German are published in some local
newspapers, however, this does not seem to occur on a regular basis (meaning
at least once per week). While noting the presence of these articles, the
Committee of Experts observes that the current frequency of the publication of
newspaper articles does not correspond to the requirements under this
undertaking.”
61131 With regard to the status of encouraging the publication of newspaper
articles in Low German and to the Committee’s question whether the authorities have
taken measures in the meantime to encourage and/or facilitate the publication of
newspaper articles in Low German on what it considers a regular basis, Bremen is
confident that it fulfils this undertaking in line with the principle of freedom of the
press.
2. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
61132 The Committee did not comment on this undertaking with regard to Hamburg
in its third evaluation report. See No. 5141 of the Third State Report indicating that
Hamburg subsidizes the quarterly Low German publication of the Quickborn e.V.
association with an average of € 7,000 annually, which with an appropriate definition
of the term “press release” can be considered a measure in the spirit of the above
undertaking, and that Hamburg also contributes to the funding of the Institute for Low
German, whose publications the Committee regards as insufficient.
3. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
61133 In No. 587 of its third evaluation report, the Committee considered that this
undertaking remains fulfilled, although according to No. 5142 of the Third State
Report, an increasing number of Low German articles is being published in all daily
newspapers of the Land (at least one page per week) as well as in regional,
homeland, advertising and Sunday papers. Print media coverage is not subsidized,
which applies, of course, also to the de facto second official language Low German.

274
The Land reports on the current status of encouraging the publication of Low German
newspaper articles as follows: The meeting of Bund-Länder officials on Low German
in Schwerin on 13–14 May 2009 and the conference “The Language Charter in
Germany 10 years on: Praxis and perspectives” in Schwerin on 14–15 May 2009
also examined the situation of Low German in the print media. For the daily
newspapers in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, the following tasks are of primary
importance with regard to the preservation of Low German:
-

forum for Low German authors, publication of recent texts in Low German;
reporting by journalists on the multi-faceted preservation and promotion of Low
German in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania and beyond.

As a result of the meeting of Bund-Länder officials on Low German, the ministerpresident of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania wrote to newspapers in the Land on
24 September 2009, encouraging them to continue using Low German in their daily
editions.
In early September 2009, the working group Plattdütsch in de Kark held an
interregional meeting at the St Jürgen Low German Bible Centre in Barth. About 60
members from Westphalia, Schleswig-Holstein, Hamburg, Saxony-Anhalt, Lower
Saxony, Berlin, Brandenburg and Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania took part. One
focus of the meeting was how to write brief press releases in Low German, for
example on issues of ethics, for print and audiovisual media.
4. Lower Saxony
61134 The Committee did not comment on this undertaking with regard to Lower
Saxony in its third evaluation report. See No. 5143 of the Third State Report. In
addition, about 40 newspapers in Lower Saxony continue to publish articles in Low
German, in some cases daily. See also No. 41105 about the letter by the ministerpresident of Lower Saxony.
5. Saxony-Anhalt
61135 The Committee did not comment on this undertaking with regard to SaxonyAnhalt in its third evaluation report. See No. 5144 of the Third State Report indicating
that an intensive exchange of ideas was held with the assistant chief editors of the
daily newspaper Volksstimme, which is of particular relevance in the Low German

275
speech area, on increasing the quantity and quality of articles in and on Low German
in the Volksstimme.
The results of this effort can be reported as follows: Articles in Low German appear
regularly in the regional editions of the Magdeburger Volksstimme, mainly in the
weekend editions. In addition, the Altmarkzeitung also lists and reports on events in
or about Low German.
1.

Schleswig-Holstein

61135a The Committee considers that Schleswig-Holstein has fulfilled this
undertaking. In addition, the Schleswig-Holsteinische Zeitungsverlag (sh:z), which
publishes 14 regional newspapers, was awarded the renowned Low German Literary
Prize of the city of Kappeln in 2009. The prize honours the publisher for having
expanded the presence of Low German in its publications in recent years.

Art. 11 (1) (f) (ii) - Financial assistance for audiovisual productions
ii) to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual
productions in the regional or minority languages;
61136 In its third evaluation report, the Committee again found that this undertaking
remained unfulfilled in Brandenburg, Bremen, Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western
Pomerania, Lower Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein, stating that it was not clear how
existing measures for financial assistance could also be used for audiovisual
productions in Low German.
1. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
61137 In its third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts did not refer to the
fulfilment of this undertaking. Bremen refers to its statement in No. 61124.
2. Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg
61138 With regard to the Committee’s findings and questions in No. 523 ff. of the
third evaluation report, especially its question as to how the new subsidy fund allows
for the qualification of productions in Low German in practice, Hamburg provides the
following information: The Hamburg Schleswig-Holstein Film Fund provides support
for projects and measures to advance film culture in Hamburg and SchleswigHolstein in terms of quality and quantity, and to enable the production of high-quality

276
and diverse films in the Land. As a result, audiovisual productions in Low German
are also eligible for funding if they satisfy the general funding criteria.
3. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
61139 With regard to the Committee’s findings and questions in No. 588 ff. of the
third evaluation report, especially its question as to whether any projects in Low
German have been financed in the meantime, the Land refers to No. 61126.
4. Lower Saxony
61140 The Committee did not comment on this undertaking with regard to Lower
Saxony in its third evaluation report. See No. 5151 of the Third State Report
indicating that funding applications for audio and film productions can still be
submitted to nordmedia GmbH, and that for example the feature film “Apparatspott –
Episode III” and the TV documentary “Land unter! Geschichten aus dem Moor”, both
in Low German, received funding.
In addition, the Land reports: In 2008, nordmedia provided funding for the three-part
documentary "Die Ostfriesland Saga: Geschichten von der Ems", in which Low
German speakers are interviewed about the past.
5. Schleswig-Holstein
61141 With regard to the Committee’s findings and questions in No. 708 ff. of its
third evaluation report, especially its question as to how promotion schemes could be
adapted with a view to ensuring that Low German productions can qualify for
financial assistance more regularly, Schleswig-Holstein provides the following
information: The Hamburg Schleswig-Holstein Film Fund provides support for
projects and measures to advance film culture in Schleswig-Holstein in terms of
quality and quantity, and to enable the production of high-quality and diverse films in
the Land. As a result, audiovisual productions in Low German are also eligible for
funding if they satisfy the general funding criteria.

Art. 11 (1) (g) - Training of journalists
to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using regional or
minority languages.

277
61142 In No. 450 ff. of its third evaluation report, the Committee regarded this
undertaking, accepted by Bremen and Hamburg, as partly fulfilled, in light of the
information that the public broadcaster Radio Bremen provides regular follow-up
training for its staff with regard to Low German and its use in radio programmes.
61143 With regard to the Committee’s question whether the authorities had taken
measures to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using Low
German, the Land reports the following: As part of the reform of training, those
involved in training are required to take the Charter’s requirements into account.
61144 The Committee regarded this undertaking as not fulfilled for Hamburg after
noting the “possibility to study both Low German language and literature as well as
journalism and communication studies. However, these courses do not seem to be
linked to one another”.
61145 With regard to the Committee’s question whether the authorities had taken
measures to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using Low
German, the Land reports the following: The responsible authority is not currently
aware of any concrete measures.

Article 11 (2)
The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and
television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or
similar form to a regional or minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission
of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language.
They further undertake to ensure that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of
expression and free circulation of information in the written press in a language used
in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of the
above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be
subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by
law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security,
territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others,
for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the
authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
61146 Due to a lack of apparent issues, the Committee of Experts did not comment
in its third evaluation report on this undertaking, which was adopted by Brandenburg,

278
Bremen, Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Lower Saxony, North RhineWestphalia, Saxony-Anhalt and Schleswig-Holstein.
61147 As indicated in No. 5155 of the Third State Report, Nos. 1183-1184 of the
Second State Report indicated that the undertaking is already fulfilled for the entire
federal territory by Germany’s Basic Law, which guarantees the free reception of
radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries, and no additional
measures are required.

Article 12
Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries,
cultural centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as
literary work and film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals
and the culture industries, including inter alia the use of new technologies – the
Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used and to the
extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this
field:
Art. 12 (1) (a) - Types of expression, and access to works
a) to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority
languages and foster the different means of access to works produced in these
languages;
61200 The Committee of Experts did not comment in its third evaluation report on
this undertaking, which was adopted by Bremen, Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western
Pomerania, Lower Saxony, North Rhine-Westphalia, Saxony-Anhalt and SchleswigHolstein.
61201 As in No. 5156 of the Third State Report, we refer to the fundamental
importance of the Institute for Low German, which receives funding from the Länder
Bremen, Hamburg, Lower Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein as well as the regional
local authority Landschaftsverband Westfalen-Lippe, in fulfilling this undertaking; we
also refer to Nos. 1189 – 1245 of the Second State Report with regard to further
implementation measures taken in Brandenburg, Bremen, Hamburg, Mecklenburg-

279
Western Pomerania, Lower Saxony, North Rhine-Westphalia, Saxony-Anhalt and
Schleswig-Holstein.
61202 In No. 5159 of the Third State Report, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
emphasized the following two of the many institutions working to fulfil this
undertaking:
1.

2.

The association Freunde und Förderer der Fritz-Reuter-Bühne Schwerin e.V.
has initiated a Low German writing contest for “junge Schriewerslüüd ut
Mäkelborg un Vörpommern” under the auspices of the Minister-President with
the theme “Wi maken di platt”. Those behind the writing competition believe it
the best way of promoting Low German among young people. It is aimed at
encouraging young people between 16 and 25 years of age from MecklenburgWestern Pomerania to take part.
The Zentrum für Niederdeutsche Sprache – Vorpommern e.V. in Wilmshagen
took up its functions in 2004. Its aim is to enrich the cultural scene in general
and the role of Low German language in Western Pomerania in particular. Very
special emphasis is put on the relation to the cultural roots and traditions of
Western Pomerania as well as the entire Pomeranian Euroregion. Other efforts
of the Centre are directed at cooperation with partners in Poland who are based
in the former region of Pomerania.

The Zentrum für Niederdeutsche Sprache – Vorpommern e.V. offers the following
services:
Performances by the Low German drama club Plattdütsch späldäl to Stralsund
e.V. in nursery schools, primary schools and other public institutions such as
museums
Preparation of a stage production entitled “De Bernsteinhex” (The Amber Witch)
for upper secondary schools and higher education classes
Low German courses for nursery-school teachers
An advanced training day for Low German
Due to internal considerations, the centre has since ceased to operate.
3.

In 2005, the Landesheimatverband Mecklenburg-Vorpommern e.V., the city of
Dömitz and the Ludwigslust Landkreis set up the Low German festival “Die
Norddeutschen Tage – Das Niederdeutsche Festival an der Elbe”. The festival
was presented by NDR 1 Radio MV. Funds for the project were provided by the
Ministry for Education, Scientific and Cultural Affairs and the East German
Savings Bank Association. The ambition of the organizers and their many

280
partners is to use the Norddeutsche Tage as a focus for the bringing together,
across Land borders, of the ancestral vernacular of the North and the Low
German way of life. The river Elbe is intended to serve as a connecting element
for the participation across Land borders of municipal authorities, citizens,
associations and clubs in the above festival.
61203
1.

Lower Saxony reports the following new developments:

Bugenhagen memorial year 2008:

In 2008, the Protestant Church in Pomerania commemorated the 450th anniversary
of the death of Johannes Bugenhagen (1485 – 18 April 1558), Pomeranian reformer
and friend of Martin Luther. Bugenhagen, the “Reformer of the North”, helped
translate the Bible into Low German during his stay in Lübeck. The ornately
decorated Lübeck Bible of 1533/34 went down in history as the “Bugenhagen Bible”.
The anniversary year began with a Bugenhagen symposium at the St Jürgen Low
German Bible Centre in Barth. A Bugenhagen conference organized by the faculty of
Protestant theology in Greifswald, a ceremony at the Greifswald Cathedral and an
exhibition showing Bugenhagen’s influence on northern Germany all honoured the
great reformer. The exhibition also travelled to Trezebiatów and Warsaw, Poland.
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania provided funding and organizational support for the
Bugenhagen commemoration in 2008.
A copy of the Lübeck Bible in Low German (1533) was purchased in April 2009 with
funding from the eastern German savings bank foundation and is on permanent loan
to the St Jürgen Low German Bible Centre in Barth.
2.

Wossidlo Year 2009:

On 26 January 2009, the University of Rostock commemorated the 150th birthday of
Richard Wossidlo (1859 – 1939), Low German folklore specialist. Numerous
associations and institutions planned the Wossidlo celebrations in 2009, including the
Volkskulturinstitut Mecklenburg und Vorpommern im Kulturbund e. V. and the
University of Rostock’s institute for folklore (Wossidlo Archives). The life and work of
this secondary school teacher from Waren was the subject of the Land exhibition
“‘Wist mi wat vertellen?’ Richard Wossidlo, a genius of folklore field research” on
display in Ribnitz-Damgarten and Waren/Müritz. A travelling exhibition, “Richard
Wossidlo: Founder of folklore research in Mecklenburg", was shown in eight locations

281
in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania as well as Haus Mecklenburg in Ratzeburg,
accompanied by numerous events and lectures throughout the Land.
The Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania Land library produced a Wossidlo bibliography
in the series of editions from the Wossidlo Archives. The publisher Hinstorff-Verlag
published a selection of texts by Wossidlo (Das große Wossidlo-Lesebuch) and
Joachim Wossidlo made the film “Richard Wossidlo, der ‘Volksprofessor’” (Richard
Wossidlo, the people’s professor). The Year of Wossidlo in 2009 was organized with
funding from Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, among others.

3.

2009 Federal Horticultural Show in Schwerin (23 April to 11 October 2009):

The Low German language and culture of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania played a
major role during the 2009 Federal Horticultural Show (BUGA 2009) in Schwerin.
Visitors to the show could experience Low German songs, sketches and traditional
costumes shown on the various event stages. For BUGA 2009, the MecklenburgWestern Pomerania Land Union for Local and Regional Traditions
(Landesheimatverband Mecklenburg-Vorpommern e. V.) presented highlights from
the Low German festival Norddeutschen Tage - Festival der niederdeutschen
Sprache und Musik an der Elbe on a special North German Day, to the delight of
BUGA visitors.
4.

“The Language Charter in Germany 10 years on: Praxis and perspectives”

The conference “The Language Charter in Germany 10 years on: Praxis and
perspectives” was held in Schwerin on 14 – 15 May 2009. This language
conference, sponsored by the president of the Land parliament of MecklenburgWestern Pomerania, was organized by the Federal Council for Low German and the
Landesheimatverband Mecklenburg-Vorpommern in cooperation with the Institute for
Low German. The aim of the conference was to analyse what improvements the
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages has brought about for Low
German and the other minority languages over the past ten years. The presentations,
which addressed all articles of the Charter, also asked which steps will be necessary
in future to promote and preserve the regional language Low German and the
minority languages.
5.

Reuter anniversary 2010:

282
The 200th anniversary of the birth of Fritz Reuter is 7 November 2010. With the help
of the Fritz Reuter Society, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania was able to arrange for
a stamp to be issued in honour of Reuter’s 200th birthday. The main celebration of
the anniversary will take place on 7 November 2010 in Stavenhagen, the city where
Reuter was born. The Reuter festival in 2010 is to include the premiere of a musical
called “Hanne Nüte un de lütte Pudel”, based on one of Reuter’s works. Special
events are planned for the occasion in numerous German cities (including
Altentreptow, Berlin, Dömitz, Eisenach, Friedland, Grevesmühlen, Ludwigslust,
Neubrandenburg, Neustrelitz, Parchim, Rostock, Schwerin, Stavenhagen and
Wismar). In 2010, the Fritz Reuter Society will hold its annual meeting in
Stavenhagen. Neubrandenburg, where Reuter lived for many years, has founded a
working group to plan the Reuter anniversary. On 15 July 2010, Neubrandenburg
and the Fritz Reuter Society will host a special event in the Marienkirche church;
additional exhibitions, theatre and school projects are planned.
See No. 60815 on the dissolution of the Centre for Low German – Western
Pomerania e.V. in Wilmshagen.
61204

North Rhine-Westphalia refers to No. 5160 of the Third State Report.

61205 It adds that linguists at the University of Münster and the University of
Bielefeld are currently working on a digital text archive for Low German. The website
will bring together thousands of texts from the 9th to the 19th centuries; the website
and an initial selection of texts are to be launched shortly. The project, to run for
seven years, receives annual funding of €70,000 from the Westphalia Initiative and
the Land North Rhine-Westphalia. The project aims to make Westphalia’s rich
cultural heritage permanently available to researchers and the interested public. In
addition to its research objectives, the project hopes to increase awareness of
Westphalia’s cultural landscape, history, language and traditions.
It should be noted that preservation of cultural traditions in North Rhine-Westphalia is
largely the responsibility of the municipalities, districts and regional associations, and
that the regional local authority Landschaftsverband Westfalen-Lippe in particular has
taken on the task of promoting Low German culture. It runs six commissions which
are solely devoted to regional and cultural studies of Westphalia, to publishing the
results and organizing conferences on their areas of concentration. The commission
for research into the dialects and names of Westphalia concentrates on researching
Westphalian dialects, archiving and describing Low German terminology and
researching Westphalian names and proverbs.

283
North Rhine-Westphalia also reports that the Low German theatre company of
Münster had its production of the Low German play Spiell van Dr. Faustus from the
2006/07 season professionally videotaped and produced a DVD; North RhineWestphalia contributed €3,000 towards the production costs.

Art. 12 (1) (b) - Access to works in the (minority) languages
b) to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in
regional or minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, postsynchronization and subtitling activities;
61206 This undertaking was accepted by Bremen, Mecklenburg-Western
Pomerania, Lower Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein.
Some of these Länder report in this context:
1. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
61207 The Land refers to No. 5163 of the Third State Report stating that within the
framework of cultural promotion, funds for projects on the dubbing, postsynchronization and subtitling of works with regard to Low German and High German
are available.
61208 With regard to the question as to how the Land has publicized this and
whether this possibility has been used, the Land responds as follows: The Directive
on providing assistance to promote projects in the cultural field and under Section 96
of the Federal Expellees Act, last amended on 26 February 2008, has provided the
foundation for cultural promotion for 14 years. In listing priorities for promotion, the
directive explicitly states that funding is to be provided for projects of Low German,
language and cultural work as defined in the Land constitution and the European
Charter of Regional or Minority Languages. This directive is published in the official
journal of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania and is available to the public on the
Internet. The same applies to the three state reports and the comments of the
Committee of Experts regarding the monitoring procedure.
Funding for translation, dubbing and post-synchronization and subtitling of works with
regard to Low German and High German is still available on the basis of the cultural
promotion directive. No applications for such funding were submitted in the reporting
period 2007 – 2009.

284

2. Lower Saxony
61209 Without concluding whether this undertaking had been fulfilled in Lower
Saxony, in No. 656 ff. of its third evaluation report the Committee repeated the
information provided in No. 5164 of the Third State Report, that “applications for
funds with regard to translation of films and literature from High German into Low
German are possible, but that no such applications have been submitted. The
authorities further state the example of a novel that was translated by the author
himself from Low German into High German. It is however not clear whether funds
had been made available for this translation activity.”
61210 With regard to the Committee’s request for information about measures
taken by the authorities to foster the different means of access in other languages to
works produced in Low German by aiding and developing translation and other
activities, the Land reports the following: As correctly represented in No. 5164 of the
Third State Report, applicants are responsible for submitting the required
applications for funding of films in Low German to the appropriate bodies. Despite
targeting potential applicants, no relevant applications were submitted.
3. Schleswig-Holstein
61211 With regard to the question raised by the Committee of Experts in
connection with this undertaking following its findings in No. 711 ff. of the third
evaluation report whether the Schleswig-Holstein authorities could provide practical
examples of the use of Land funds for translating Low German works into other
languages and vice versa, the Land reports the following: Schleswig-Holstein once
again points out that it provides both institutional and project funding for Low German
institutions such as the Centres for Low German, the Schleswig-Holsteinischer
Heimatbund (SHHB) and the Institute for Low German. The SHHB responded that
works in regional languages are very rarely translated into other languages, saying
that there was apparently little special demand apart from works considered part of
world literature, such as those by Fritz Reuter.

Art. 12 (1) (c) - Access to works produced in other languages
c) to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other
languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronization and
subtitling activities;

285

61212 This undertaking was accepted by Bremen, Mecklenburg-Western
Pomerania, Lower Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein.
Information about some of these Länder can be reported as follows:
1. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
61213 For Bremen, in No. 453 of its third evaluation report, the Committee stated
that the “authorities have not provided any information with regard to this
undertaking. In light of all the information available, the Committee of Experts must
conclude that the activities of nordmedia are not relevant for this undertaking.
Therefore the Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled.”
61214 With regard to the Committee’s question whether measures have been
taken in the meantime to aid translation, dubbing, post-synchronization and subtitling
activities, the Land is working, within the framework of the legal possibilities, to use
its influence on programme planners to improve the situation.
2. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
61215 In No. 591 of its third evaluation report the Committee found that
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania only partly fulfilled this undertaking, in the absence
of practical examples of implementation and after noting in No. 5168 of the Third
State Report only that translation, dubbing and post-synchronization and subtitling
can be subsidized on the basis of the cultural promotion directive of the Land.
61216 With regard to the Committee’s question as to which measures have been
taken to foster access in Low German to works produced in other languages by
aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronization and subtitling
activities, the Land refers to No. 61208.
3. Lower Saxony
61217 In No. 659 of its third evaluation report, the Committee notes that
“[a]ccording to the information contained in the third periodical report (paragraph
5126), certain programmes that are broadcast on the public regional television
channel NDR have been dubbed into Low German. The Committee of Experts
concludes that the undertaking remains partly fulfilled.”

286
61218 With regard to the Committee’s request for information about measures
taken in the meantime to foster the different means of access in Low German to
works produced in other languages, the Land reports the following:
With regard to No. 5126 of the Third State Report it should be noted that NDR’s
dubbing and post-synchronization of programmes already produced comes under its
programming autonomy. The large number of examples listed in No. 5126 of the
Third State Report indicate that extensive activities have been developed.
4. Schleswig-Holstein
61219 In No. 711 ff. of its third evaluation report, the Committee stated that this
undertaking is not fulfilled in Schleswig-Holstein because although the Land says that
it subsidizes translation activities of the Low German institutions, the authorities state
that they had no information on whether any use was made of this possibility.
61220 With regard to the Committee’s question whether the authorities can now
provide this information, the Land reports as follows:
According to the Schleswig-Holsteinischer Heimatbund (SHHB), access in the
regional language to works in other languages occurs in isolated cases, mainly on
the private initiative of Low German authors who translate such works in order to
ensure their publication. More plays are translated from foreign languages into Low
German in order to ensure sufficient supply for the professional and amateur
theatres. These works are usually translated as projects of publishers or authors.

Art. 12 (1) (d) - Taking account of the regional or minority language in cultural
activities
d) to ensure that the bodies responsible for organizing or supporting cultural
activities of various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the
knowledge and use of regional or minority languages and cultures in the
undertakings which they initiate or for which they provide backing;
61221 This undertaking was accepted by Bremen, Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western
Pomerania, Lower Saxony, North Rhine-Westphalia and Schleswig-Holstein.
The following can be reported about these Länder:
1. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen

287
61222 In No. 455 ff. of its third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts stated
that “[i]n the third periodical report (paragraph 5172), the authorities confine
themselves to stating that the relevant decision-makers take the needs of the Low
German-speakers into consideration when allocating budgetary funds. However, the
Committee of Experts has not received any information on how this is applied in
practice and to what extent it relates to the present undertaking” and therefore
considers that the undertaking is not fulfilled.
61223 In the meantime, the Land parliament has called on the Senate to present a
report on the situation of Low German in Bremen. The report is being prepared.
2.

Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg

61224 In No. 532 of its third evaluation report, the Committee states that it “has
received no new information with regard to this undertaking. It therefore maintains its
previous conclusion that the undertaking is not fulfilled.” Hamburg responds by
reporting the measures taken in the meantime to ensure that the bodies responsible
for organizing or supporting cultural activities of various kinds make appropriate
allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of the Low German language and
culture in the undertakings which they initiate or for which they provide backing as
follows:
Based on a change of responsibility for issues concerning the Charter, the Office for
Diversity in the Hamburg ministry of justice, which is now responsible for these
issues, regrets that it is unable to provide a concrete answer.
3. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
61225 The Committee did not comment on this undertaking for MecklenburgWestern Pomerania in its third evaluation report. See No. 5174 of the Third State
Report indicating that the institutions listed there as being involved in the linguistic
and cultural efforts have the necessary language and subject-area competence and
can rely on assistance from the Low German Chair of Rostock University and other
competent institutions as needed.
61226
4. Lower Saxony

288
61227 The Committee did not comment on this undertaking with regard to Lower
Saxony in its third evaluation report. See No. 1273 ff. of the Second State Report
indicating that the cultural associations (Landschaften) promote the Low German
language and culture in their institutions and activities based on the competence of
their members with support from the Land.
61228
5. North Rhine-Westphalia
61229 The Committee did not comment on this undertaking with regard to North
Rhine-Westphalia. See No. 5175 of the Third State Report indicating that the
Westphalia and the Lippe Associations for Local/Regional Traditions, funded by the
Landschaftsverband of Westfalen-Lippe, also possess the necessary language
competence and promote it at their events. See also the comments in No. 61204.
61230

6. Schleswig-Holstein
61231 The Committee did not comment on this undertaking with regard to
Schleswig-Holstein. See No. 5176 of the Third State Report indicating that the
Schleswig-Holsteinischer Heimatbund regularly puts on the Low German Day,
thereby working to disseminate Low German.
61232 Schleswig-Holstein also has a large number of Low German theatres which
promote the Low German language and Low German theatre in Schleswig-Holstein
together with their umbrella organizations, the Union of Low German Theatres
(Niederdeutscher Bühnenbund) and the Association of Amateur Theatrical Societies
(Amateurtheaterverband). These groups have agreed on aims and measures
intended to help give Low German greater weight, in particular exposing young
people to the Low German language and theatre, providing basic and further training
in order to enhance the quality of theatrical offerings, and fostering contact and
cooperation among all stakeholders in Low German across Land borders.
In addition, the Land government regularly supports the Low German theatre festival
at the Molfsee open-air museum and the theatre festival of the Union of Low German
Theatres in Schleswig-Holstein; it enables the use of guest directors for premieres of

289
Low German plays, and is involved among others in the Scheersbarg theatre award
given out at the meeting of Low German theatre companies at the Jugendhof
Scheersberg.

Art. 12 (1) (e) - Employment of staff proficient in the language(s) concerned
e) to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organizing or
supporting cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of
the regional or minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest
of the population;
We report as following on this undertaking, accepted by Bremen, MecklenburgWestern Pomerania, Lower Saxony and North Rhine-Westphalia:

1. Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
61233 In No. 458 ff. of its third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts
considered that this undertaking is fulfilled after No. 5178 of the Third State Report
indicated that subsidized institutions such as the Landesverband Bremer
Amateurtheater e.V., archives and libraries take care to ensure that they have staff
who are proficient in Low German.
2. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
61234 The Committee did not comment on this undertaking for MecklenburgWestern Pomerania in its third evaluation report. As indicated in No. 61225 above,
see No. 5174 of the Third State Report indicating that the institutions listed there as
being involved in the linguistic and cultural efforts have the necessary language and
subject-area competence and can rely on assistance from the Low German Chair of
Rostock University and other competent institutions as needed.
3. Lower Saxony
61235 The Committee did not comment on this undertaking with regard to Lower
Saxony in its third evaluation report. See No. 5180 of the Third State Report
indicating that since 2001 the Ostfriesische Landschaft has been successful in
motivating the use of Low German with its project “Plattdütsk bi d’Arbeid” and that its
staff have the necessary language skills for cultural activities.

290

4. North Rhine-Westphalia
61236 The Committee did not comment on this undertaking with regard to North
Rhine-Westphalia in its third evaluation report. See No. 5175 of the Third State
Report indicating that the Westphalia and the Lippe Associations for Local/Regional
Traditions, funded by the Landschaftsverband of Westfalen-Lippe, also possess the
necessary language competence and promote it through their activities. The local
Low German groups of the Westphalia and Lippe associations have regular and
special meetings and activities related to Low German (e.g. awards ceremonies,
reading competitions and exhibitions). The leaders of the specialist panels also meet
regularly. Every October, the Lippe association organizes a Low German convention
with 250 to 270 participants, featuring lectures, sketches and musical entertainment
in Low German. In the area of the Westphalia association, the meeting of the
Schriewerking and the Low German Days in Münster are held each year.

Art. 12 (1) (f) - Participation of representatives of the group speaking the given
language in cultural activities
f) to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given
regional or minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;
61237 This undertaking was accepted by Brandenburg, Bremen, Hamburg,
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Lower Saxony, North Rhine-Westphalia, SaxonyAnhalt and Schleswig-Holstein.
61238 In No. 461 ff. of its third evaluation report, the Committee stated that it had
no positive evidence of any measures taken by the authorities with regard to this
undertaking in Bremen and that it considered the undertaking not fulfilled.
With regard to the Committee’s question whether the authorities in Bremen had taken
measures to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of Low
German in providing facilities and planning cultural activities, Bremen reports as
follows:
Bremen’s democratic organization, with local parliaments, deputations, district
councils, planning and programme councils, ensures appropriate participation by the
language group at the different levels.

291
61239 In No. 534 ff. of its third evaluation report, the Committee stated that it had
no evidence of any measures taken by the authorities with regard to this undertaking
in Hamburg and that it considered the undertaking not fulfilled.
With regard to the Committee’s question whether the authorities in Hamburg had
taken measures to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of
Low German in providing facilities and planning cultural activities, Hamburg reports
as follows:
Hamburg’s democratic organization, with local (district) parliaments, deputations,
district councils, planning and programme councils, ensures appropriate participation
by the language group at the different levels.
61240 With regard to Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, see No. 61234 above; for
Lower Saxony, see No. 61235; for North Rhine-Westphalia, see No. 61236; and for
Schleswig-Holstein, see No. 61232. Speakers of Low German are of course involved
in the publicly funded measures mentioned there.
61241 With regard to Saxony-Anhalt, on which the Committee did not comment in
connection with this undertaking (like the other Länder mentioned above), see No.
5189 of the Third State Report stating that via the Low German working group in the
Ministry of Culture, representatives of Low German discuss projects and receive
financial assistance in the form of funding for individual school and cultural projects
and for programmes (e.g. on culture at school and in clubs) and competitions (e.g. for
the Youth Cultural Prize of Saxony-Anhalt).
61242 Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania reports the following recent examples of
funding for measures directly involving speakers of Low German: The activities for
the Bugenhagen anniversary year in 2008, for the Wossidlo anniversary year in 2009
and for the Reuter anniversary year in 2010 were planned almost entirely by persons
with a thorough command of the Low German language and extensive knowledge of
its culture.
Saxony-Anhalt reports on the following measures in which Low German speakers
were involved.
2007
- April: Presentation of a book of stories and poems in Low German by Marta Rothe
(Von Minschen un öhre Tiet - Jeschichtn un Jedichte in ostfälischer Sprache)
- May: A Low German theatre workshop for children and youth in Magdeburg

292

- June: Saxony-Anhalt Day in Osterburg including the Low German Hour
- June: “Schaulkramms spräket Platt” in Wernigerode
- September – December: Low German reading competition (at schools, at three
regional competitions and at one Land competition)
2008
- April: Low German event on plants and their names
- June: Low German theatre competition in Magdeburg
- October: Presentation of a book of stories and poems in Low German by Helga
Albert (Wind, Wulken un alltiet bütschen Glück - Jedichte un Jeschichten up
oltmärkisch Platt)
- September – December: Low German reading competition (at schools, at three
regional competitions and at one Land competition)
2009
- March: Low German theatre workshop for children and youth
- September – December: Low German reading competition (at schools, at three
regional competitions and at one Land competition)
61242b Lower Saxony provides the following additional information:
In May 2009, the Ostfriesische Landschaft organized a conference under the
patronage of the Lower Saxony Minister of Culture on the topic of multi-lingual
Ostfriesland and the benefit of preserving Low German. Speakers from the Dutch
province of Fryslân also took part.
Also in May 2009, a panel discussion was held at the representation of Lower
Saxony to the Federation in Berlin with participation from representatives of the Low
German language group.
In September 2009, a symposium on ten years of the European Language Charter in
Lower Saxony was held at the University of Oldenburg under the patronage of the
president of Lower Saxony’s parliament. The symposium was organized by the
University of Oldenburg in cooperation with the Niedersächsischer Heimatbund, the
Oldenburgische Landschaft and the Ostfriesischen Landschaft. Speakers included
representatives of the Low German language group, the chair of the Committee of

293
Experts for the Charter at the Council of Europe and Lower Saxony's minister for
research and culture.
For the 9th European Day of Languages, the Niedersächsischer Heimatbund and
representatives of the Low German language group held an expert meeting in late
September 2009 (“Niederdeutsch – Bruken wi en Gesett för Plattdüütsch in
Neddersassen? Open Treffen van „NettPlatt Neddersassen in ’n NHB").
Art. 12 (1) (g) - Creation of archive bodies
g) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for
collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the
regional or minority languages;
61243 The Committee once again did not comment on this undertaking, which was
accepted by Brandenburg, Bremen, Hamburg, Lower Saxony, North RhineWestphalia, Saxony-Anhalt and Schleswig-Holstein, due to a lack of issues. As
already indicated in No. 5191 of the Third State Report, see Nos. 1311–1330 of the
Second State Report.

Art. 12 (1) (h) - Translation and terminological research services
h) if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and terminological
research services, particularly with a view to maintaining and developing appropriate
administrative, commercial, economic, social, technical or legal terminology in each
regional or minority language.
61244 The Committee did not comment on this undertaking, accepted by
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, North Rhine-Westphalia and Saxony-Anhalt, in its
third evaluation report. As indicated in No. 5163 of the Third State Report, see the
facilities listed in Nos. 1331 – 1336 of the Second State Report, which also provide
terminological research services, among other things.

Article 12 (2)
In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages
are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or
minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural
activities and facilities in accordance with the preceding paragraph.

294
61245 In Germany’s view, this undertaking, accepted by Lower Saxony and North
Rhine-Westphalia, is fulfilled due to the fact that cultural activities related to Low
German are generally allowed in compliance with the law outside the Low German
language area.
61246 Although Nos. 1337 – 1339 of the Second State Report listed activities
related to Low German outside the Low German language areas in Lower Saxony
and North Rhine-Westphalia, in No. 660 of its third evaluation report the Committee
did not consider the undertaking to be fulfilled until it was informed (in No. 5196 of the
Third State Report) that after the task of promoting regional culture was transferred to
the regional local authorities (Landschaftsverbände), a target agreement was
concluded with the Landschaftsverband Südniedersachsen (Southern Lower Saxony)
which makes explicit reference to cultural activities related to Low German and that
Low German commissioners have been appointed to the southern Lower Saxon
Landkreise of Göttingen, Northeim and Osterode.
61247 In response to the Committee’s request for information on the activities of
the Landschaftsverband Südniedersachsen and of the Low German commissioners,
we report as follows: Low German is rarely used in daily life along the southern edge
of the language area, in the districts of Holzminden, Northeim, Osterode am Harz
and Göttingen. A number of discussion groups meet regularly and occasionally
organize activities for the local public. The number of active and passive participants
in these four districts is probably well under 1,000. The districts of Göttingen,
Northeim and Osterode am Harz have each appointed a commissioner for the
preservation of the Low German language. These work to maintain contact with the
groups listed above, to advise them and encourage exchange among them.
In cooperation with these Low German commissioners, once a year the
Landschaftsverband Südniedersachsen organizes a regional Low German meeting
which usually draws 200 to 300 visitors from the entire region with a programme of
Low German lectures and stage performances. This event is one at which Low
German speakers can make contact with others from beyond their local environment.
The Working Group for Local History Research in Southern Lower Saxony
(Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Südniedersächsische Heimatforschung e. V.) is a kind of
umbrella organization for many persons in the region interested in preserving and
researching local history and culture. It has long had an expert commission for Low
German language and literature which gathers information about Low German,

295
sometimes at the level of professional research, and facilitates exchange among
enthusiastic Low German speakers.
61248 For North Rhine-Westphalia, see No. 5196 of the Third State Report
indicating that research findings by the Commission for Dialectology and Names
Research (Kommission für Mundart- und Namenforschung) are published in the
journal Niederdeutsches Wort. Beiträge zur niederdeutschen Philologie (The
Low German Word. Articles on Low German Philology), the series Niederdeutsche
Studien (Low German Studies) and Westfälische Beiträge zur niederdeutschen
Philologie (Westphalian Contributions to Low German Philology) and in the series
Westfälisches Wörterbuch (Dictionary of Westphalia) and Westfälischer
Flurnamenatlas (Atlas of Local Field Names in Westphalia).
The website of the Commission for Dialectology and Names Research on the
geography of family names is still available at www.lwl.org/familiennamen-inwestfalen/StartAction.do and offers the possibility to display the distribution of family
names in the region of Westfalen-Lippe in the form of a map or a table.

Article 12 (3)
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy
abroad, for regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.
61249 In its third evaluation report, the Committee found that this undertaking was
not fulfilled
in Nos. 463 and 464 in conjunction with No. 104 ff. by the Federation,
in Nos. 536 and 537 by Hamburg,
in Nos. 593 and 594 in Mecklenburg,
in Nos. 663 and 664 in Lower Saxony, and
in No. 715 in Schleswig-Holstein
since no structured approach to integrating the Low German language in Germany’s
cultural policy abroad was apparent.
61250 In response to the question whether the German authorities make
appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for Low German and
the culture it reflects (according to the Committee’s standards), see the general
discussion of this issue in No. 01202 ff.
61251

In addition, the Länder provide the following information:

296
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania reports that an exhibition on the life and work of
Johannes Bugenhagen (1485 – 1558), Pomeranian reformer and friend of Luther,
was developed as part of the Bugenhagen anniversary year in 2008. This exhibition,
which presents the Low German language and cultural history of the Reformation,
was shown to great acclaim in Trezebiatów and Warsaw, Poland in 2008.
The exhibition “Johannes Bugenhagen: Doctor Pomeranus, 1485 – 1558” was
displayed at the palace of the Pomeranian dukes in Szczecin. The exhibition was
organized as part of the presentation of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania in the
West Pomeranian voivodeship and was funded by the Land.
Lower Saxony refers to its comments in No. 41212 above.

Article 13
Economic and social life
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake within the whole
country:
a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without
justifiable reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to
economic or social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical
documents such as instructions for the use of products or installations;
b) to prohibit the insertion - in internal regulations of companies and private
documents - of any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or minority
languages, at least between users of the same language;
c) to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority
languages in connection with economic or social activities;
61300 With regard to this undertaking, of which (a) and (c) have been accepted by
Bremen, Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Lower Saxony, North RhineWestphalia and Schleswig-Holstein, the Committee of Experts did not comment in its
third evaluation report in the absence of apparent issues. As indicated in No. 5199 of
the Third State Report, see No. 1356, 1357 and 248 of the Second State Report
stating that neither provisions nor practices are evident which would require special
measures to fulfil this undertaking.

297
Art. 13 (1) (d) - Facilitating the use of the regional or minority language
d) to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by means
other than those specified in the above sub-paragraphs.
61301 This undertaking has been accepted by Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western
Pomerania, Lower Saxony, North Rhine-Westphalia and Schleswig-Holstein.
61302 In its third evaluation report (Nos. 538 and 539 with respect to Hamburg and
Nos. 716 and 717 with respect to Schleswig-Holstein), the Committee stated that it
was not aware of any measures to facilitate and/or encourage the use of Low
German within the meaning of the undertaking and therefore considered the
undertaking not fulfilled.
61303
61304
61305 Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania refers to Nos. 1361 – 1365 of the Second
State Report (Low German in tourism promotion, flyer on Low German, Low German
cultural website) and reports the following new developments:
Guided city and museum tours in Low German are very popular with visitors to
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania. All of the medium-sized and larger cities of the
Land now offer guided city tours in Low German. In cooperation with the Rostock
association of tour guides (Stadtführerverein Rostock e.V.), the Hanseatic city of
Rostock organizes an annual day of international tourist guides. The Low German
association Klönsnack-Rostocker 7 e.V. has contributed its experience with Low
German in the tourist industry. In the city of Neubrandenburg, the senior citizens'
group Rastlos has produced a Reuter video in Low German (a historical walking tour
of the city). Throughout the tourist sector in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Low
German is being used for advertising purposes.
61306 In addition to the measures described in No. 1366 (flyer on the Low German
language) and No. 1367 (“Plattdütsk bi d‘Arbeid” project), Lower Saxony reports the
following more recent measures:
In Ostfriesland, the Low German Office (Plattdütskbüro) of the Ostfriesische
Landschaft, which receives about 50% of its funding from Lower Saxony, has
organized an annual Low German Month (Plattdütskmaant) since 2007. This grew
out of the “Plattdütsk bi d‘Arbeid” project and is especially aimed at the use of Low
German at work and in public life. In 2008, the Low German Month offered trainees
of the Ostfriesische Landschaftliche Brandkasse fire insurance company a class on

298
the importance of Low German in professional life, showing the young trainees how
to take advantage of bilingualism in their future careers. Also during Low German
Month in 2008, the Ostfriesische Landschaft called on the East Frisian communities
and districts to designate Low German commissioners. These commissioners have
worked together under the oversight of the Ostfriesische Landschaft since 2009.
In Wittmund in September 2009, the Low German commissioners of Ostfriesland, the
association Oostfreeske Taal and the Ostfriesische Landschaft held a conference on
Low German at work for representatives of private industry, public administration and
the tourism and educational sectors.
In autumn 2009, all the Landkreise in Ostfriesland conducted writing courses
especially for staff of local public administration. This class was initiated by the Low
German Office and organized in cooperation with the adult education centres.

Article 13 (2)
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the
public authorities are competent, within the territory in which the regional or minority
languages are used, and as far as this is reasonably possible:

Art. 13 (2) (c) - Use of the regional or minority language in social care facilities
c) to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and
hostels offer the possibility of receiving and treating in their own language persons
using a regional or minority language who are in need of care on grounds of illhealth, old age or for other reasons;
61307 This undertaking was accepted by Bremen, Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western
Pomerania and Schleswig-Holstein.
61308 In No. 465 ff. of its third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts found
that, although many retirement homes and hospitals have Low German speakers on
their staff, Bremen “has not for example taken measures towards a more systematic
provision in order to ensure that social care facilities have Low German-speakers at
their disposal” and therefore considers that the undertaking remains partly fulfilled.
61309 With regard to the Committee’s question whether the German authorities
had adopted a structural policy with a view to making more systematic the possibility
for the person concerned to be received and treated in Low German in social care
facilities, Bremen responds as follows:

299
There are no barriers to employing persons in social care facilities who also speak
Low German; on the contrary, such employees are welcome. However, it would not
be appropriate to require the operators of such facilities (most of which are privately
run) to make this a mandatory condition of employment, because even without this
condition it will be difficult to meet the growing demand for skilled staff as the
capacity of care facilities increases.
61310 In No. 540 ff. of its third evaluation report, the Committee found that
Hamburg too only partly fulfilled this undertaking after noting that “treatment in Low
German is generally ensured in some of those retirement homes where the residents
speak Low German. However, the authorities claim that they could not ensure a
provision for all persons who are in need of care, which in most cases did not appear
necessary because all Low German speakers also understand and speak standard
German”.
61311 With regard to its question whether the Hamburg authorities had, at the
Committee’s urging, adopted a structured policy with a view to making more
systematic the possibility for the person concerned to be received and treated in Low
German in social care facilities, Hamburg responds as follows:
There are no barriers to employing persons in social care facilities who also speak
Low German; on the contrary, such employees are welcome. However, requiring the
operators of such facilities (most of which are privately run) to make this a mandatory
condition of employment appears problematic in terms of labour law and is not
advisable because even without this condition it will be difficult to meet the growing
demand for skilled staff as the capacity of care facilities increases.
61312 In No. 595 ff. of its third evaluation report, the Committee found that the
undertaking was not fulfilled in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, after stating that
- many social care facilities, many of which have been privatized, had adopted a
Low German ‘corporate identity concept’ [and] it was not clear
• what steps the authorities had taken to promote any such policy, and
• to what extent such a concept guarantees that persons in need of care can
receive treatment in Low German;
- and that the use of Low German in many social care facilities “appears to be
more a matter of chance than design”.
61313 With regard to the Committee’s question whether the authorities had, as
urged by the Committee, adopted a structured policy to fulfil this undertaking,
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania responds as follows:

300
When admitted to a retirement or care home in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania,
future residents are asked to complete a questionnaire including a question on their
language skills. In this way, care staff can identify who speaks Low German, for
example. Land hospitals also try to accommodate the language skills of their
patients. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania’s Ministry for Social Affairs continues to
fund a radio project by the elderly for the elderly (“Hörmax – Das Radio for Senioren
für Senioren”) in retirement and care homes throughout the Land. This radio project
also includes numerous programmes in Low German.
In this way, Low German is integrated into communications in the social care facilities
of the German Red Cross in Rostock, Lübtheen (Landkreis Ludwigslust), Teterow
and Laage (Landkreis Güstrow), Neustrelitz (Landkreis Mecklenburg-Strelitz),
Neubrandenburg and Sternberg (Landkreis Parchim). Low German is also used
specifically as part of occupational therapy and memory training at the Red Cross
hospitals in Neustrelitz and Teterow. Both the German Red Cross and the
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania branch of the Volkssolidarität charitable
organization use Low German in their cultural activities. The Red Cross care home in
Neubrandenburg regularly publishes a newsletter for residents which includes
articles in Low German.
Privately run social care facilities, such as hospitals, retirement and care homes in
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, are happy to use the regional language Low
German in oral communication.
61314 In No. 718 ff. of its third evaluation report, the Committee found that this
undertaking was not fulfilled in Schleswig-Holstein, after noting that while “Low
German is used in many social care facilities, it is more a matter of chance than
design” and thus does not replace measures to guarantee more systematic provision.
61315 With regard to the Committee’s question whether the authorities had
adopted a structured policy as the Committee urged, Schleswig-Holstein responds as
follows:
The proportion of publicly run retirement and care homes in Schleswig-Holstein has
shrunk significantly and is now less than 5%. For this reason, there are limited
possibilities to exert direct government influence in this area. The only possibility is to
appeal to the private and charitable operators of these facilities to hire Low Germanspeaking staff to care for residents who are speakers of Low German. Such appeals
can be made via the associations of operators of care facilities.

301
Another possibility is to achieve this aim through the use of volunteers. The Land
subsidizes various programmes and measures of this kind (senior trainers,
multipliers, participation in care facilities). In future, Low German language skills will
also be a priority when selecting volunteers for these programmes.
As far as possible, the Land plans to fund and support efforts to hire more hospital
staff who can speak Low German. To do so, recommendations and possibly also
conditions could be tied to funding for specific projects. And hospital operators can
and should be persuaded that staff who speak Low German are one element of
patient-oriented care. Care facilities could also use this approach to gain an
advantage over their competitors.
In 2008, the Federal Council for Low German formulated its ideas for anchoring the
regional language Low German in hospitals and care facilities (Schleswiger Appell).
The Schleswig-Holstein Minister-President’s Commissioner for Minorities also took
part in the expert conference in Schleswig on 27 June 2008 within the framework of
her responsibility for Low German.

Article 14
Transfrontier exchanges
The Parties undertake:
a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the
States in which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if necessary
to seek to conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster contacts between
the users of the same language in the States concerned in the fields of culture,
education, information, vocational training and permanent education;
b) for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or promote cooperation across borders, in particular between regional or local authorities in whose
territory the same language is used in identical or similar form.
61400 The Committee of Experts did not comment on these undertakings in its third
evaluation report. Lower Saxony is the only Land which has accepted these
undertakings; as indicated in No. 5204 of the Third State Report, see Nos. 1379 –
1384 of the Second State Report.

302
Part E

Comments by the minorities/language groups

Numbers (No.) refer to the Fourth State Report

Comments by the Danish minority on the Fourth Report of the Federal Republic of
Germany on the implementation of the European Charter for Regional and Minority
Languages
21. December 2009, Danish Secretariat General (Dansk Generalsekretariat)
1.

Introductory remarks

Sydslesvigsk Forening (SSF) / Südschleswigscher Verein (South Schleswig
Association), Sydslesvigsk Vælgerforening / Südschleswigscher Wählerverband
(SSW) (South Schleswig Voters' Association) and Dansk Skoleforening for
Sydslesvig / Dänischer Schulverein für Südschleswig (Danish Schools Association
for South Schleswig) have agreed to submit their joint comments on behalf of the
Danish minority on the Draft Fourth State Report.
The possibility to use the Danish language in Schleswig/South Schleswig exists
mainly thanks to the activities of the well-organized Danish minority. Eight
autonomous organizations/institutions are responsible for their respective sub-areas
of minority work, and overall, they ensure that members of the minority can make use
of their language in many areas of social life. As part of their activities they also fulfil
state tasks, not only with regard to promoting the Danish language. Please find an
overview of all Danish organizations and institutions at the end of this part.
No. 00211 (Articles 9 and 10). The Danish minority shares and underlines the view of
the Committee of Experts that there is still a need for legal provisions regulating the
use of regional and minority languages in many areas of public life. Because the
administration of the minority organizations uses the Danish language, there are
often difficulties in working with government authorities such as tax and social
insurance offices. For example, the Social Code expressly requires that all
paperwork be submitted in German. This means that everything has to be translated,
creating a significant burden of extra work for the individual organizations. This
conflicts with the voluntary commitment of the Federal Republic of Germany under
Art. 10 (1) (a) (v) and Art. 13 (1) (a) of the Charter.

303
More efforts will be needed to facilitate and encourage the use of the Danish
language in public and to ensure that the Danish language and relevant information
for members of the Danish minority are published in German media. Sydslesvigsk
Vælgerforening (SSW) has therefore taken the initiative to encourage a pro-language
policy in Schleswig-Holstein (see below for details). In the following, we will also refer
to the current status of broadcast programming for the Danish minority.
2.

Financial equality of the Danish minority

The Danish minority acknowledges that positive developments have actually taken
place. Moreover, the 2008/2009 two-year budget of Schleswig-Holstein ensures
financial equality in terms of school fees. Not only has there been no cut in budget
funds earmarked for cultural activities of the Danish minority. The funds have
actually been raised slightly. We are very pleased that the Land government has
decided to grant financial support to the Danevirke Museum as of 2009. In view of
the difficult situation regarding the strained budgets of public authorities, the Danish
minority regards this development as very positive indeed.
However, equality at local level has by far not been achieved. Local government
support of the activities of the Danish minority is voluntary. In terms of minority policy,
this is difficult to understand. As regards this issue, the municipalities in South
Schleswig do not at all comply with the provisions of the Framework Convention for
the Protection of National Minorities, the European Charter for Regional and Minority
Languages, or the Bonn-Copenhagen Declarations.
As part of the promotion of cultural activities, the Federal Government has since
2001 supported specific cultural projects of the Danish minority. For example, the
Federal Government disbursed funds to the Danish minority to reconstruct the
Danevirkegården Museum and, in the period 2003-2005, to modernize the theatre
and concert hall in Flensburg. Between 2006 and 2009 federal funds were provided
to build a cultural centre in Flensburg. In their most recent motion, the Danish
minority required funds to build a cultural centre in Büdelsdorf near Rendsburg.
Since 2001, the Danish minority has received a total of 1.4 million Euros in Federal
Government funding. The Danish minority is very grateful for this support and hopes
that that the Federal Government will continue to improve the framework conditions
and promote a living Danish culture in South Schleswig.
3.

An active policy for the Danish language in Schleswig-Holstein (Article 10)

304
The language of a minority group is vital for their identity, and the same time a means
to preserve their cultural heritage. The right to use one’s own language is similar to
other basic human rights. For the Danish population in Schleswig to be genuinely
multilingual would require that they be entitled to use their language in every-day life
and that their language be part of public life.
In the view of the Danish minority, it is time to go a step further and ask the Land
government to make more efforts in promoting the Danish language.
It is now ten years that the European Charter for Minority Languages has entered
into effect and there are still significant inequalities with regard to the treatment of
minority languages. Moreover, increasing globalization has made people all over the
world recall their regional and cultural roots. And last but not least, the Danish
language in Schleswig, as all the other minority languages, too, is under the pressure
to assimilate into German as the majority language.
For Schleswig-Holstein and Germany to pursue a determined language policy means
to acknowledge that promoting multilingualism is one of their very tasks. Only then
will Germany be able to fulfil her obligations under the Charter, if the majority
population wants to have, and is willing to promote, a diversity of languages. In our
view, there are insufficient opportunities to learn Danish as a foreign language in
public schools in Schleswig-Holstein. Please refer to No. 10824.
The Land government and the Land parliament must develop and implement their
own specific language policy reflecting and ensuring the equality of regional and
minority languages. The progressive plans of the Dutch province Fryslân could serve
as a model for such a policy. With regard to the Frisian language, the “Modäl
Nordfriislon“ could serve as a model for a language policy.
Land government policy for promoting the Danish language should include the
following elements, among others:
Ensuring multilingualism in the public administration: Where the Land administration
in Schleswig has direct contact with citizens it should be able to provide its services
in Danish, both orally and in writing.
Recognition of documents written in Danish: Members of the Danish minority as well
as Danish organizations and associations must be given the possibility to submit
certificates, statutes, budgets, and other documents to courts, revenue offices, Land
authorities, and municipal authorities in the Danish language.
Danish at universities: A country can become truly multilingual only if the majority
population knows and understands the minority languages. Therefore, provision of
the resources needed for linguistic sciences and teacher training at universities in
Schleswig-Holstein would be in the interest of both the minority and the majority

305
population.
More and better language courses: There is a need for more and better Danish
language courses. This would reduce the costs to be borne by the minority, and at
the same time promote intercultural understanding. Efforts should be taken to
encourage as much staff members of the Land and municipalities as possible to
acquire minority language skills. The Land government is being called upon to
support, and draw attention to, modern methods of language learning, such as online
courses.
Multilingualism in cultural institutions: Language policy should aim at adopting a
multilingual approach in the work of museums and other cultural institutions in
Schleswig. The Land must provide financial support to these institutions.
Danish in public schools: In order to achieve these objectives the Land is called upon
to act and actively support Danish classes in public schools. It is not enough to refer
to the schools run by the Danish School Association, because these schools are
regular schools reserved for members of the Danish minority and therefore will not
help expand the use of Danish within the majority population.
Elements of language policy at local level include: Ensuring multilingualism in the
public administration: Where the staff of local administrative bodies have direct
contact with citizens they should be able as much as possible to communicate in
Danish orally and in writing.
Multi-lingual websites: So far, only few municipalities in Schleswig maintain websites
in Danish, and if so, they are primarily addressed to tourists from Denmark. To
maintain a fully multi-lingual website requires enormous efforts. Nonetheless,
essential information for citizens must be published also in Danish.
Multi-lingual signs in public buildings: Signs on premises of local authorities and
institutions in Schleswig should be in German and Danish, at least, the name of the
authority or institution should be given in Danish, too.
Bilingual town sings: Since 2007 it has been admissible to have town signs also in
Danish. So far, only the city of Flensburg has made use of this possibility. The Land
and the minority should work together and encourage the use of Danish town names
as this helps preserve the memory of the history of places and the original meaning
of their names. In Nordfriesland, experience with this practice is positive.
Signposts to Danish institutions: Since 2007, it has been admissible to install
signposts to key institutions of minority groups. In the future, stronger use should be
made of this possibility.
Street signs in Danish: Similar to many European regions as well as Saxony and
Brandenburg, where bilingual signs for streets and places and other topographic
places have long been commonplace, bilingual signs should be introduced in Danishspeaking areas as well, as this would mark a real advance towards multilingualism.

306
However, we are not calling for a general, region-wide introduction of bilingual signs.
Bilingual signs, however, should be used where the old Danish name of a place was
“translated” into German, if the local people agree, also to explain the original
meaning of a topographic name and to preserve the heritage of the region.
The issue of “Danish in the media” will be addressed in a separate paragraph.
4. Media and broadcasting programmes for the Danish minority in SchleswigHolstein (Article 11)
The deregulation of media markets gives impetus to ensure the optimal exploitation
of rights. At the same time, technological progress through digitalization allows for
increasingly precise delimitation of audiences. In structural terms, therefore, the more
or less random transmission of radio and television to neighbouring countries is
becoming a thing of the past. Since 1 November 2009, Danmarks Radio and TV2
have been broadcast via digital signals only. It is thus a task of minority and cultural
policy to ensure the continued distribution of these media in the future by creating the
necessary regulations and requirements.
In the German-Danish border area, the free reception of public service broadcasts
from the neighbouring country is part of official minority policy. In the Bonn–
Copenhagen Declarations of 1955 and, above all, the European Charter for Regional
or Minority Languages, the two countries agreed to guarantee the “freedom of direct
reception of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries” (Article 11
(2)). The rapid transformation of electronic media entails certain risks to reception in
the neighbouring country:
•
After terrestrial signals are digitalized, it is necessary to guarantee that the
programmes of public broadcasters from the respective neighbouring country can still
be received in North and South Schleswig using standard receivers.
•
The broadcasting of Danish television programmes via satellite is encoded
because of copyright contracts and consequently cannot be freely received.
Purchasing the appropriate Danish decoder card involves considerable costs.
We are very pleased that an agreement has been reached, after lengthy negotiations
between Danmarks Radio/TV2 and KabelDeutschland, guaranteeing that Danish TV
programmes will continue to be broadcast via cable after 1 November 2009.
The Danish minority calls on all responsible decision-makers to guarantee reception
of radio and television broadcasts in the neighbouring country on a permanent basis.

307
We welcome the fact that both the Danish government and the Land government of
Schleswig-Holstein are actively committed to ensuring that radio and television
broadcasts from both countries can be received in the German-Danish border region,
Presence of the Danish minority in the German media: As before, the Danish minority
wishes to ensure its increased presence in the media in general and in the
public service media in particular. The Danish minority holds fast to its request that
continuous and adequate consideration be given to the Danish language and that the
Danish minority be more comprehensively represented in the media.
Similarly, the prominence given to the criterion of mandatory governmental nonintervention in the media is not convincing since it is ultimately the respective
parliaments which adopt inter-state treaties. The Language Charter’s obligations for
policy-makers must be anchored in such instruments.
The Danish minority continues to press for negotiations with the broadcasting
supervisory authorities in order to make sure that the media take adequate account
of the Danish language in a practical way. At the same time, we expect policymakers to support these negotiations. In this context, we would like to draw attention
to the fact that other national minorities produce their own broadcast programmes in
cooperation with the public service media.
The Danish minority welcomes the fact that a minority representative has been given
a seat on the media council of the supervisory authority for Hamburg and SchleswigHolstein. In addition, a seat in the Broadcasting and Television Board of
Norddeutscher Runkfunk would be desirable.
The possibility for national minorities to create and use printed media: With regard to
the media situation of the Danish minority, it should be noted that the daily
newspaper for the Danish minority, Flensborg Avis, is published without any kind of
subsidy from either the Land Schleswig-Holstein or the Federal Republic of
Germany. The enormous costs involved are covered solely by subsidies from
Denmark and income generated by the newspaper itself. In our view, at least the
Federal Government in Berlin is obligated to provide project funding or institutional
grants to assist with the financial security and continued existence of the only
Danish-language daily newspaper in the Federal Republic of Germany. The Federal
Union of European Nationalities (FUEN) also expressly supports this request in the
form of a resolution passed at its Assembly of Delegates in Pécs, Hungary, on 24
May 2008.

308

The issue of funding of the daily newspaper Flensborg Avis was addressed in
No. 09032 of the Third State Report of the Federal Republic of Germany in
accordance with Art. 25 (2) of the Framework Convention for the Protection of
National Minorities of February 2009: “Under the German-Danish funding
arrangement, the German government does not provide subsidies for Flensborg
Avis, which is subsidized by the Kingdom of Denmark, but does support the
newspaper Der Nordschleswiger.”
This is not correct. The daily newspaper of the Danish minority does indeed receive
funds from Denmark, as stated in the State Report of Denmark. The newspaper Der
Nordschleswiger received nearly DKR 2 million under the governmental funding
programme Dagbladspuljen; it also receives financial support from other envelopes,
for example for radio and news programmes. The Flensborg Avis has not received
any funds from the German government, so far.
5.

Education and schools of the Danish minority (Article 8)

Curriculum in Schleswig-Holstein: The fact that the school curriculum in SchleswigHolstein addresses “issues of co-existence in a world with different cultures,
religions, forms of society, peoples and nations” should be seen positively. However,
it should be noted that lesson plans for world cultural studies refer only to “living
situations of minorities subject to exclusion from society (people with disabilities,
homosexuals, persons with AIDS, homeless people and people living in poverty)”,
while national minorities are not a focus of interest. The curriculum for history classes
lists the following topics for all types of schools: the Danes of North Schleswig in
Imperial Germany; the German-Danish conflict over Schleswig Holstein, 1864; and
the Treaty of Versailles and the referendums in Schleswig. The focus on North
Schleswig is problematic, because it ignores the area south of the border and thus
fails to adequately explain the basis for the situation of minorities today. Curriculum
for history, economics and policy does not address the situation following the
referendums of 1920. As a result, younger generations will hardly be able to
understand current minority issues.
Financial support for the schools of the Danish minority: As the providing body for
Danish nursery schools and schools in the Schleswig region, Dansk Skoleforening
for Sydslesvig fulfils public tasks deriving from both the Schleswig-Holstein Land
constitution and various international instruments, e.g. the Bonn-Copenhagen
Declarations, the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities,

309
and the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. On the basis of the
provisions of the Schleswig-Holstein Land constitution alone, the public sector would
be obliged to provide a school system for the Danish minority if Dansk Skoleforening
for Sydslesvig did not already provide such a system. Unfortunately, however, not all
policy-making bodies are aware of this obligation.
With regard to school fees, the principle of equal treatment with public schools
provided the basis for subsidies from the mid-1980s until 1997, when it was
discontinued. Following several years of intensive negotiations, this principle has
been included in the new Schools Act and will go into effect again starting with the
2008 budget year. Expenses not defined in the Schools Act will still not be taken into
account, such as costs for school inspection, school psychological care and other
services which Land or local authorities pick up in the case of public schools.
The cost of transporting non-local pupils is a special problem for the Schools
Association. The support for this area provided for in the Schools Act is valid for
public schools only. Although the Land government recognizes the schools run by
the Danish School Association as “regular schools for members of the minority”, they
still have not been granted the same legal status as public schools. Reimbursement
of “one-third of the necessary school transport costs in accordance with Section 114
(3) of the Schools Act” (see No.. 10822) refers to the average costs of school
transport in public schools in Schleswig-Holstein. Since transport costs for minority
schools are particularly high on account of the greater distances to be covered by
non-local pupils, this reimbursement does not cover one third of the necessary costs
for school transport to schools of the Dansk Skoleforening for Sydslesvig. Coverage
of two thirds of the costs from district funds is voluntary, despite the interim solution
in the 2009/2010 two-year budget, and may cease to be paid at any time. A legal
guarantee of equality is urgently needed also in this matter. Again, we would like to
draw attention to the special provision made by the Kingdom of Denmark covering
transport costs for the German minority.
Overview of organizations and institutions of the Danish minority:
•

Dansk Centralbibliotek for Sydslesvig (Danish central library): organizes the
library system and does research work.

•

Dansk Kirke i Sydslesvig (DKS) (Danish Church in South Schleswig): takes care
of the interests of Danish Protestants.

310
•

Dansk Skoleforening for Sydslesvig (Danish Schools Association for South
Schleswig): is responsible for children’s day-care facilities, schools and
education.

•

Dansk Sundhedstjeneste for Sydslesvig (Danish Health Care Service for South
Schleswig): looks after the elderly, provides school health services, does social
work, organizes nursing and health services for members of the minority.

•

Flensborg Avis is a joint-stock media company and publisher of the bilingual
newspaper of the Danish minority.

•

Sydslesvigs danske Ungdomsforeninger (SdU) (Danish youth groups of South
Schleswig): is active in the area of youth work and sport.

•

Sydslesvigsk Forening (SSF) (South Schleswig Association): Main cultural
organization of the Danish minority and responsible for general minority matters.
Regular member of the Federal Union of European Nationalities (FUEN) and,
together with the SSW, is actively involved in the Minority Council of national
minorities in Germany.

•

Sydslesvigsk Vælgerforening (SSW) (South Schleswig Association of Voters):
represents the political interests of the Danish minority at local and regional level
in Schleswig-Holstein as well as at national level in Germany, in close
cooperation with the SSF.

311
Comments by the Domowina – Bund Lausitzer Sorben e.V. (Federation of
Lusatian Sorbs) on the Draft Fourth State Report of the Federal Republic of
Germany in accordance with the European Charter of Regional and Minority
Languages
1. General remarks on the preparation of the report
With regard to the procedure of drawing-up the Fourth State Report, we find it
problematic that representatives of the Länder, the national public authorities, and of
protected language groups made parallel contributions. For the latter to be able to
comment on the contributions of the Land and Bund, these would have to be
integrated into the report first. On account of the fact that the revised draft report as
of 18 November 2009 is still incomplete as regards certain aspects, our comments
may not refer to the current version of the numbers in question.
2. Specific comments on Part D:
No. 20810: In addition to their compulsory classes, trainees interested in the Sorbian
(Wendish) language may attend optional Sorbian (Wendish) classes.
Remark: This offer is insufficient because it neither provides an opportunity to acquire
solid language skills nor to prepare oneself for a job in Sorbian and WITAJ nursery
schools. If this problem is not solved, the whole project in Lower Lusatia is doomed
to fail .
No. 20814 last paragraph:
Statements about deteriorating language skills are not based on research and are
therefore not reliable.
Our comments are as follows:
Concrete results of past Language Olympics and school competitions in the
Sorbian/Wendish language, which are organized every year by the WITAJ language
centre, confirm this statement. In the future, scientific evaluation is needed in order to
get a specific analysis of the status of language proficiency in Sorbian/Wendish that
allows relevant conclusions to be drawn.
No. 20833
Statement by the Saxon government concerning the finding of the Committee of
Experts in No. 2083 that as a way of reconciling the trend of school closures, Saxony
has introduced Sorbian streams into mainstream schools using the bilingual teaching
model “2 plus”, but still sees some serious problems such as the relatively low

312
number of five hours devoted to Sorbian and its possible harm to the language
competence of mother tongue pupils.
Our comments are as follows:
First:
The less intensive five-hours-per-week model is applied in non-Sorbian
schools. In our view it is unsatisfactory that because of small, allegedly insufficient,
numbers of school pupils the “2plus” teaching model is offered in a slim-down
version. This means that these children are not treated equally as other children who
have the opportunity to visit a Sorbian school.
Second: The Committee of Experts’ concerns that this model might possibly harm the
language competence of mother tongue pupils are indeed justified, particularly in the
case of pupils who - in a class of at least 20 pupils, as required by law – are the
absolute minority (usually 3-5 out of 20) in a group of non-mother tongue pupils.
Such constellations can be observed in several Sorbian schools, particularly in some
intermediate schools.
No. 20836
The originally planned project measure to provide additional funds for Sorbian
lessons for vocational trainees was not carried out.
Reason: Insufficient number of applicants from all fields and therefore insufficient
trainee contributions, which is a prerequisite for receiving public funds.
Organizational obstacles also thwarted the project: Owing to incompatible timetables
it was difficult to form a class of at least 12 pupils.
No. 20837, 2nd paragraph:
After the Sorbian technical school for social welfare (Sorbische Fachschule für
Sozialpädagogik) had been merged into the vocational training centre in Bautzen,
sufficient training of nursery and pre-school teachers is no longer guaranteed. On the
one hand, the number of Sorbian applicants is subject to a numerus clausus
regulation; as a consequence, minority applicants statistically do not have equal
opportunities as majority applicants. On the other hand, ongoing structural changes
within the training institution lead to deteriorating training and teaching conditions for
trainees and trainers alike. So far, the Domowina has not been informed about
structural changes.
No. 20848
Ref.:
Teacher training
Currently, the plan to give due consideration to the history and culture of the Sorbs
during teacher training at university level, as referred to in No. 20848, is being put

313
into practice on an ad-hoc basis by just one academic assistant. This is far from
being appropriate.
No. 20858
Additional remarks
The guarantee to be hired for school service is jeopardized by the fact that there are
not sufficient vacancies for the second, practical phase of teacher training. Therefore,
Sorbian teacher trainees often have to interrupt or continue their studies in other
federal states.
No. 20864
Supervisory functions
It would be desirable to have a representative of the Sorbian/Wendish language
group with ministerial powers to perform supervisory functions.
No. 21019
Recruitment to public office
In order to preserve regional particularities, applicants with Sorbish/Wendish
language skills should be recruited to public offices.
No. 21119
In its decision concerning the MDR Broadcasting Board, the Saxon parliament did
not support the representation of the Sorbs in the said body. As a consequence, the
Sorbs will no longer be able to represent their interests in the Board themselves.
No. 21120
Production and distribution of audio and audiovisual works in minority languages
On account of insufficient funds available to the Foundation for the Sorbian People,
this area was paid too little attention or was neglected altogether in the past. There is
a lack of complementary resources to finance such productions. Individual projects of
the WITAJ language centre and of the Domowina are exceptional in this context.
No. 21202
Additional remarks
Despite the fact that new funding arrangements have been agreed for the period
from 2009 to 2014 and that the total annual budget for the foundation amounts to
€ 16.8 million, excluding inflation relief, available resources are not enough to ensure
the future of institutional structures, particularly the Sorbian National Ensemble.
Already at the meeting of the Foundation Board on 26 November 2009 it was

314
acknowledged that without financial support the Ensemble would have to file an
insolvency petition still in 2009.
An external study, commissioned by donators of the foundation, on ways to improve
or consolidate the financial situation did not yield significant results. The current
financial situation remains precarious in all institutional areas.
No. 21305
We are not satisfied with the assessment of the SMWK concerning the use of the
Sorbian language in the nursing home for people with mental disabilities run by St.
Marienstern monastery. In practice, this instruction has not changed the situation for
employees with regard to their possibility to use their Sorbian mother tongue at work.
In this respect they are still being discriminated against.

Bautzen, 29 January 2010

315
Frasche Rädj Sektion Nord e. V.
Comments on the implementation of the European Charter of Regional and Minority
Languages in Schleswig-Holstein
The Charter's importance to the minority language North Frisian
Thanks to the associated evaluation process, the Charter has become an important
instrument for the work of Frisian associations. The state reports provide a good
overview of the status of supported given by the Federal and Land governments on a
regular basis. Therefore, the Charter is of outstanding importance for North Frisian as
a minority language.
In general, the Frisian Council notes that hopes raised in the last reporting period
were disappointed: Although Frisian has been granted the status of a minority
language in Schleswig-Holstein and the protection and promotion of the Frisian
ethnic group have been anchored in the Constitution, this positive development has
not been further consolidated.
Frisian in teacher training
Schleswig-Holstein has not enough Frisian language teachers. From our perspective,
the responsible ministry has not done enough to remedy this situation; so far, the
development of available teachers has not even been systematically recorded.
Although information on both the seniority and the age of Frisian language teachers
should be available, there is no early warning system to fill retirement-related
vacancies without long delays.
After the traditional teacher training courses at the universities of Kiel and Flensburg
were abolished, Frisian is of only marginal importance in teacher training. The
reasons are obvious and have to do with the fact that Frisian is not treated as a
proper subject, but it taught merely as an add-on. This creates a significant burden
of extra work for students of the Frisian language, compared to their co-student who
do not take Frisian lessons.
The so called Frisian Ordinance (see below) provides for the possibility of Frisian
lessons only under the condition of sufficient human resources. In practice, Frisian
teachers-to-be are no longer offered vacancies for their second, practical training in
the Frisian language area. As a consequence, they cannot acquire the necessary
qualification. Over the long term, Schleswig-Holstein will likely be confronted with a
shortage of Frisian language teachers in the future. In the next years there will be
hardly any new qualified teachers. The already existing difficulties to recruit new staff
will even become worse, which means that teaching standards cannot be

316
maintained. This is of great concern to the Frisian Council, which is therefore
seeking to recruit qualified teachers already working at schools in Nordfriesland as
Frisian language teachers. Based on an initiative of the Council, a pilot project is
being conducted at the Island of Föhr.
Frisian in school
The Frisian Council notes with concern the development in the area of Frisian
language classes in schools. The number of pupils attending Frisian language
classes is shrinking after some schools were either closed or merged in the language
area. The new School Act does not take account of Frisian language classes;
instead, reference was made to an ordinance issued in October 2008 which will
expire in 2013. Certainly, the demand for Frisian language classes depends on
various factors, of which the awareness of one’s own language plays a central role;
this awareness is developed through cultural work. However, there is no network of
cultural projects and initiatives, nor is networking the focus of school policy. As a
result, no advantage is taken of possible synergies between culture and school
policies. There is a potential, yet not reflected need for Frisian language classes and
because of that school policy is based on distorted assumptions.
Regular Frisian language classes are absolutely exceptional. Not only does the
Ministry of Education insist on voluntarism, but also parents are required to actively
apply for Frisian language classes if this is not provided for in the school programme;
such applications are also binding. This exceptional status of Frisian language
classes has far-reaching consequences: Frisian is still no regular classroom subject
in public schools. Binding curricula are lacking, expert assistance and supervision is
incomplete, there is no tutor for Frisian for the secondary level. In its communication
with the Land Audit Office, the Ministry of Education refers to expenditure for Frisian
language instruction as additional costs, even though this is a mandatory school
policy task under the Land constitution.
A decree on “Frisian in schools in the Nordfriesland district and on the island of
Helgoland”, which was issued in addition to the Schools Act, stipulates that schools
in the Nordfriesland district and on the island of Helgoland are obligated to inform
parents that they may apply for Frisian language instruction for their children. In view
of the Frisian Council, it would be desirable to have regular controls of compliance
with this obligation. A clear legal entitlement to Frisian language instruction, as
demanded by the Frisian minority, is not granted under the decree.
At primary and secondary schools in Schleswig-Holstein pupils do not have the
opportunity to attend regular language classes throughout their school career. Frisian
is offered as one of several optional courses, in addition to the regular curriculum.

317
The introduction of Frisian as an optional compulsory subject for the seventh grade is
a step into the right direction; it remains to be seen, however, how many pupils of
lower grades, if any, will be actually able to attend Frisian classes.
Demand statistics are distorted owing to the systemic deficiencies already referred to
and may therefore not be taken as a basis for future planning, as required by the
decree on Frisian language instruction. Especially in the field of secondary education,
vocational training opportunities are absolutely inadequate. Nothing is being done to
remedy this situation.
Hence, the contractual obligation to encourage people to attend Frisian language
classes has not been fulfilled.
Frisian in the public sphere
Since the last report, Frisian has become more present in the public sphere, thanks
to new, bilingual signs at police stations and train stations, among other things.
Frisian has the status of an official language and can therefore be used in public
dealings. In practice, however, the possibilities of language promotion have been
used with restraint at local level. Actually, the Frisian names of public authorities (e.g.
Bökingharde, Karrharde) are no longer used after the authorities were merged in the
Nordfriesland district. In fact, the Frisian language is no longer in use in official
dealings (in committees etc.). The political debate about local government reform did
not take account of Frisian concerns.
Few people use Frisian as an official language, but the language is not actively used
by public authorities. The Frisian Council noted with great concern that individual
measures, like announcements of stops in trains of the NordOstseeBahn railway,
have been abandoned after a short introductory period. As soon as the appeal of
being new was lost, announcements were again made in German only. Sustainable
language work, however, is based on continuity. Measures that require active
participation need continuous expert assistance; this, however, cannot be achieved
with voluntary help alone.
In our view, the current human resources policy does not take account of civil
servants’ skills in regional or minority languages. For the Frisian minority, however, it
is essential that at least some of the public service staff in Nordfriesland and on the
island of Helgoland speak Frisian, otherwise any further efforts will be in vain. If
Frisian language skills are a prerequisite for recruitment, this would be a direct
incentive to take Frisian classes. This also holds true for interpreting services, for
which no provision has been made so far. To begin with, adequate advanced training
opportunities should be created in a first step.

318
To promote the use of Frisian in the economic and social sectors directly under state
control (public sector), the Land government has to create an adequate financial
framework.
Frisian in the media
The Frisian Council notes that despite the efforts of the Land government and the
Landtag to encourage broadcasters to offer programmes in the Frisian language,
Frisian continues to be disproportionally represented in the media and is not used at
all in TV programmes.
Radio programmes produced by Friisk Foriining for Nordfriisk Radio on Offener Kanal
Westküste ceased to be broadcasted. Instead, Friisk Foriining provides funds for the
translation and presentation of short news broadcast online on “Radio mm” via
Internet. The Land government does not support this project. Therefore, the Frisian
Council upholds his demands that the Land should fulfil its financial obligations in this
area and provide frequencies for Northern and Central Nordfriesland that can be use
for broadcasting Frisian programmes.
Every week, the public broadcaster NDR broadcasts “Frasch for enarken”, a threeminute programme in Frisian on Radio Flensburg. This is no basic provision of
Frisian language programmes. There are no plans to extend the programme. Frisian
language courses for journalists are not available, the only possibility for journalists to
learn the language is to complete a short internship at the NDR.
Other licence-fee funded broadcasters in Germany, i.e. the Mitteldeutscher Rundfunk
(MDR) and Radio Berlin-Brandenburg (RBB), broadcast a full programme in Sorbian
every day that lasts for several hours. The Frisian Council calls for an amendment of
the NDR State Treaty to include minority-language-related obligations and for an
amendment of Land regulations concerning private broadcasters.
On 16 December 2009, the Media Council of the supervisory authority for private
broadcasters of Schleswig-Holstein in Hamburg (MA HSH) decided to award the FM
frequency 96.7 MHz in Wyk on the island of Föhr to the Open Channel SchleswigHolstein (OKSH) for ten years. The OKSH and the private Ferrari foundation together
want to broadcast Frisian programmes. The Frisian Council has pledged to support
the radio project over five years with € 40,000 per year.
Cross-border cooperation
The Land has not fulfilled its obligation to conclude agreements with states in which
the same regional or minority language is used in identical or similar form. As a
result, there is no contractual cooperation with Westerlauwersk Fryslân (Netherlands)

319
and hence no institutionalized cooperation between Schleswig-Holstein and the
North Frisians, on the one hand, and the province of Fryslân and the Western
Frisians on the other. Experience made there and structures existing there could be
easily translated to the situation of North Frisian, as already happened in the past at
private or voluntary initiative (Inter-Frisian Council and others). We continue to place
high priority on the promotion of exchange programmes (for farmers, students, etc.)
between the Friesland regions. Currently, the exchange is organized at the initiative
of Frisian clubs and associations; it would be desirable to involve the Land
government in order to establish the exchange programme on a permanent basis.
Outlook
The impetus given by the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages is
inspiring for the Frisians and the majority population alike. Both sides are inspired by
the Charter to search for solutions to concrete problems in constant contact with
each other. An important element in this dialogue is the reporting requirement ,
extended in Schleswig-Holstein to cover a Land Report. It should be kept in mid,
however, that preconditions are unequal: an umbrella organization of cultural
associations run by voluntary staff competes with a fully trained civil service
apparatus. In order to breath new life into the Charter, it is important for the Frisian
organizations to be given a certain financial scope of action allowing them to conduct
the necessary, yet complex project procedures in a proper and targeted way. This
requirement was already recognized by the Land Government and the Landtag some
time ago when they came out in favour of a "Foundation for the Frisian People" and
set up a capital stock to this end at the Land level. It must be noted, however, that
the Foundation has not taken in enough interests from its capital investments to put
all its ideas for promoting the Frisian language into practice. Strong support is
provided by the Federal Government, who made € 280,000 available to the project in
2009. Based on close and trustful cooperation with the competent authorities it has
been possible to spend these project funds on specific activities to promote the
Frisian language and culture, taking account of individual needs; nevertheless, the
need for support and funding for the Frisian language is primarily of an institutional
character. For several years the Frisian Council has suggested to establish a
language promotion plan for Schleswig-Holstein, which would list the objectives and
futures measures of language policy for a certain period, and which could be
evaluated after this period. In addition to the Articles of the Charter, this language
promotion plan could also cover economic aspects, for example by promoting Frisian
cultural life as a "unique selling proposition" in the field of tourism. The fact that local
tourism businesses use "Frisian" already as a kind of brand name indicates that they

320
are well aware of the attractiveness of local culture. We need to build on these
efforts. Based on the study on “Minorities as a location factor in the German-Danish
border region” concrete measures could be launched. Measures could be modelled
on the Modäl Nordfriislon/Nordfriesland Model, developed by the Frisian minority,
which lists future perspectives and solutions for the Frisian language and culture.
By defining language-policy objectives and specifically implementing planned
measures, Schleswig-Holstein could set European standards, or at least follow
European standards. Sooner or later, this will open up possibilities for fulfilling - and
subsequently notifying - other provisions of the Charter in addition to those already
notified. This, in particular, would also be in accordance with the dynamic character
of the Charter for Regional and Minority Languages.
At the federal level it will be important in future to sensitize the federal policy to the
minorities issue.

321
Seelter Buund – Sater Frisian
Comments on the implementation of the European Charter of Regional and Minority
Languages in Lower Saxony
In the last few years, the evaluation process under the language Charter has become
an important instrument for the work of the Seelter Buund and its efforts to preserve
the Sater Frisian language. Of course, to comment to the various state reports
means a lot of work for an organization that is operated by voluntary work. On the
other hand, the state reports provide a good, regular overview of the implementation
of the Charter by the Federal and Land governments.
In the last reporting period, there have been some positive developments, particularly
with regard to the financial situation of the Seelter Buund and the Sater Frisian
language. In 2008 and 2009, Lower Saxony provided € 10,000 each year as project
funding for the Sater Frisians. Our project is called “Preserving the Sater Frisian
Language”. With the public funds the Seelter Buund was able to reimburse voluntary
language teachers for their travel expenses, to buy teaching materials, and to
organize advanced training classes.
However, a one-hour language class per week is not enough to achieve language
proficiency. Those who have never learnt the language before will get basic
knowledge, and native speakers may perhaps improve their language skills. In order
to extend language instruction, the Seelter Buund has asked the University of
Oldenburg (Prof. Dr Peters) and the nursery schools in Saterland to set up one or
two bilingual nursery-school groups. This requires a Sater Frisian native speaker
and a German native speaker for each group as nursery school teachers. In the
future it is planned to set up bilingual classes in one or two primary schools. With this
immersive language instruction we hope to make a decisive step towards preserving
the Sater Frisian language. Experiences of Frisians and Sorbs show that we are on
the right path. Prof. Peters from Oldenburg University has agreed to support the
project as scientific adviser. The necessary project funds should be provided by
Lower Saxony. So far, all applications for project funding lodged by the University of
Oldenburg were rejected.
Another important issue is the funding of the second edition of the Sater Frisian
Dictionary edited by Dr Marron Fort. The dictionary is of particular importance not
only for language maintenance, but also for language preservation. The dictionary is
a bilingual Sater Frisian-German dictionary.

322
All applications for project funding (we need € 25,000) have been rejected. We have
submitted further applications to the Foundation. However, we think that Lower
Saxony would be obligated to provide the necessary funds.
For routine work, a German-Sater Frisian dictionary would be helpful, too. The costs
for such a dictionary have not been determined yet.
Karl-Peter Schramm, 08.12.2009

323
Comments by the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma on the Fourth State
Report of the Federal Republic of Germany on the implementation of the European
Charter of Regional and Minority Languages
Generally, the Central Council and the Documentation Centre refer to their
comments made and attached to previous state reports.
First of all it should be emphasized that the Charter is a regulatory instrument
ensuring that German Romani is recognized as a minority language and granted the
same status as other regional and minority languages in Europe. This does not mean
that the provisions of the Charter have to be implemented immediately. At the same
time, the Charter's provisions must not be interpreted in a way that is not in the
interest of the minority. Specifically, this means that the Charter’s provisions shall be
implemented without prejudice to the wish of most German Sinti and Roma not to
have a standard written form of their language, but to maintain and cultivate it only
within their minority.
However, this wish should not be misunderstood as a rejection of the Charter by
German Sinti and Roma, like in Nos. 50001 and 50002. The commitment of a state to
promote the minority language Romani in compliance with the Charter continues to
be an important signal; the state should not be relieved from its obligation to
encourage and enable implementation of the Charter's provisions.
For the following reasons:
1. For Sinti and Roma, circumstances are particularly difficult. According to several
statistical studies, members of this minority in particular are affected by
marginalization and discrimination. According to findings of the public opinion
research institutes Emnid and Allensbach, more than two thirds of the majority
population in Germany has strong resentments at the minority. According to own
surveys, the Central Council found that 76% of those minority members polled have
already been discriminated against. To create equal opportunities to take part in all
aspects of political, social, and economic life requires effective measures to reduce
prejudices and intolerance and to encourage societal recognition.
2. For many years, the Central Council has criticized the media for their derogatory
coverage of Sinti and Roma – and rightly so, as has been found by participants of an
international conference organized by the Central Council together with the German
Press Council and the Friedrich Ebert Foundation in Berlin recently.

324

3. Indifferent politics, or late and only half-hearted responses to racist violence in
other European countries, like in the case of racist rioting against Roma in Italy
incited by a smear campaign in the press, or of the assassination of minority
members in Hungary for racist motives.
4. In the field of education, Sinti and Roma in history and in the present must be
addressed more extensively in school classes and teaching materials.
The report gives the impression (cf. N. 50800) that only very few members of the
minority would approve of the proposal of Central Council to teach Romani in
schools. This comment appears to be misleading as the formulation “Romani
instruction in public schools” suggests that the proposal meant proper language
classes similar to English or French instruction. This is wrong. Supplemental
instruction in Romani at school, as proposed by the Central Council, means that
classes should be held outside regular instruction, only if those concerned so wish,
exclusively for pupils from the minority, and should only be taught by teachers who
are members of the minority themselves. Moreover, participation is voluntary and –
most importantly – the rights of minority members who do not want to participate in
these classes should not be violated.
Without prejudice to the above said, it remains the responsibility of initiators of
language promotion measures to take due account of local circumstances and
conditions and to decide where supplemental should be held, if at all.
At the Zugspitzschule in Nuremberg, the Bavarian Land Association of Sinti and
Roma continues to organize homework assistance private tutoring. The Hessian
Land Association has launched regional private tutoring projects in which Romani is
used, like in Bavaria. In Rhineland-Palatinate, the protection of minorities, including
the promotion of minority languages, has been integrated into the framework
agreement with the Land Association. Unfortunately, plans to hire a full-time
educational officer to determine the need for seminars in Romani were thwarted by
budgetary constraints (additional comment by the Land Association of RhinelandPalatinate on No. 00757).
The Land Association of North-Rhine/Westphalia has noted that schools have
insufficient knowledge of the obligations under the Charter. After an exchange of
information at the Ministry of Education, framework conditions for extra tuition in
Romani were set out in a joint declaration. Soon, guidelines for teachers on

325
promoting the schooling progress of children from Sinti and Roma families both in
and outside school will be published, which will also deal with the importance of
minority languages.
Such activities are mostly carried out at the initiative of the minority itself, without any
encouragement by the Länder. One example is the one-hour radio programme
broadcast on Radio Radar in Darmstadt on 15 December at 5 p.m., which was
produced at the initiative of and also by the Hessian Land Association of Sinti and
Roma. The production received financial support from the working panel “Open
Darmstadt”.
Based on information that Romani speakers in Hesse welcomed radio and television
broadcasts in Romani (see No. 51103), the Expert Committee accused the Land of
failures in its Third Monitoring Report. The Central Council welcomes the response
by Hessian authorities, who have undertaken to inform the Land public-service
broadcasting corporation about the obligations under the Charter and to enter into a
dialogue with the Land association (cf. No. 51104).
The Rhineland-Palatinate association of Sinti and Roma in Germany comments
on the report as follows:
No. 00115
In 2009, the German Institute for Human Rights organized an expert meeting in
Germany to discuss the recommendations of the UN Committee monitoring the
“International Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Racial Discrimination” of
August 2008, which was also attended by representatives of the RhinelandPalatinate Land association. The UN Committee commended the framework
condition between the Rhineland-Palatinate Land government and the Land
association and said that it should serve as an example to other Länder.
This contract under public law is a success for the Land association, which
represents the interests of some 8,000 Sinti and Roma living in Rhineland-Palatinate,
and which for many years has demanded that the protection of minorities should be
embodied in a legal instrument guaranteeing the protection and promotion of the
culture of Sinti and Roma. This does not grant the Sinti and Roma any special
status, since under their respective constitutions the Länder concerned have long
been obligated to protect the other minorities in Germany, i.e. the Danes, Frisians,
and Sorbs. Those Sinti and Roma who were prosecuted under the Nazi regime see

326
the contract also as recognition of the injustices suffered by them in the past and as
respect for their minority culture.
The work of the Land association runs the gamut from routine counselling,
processing of damage claims, public relations work to information campaigns, as set
out in the framework agreement. Additional funds are needed for the cultural
promotion, the necessary education of minority members, and particularly the
promotion of Romani. To fulfil these tasks, funds necessary to hire a Sinti/Roma
official are needed.
No. 00756
The responsibilities of the Sinti educational officer include coordination and
organization of seminars in several cities in Rhineland-Palatinate. The educational
officer should organize seminars in the Romani language focusing on the minority’s
specific culture, history and problems of discrimination; the seminars should be
offered in communities in Rhineland-Palatinate where desired by local members of
the minority. In addition, concepts for age-appropriate seminars should be developed
to transfer knowledge of the language and tradition of the Sinti and Roma, and to
teach strategies for dealing with the personal experience of discrimination.
To prepare the application for project funding for the Romani language under the
framework agreement between Rhineland-Palatinate and the Land association of the
Sinti and Roma, a working panel meeting was organized with some 25 young adults,
funded with subsidies for institutional and voluntary work. Members of the minority
group showed great interest in the working panel. The resulting application for project
funding for the promotion of the Romani language was rejected by the Land
government because of “budgetary constraints and necessary priority shifts” in the
2009/2010 biennial budget.
This project is intended to improve educational opportunities for members of the
minority and to strengthen the processes ensuring equal opportunities by extending
the scope of language promotion. To achieve this objective, Rhineland-Palatinate
needs an educational officer of the Sinti and Roma; otherwise it will be impossible to
implement the framework condition for language promotion.

327
Comments by the Sinti Alliance of Germany on the Fourth Report submitted by
the Federal Republic of Germany in accordance with Article 15 (1) of the European
Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
A. General comments
The Sinti Alliance of Germany regrets to note that with regard to the autochthonous
ethnic group of Sinti and their representatives there were only very few positive
developments in the reporting period, because governmental promotion measures
under the language Charter aimed at preserving the culture and language of German
Gypsies in practice support only the work of a limited group of Sinti and Roma in
Germany, while all others are neglected.
1. Imbalanced governmental support policy results in a lack of infrastructure for
practical work
The groups, initiatives, and associations of German Gypsies who have joined
together in the Sinti Alliance of Germany, continue to be totally excluded from public
support; they are not among the beneficiaries of the measures listed in the Fourth
Report, such as publicly funded facilities and measures for German Gypsies to
enable self-government and to create the conditions necessary to preserve and
strengthen their original identity, values, culture and language.
We not with great regret that these publicly funded structures are for the benefit of
one single association in the whole country, i.e. the Central Council of Sinti and
Roma in Germany. The Central Council is the only umbrella associations receiving
institutional funding. The financial support policy of the Länder is imbalanced, too,
with a one-sided focus on organizations belonging to the Central Council. However,
the Sinti Alliance received project funding from the Land association of RhinelandPalatinate for the first time.
The Sinti Alliance Germany is operated and represented by voluntary workers. The
expenditures for the affiliated groups and external service staff have to be funded
from private resources. The available means are totally inappropriate for necessary
overtime work. We need funds to recruit staff, on a modest scale, as well as funds to
ensure efficient representation of interests of the autochthonous ethnic group of
German Sinti and their cultural integration into the German society. The affiliated
groups and the Sinti Alliance Germany are good at economizing and spend their
resources in an appropriate and efficient way

328

We know that especially when public finances are tight, every application for public
funding must be thoroughly scrutinized. Available resources, however, can and
should be re-distributed. German Gypsies are organized in two different umbrella
organizations, the Sinti Alliance Germany and the Central Council of Sinti and Roma
in Germany, each having a different membership and representing different social
and political positions. However, only the Central Council receives comprehensive
public funding (institutional support); the Sinti Alliance Germany does not receive any
public funds.
Voluntary work and private funding of all kinds of tasks within our society have long
been exploited to their limits.
The Sinti Alliance Germany is well aware of the tight budget situation in Germany. If
no additional public funds are made available in the federal or Land budgets to
support our secretariats and our diverse work, the budgetary funds, both at national
and Land level, earmarked for the Central Council of Sinti an Roma in Germany and
its Land associations should be split and shared between both organizations and
their respective Land associations. This is necessary for us to get the same
opportunity to promote and preserve our cultural heritage.
The Sinti Alliance Germany once again calls upon the Federal Government and the
Länder to grant appropriate and equal support to both the Central Council of Sinti
and Roma in Germany and its Land associations as well as the Sinti Alliance
Germany and its Land associations. This refers to the infrastructure necessary to
represent the interests of the minority group members, but also to organize cultural
projects in the Länder, e.g. radio programmes, music festivals, or other events, which
so far have been financed with private funds, and in the case of one Land association
received small, temporary grants from the local budget. In comparison to the vivid,
cultural life of other autochthonous ethnic groups and the public funds provided to
them, we cannot but note that the culture of Sinti in Germany has been one of the
areas almost completely neglected by public funding.
Framework agreements between the state and interest groups, such as the one
between the Land government of Rhineland-Palatinate and association of German
Sinti - the Rhineland-Palatinate Land Association of the Central Council of Sinti and
Roma in Germany, also contribute to protecting the culture of German Gypsies and
to strengthening their self-government. In due time, the Land association of the Sinti
Alliance in Germany, the Sinti Union in Rhineland-Palatinate, will ask the Land

329
government to conclude a similar, yet not identical framework condition with the Sinti
Union, too, to ensure the peaceful coexistence and equal treatment of all German
Gypsies living in Rhineland-Palatinate.
It would not be acceptable if unilateral assistance to one of the two existing
associations would cause the Central Council to claim a sole right of representation,
thus excluding the Gypsies represented by the Land association of the Sinti Alliance
Germany.
2. Documentation and Cultural Centre of German Sinti and Roma
Once again the Sinti Alliance Germany wants to emphasize that among all statesponsored promotional measures to support the German Gypsies’ selfadministration, the considerable funding for the Documentation and Cultural Centre
of German Sinti and Roma in Heidelberg deserves particular mention.
However, it must be pointed out once again that only the associations, groups and
individuals affiliated with the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma can work
and co-operate with this important institution.
Groups affiliated with the Sinti Alliance Germany continue to be denied involvement
in the Centre’s activities. Verbal attacks by officials of the Central Council and the
Centre and written comments to this effect, which were released to the general
public, have very clearly shown that the Sinti Alliance Germany (SAD) as an umbrella
organisation is not welcome, either, to take part in the activities of this Centre. In our
view, one of the most important tasks is that the entities funding this work - the
Federal Government and Baden-Württemberg - ensure that every German Gypsy
who can make a useful contribution to this work, i.e. including SAD Land associations
and their umbrella organization, has equal opportunities of participation in the
Centre’s activities.
The Federal Government has recognized that everyone should have access to the
information collections of the Documentation and Culture Centre. Despite the fact
that access is still restricted, this would by far not be enough.
The tasks of the Documentation and Cultural Centre refer to ethnic group of German
Gypsies as a whole. Hence, state-imposed requirements should give our umbrella
organization equal rights regarding participation in the shaping of, and decisionmaking on, policies and programmes, too. If it should not be possible, in view of the
close linkup, in personnel terms, between the Central Council and the Centre, to
include these rights in the present structure, the Sinti Alliance reiterates its demand

330
that consideration should be given to changing the legal form of the Documentation
and Cultural Centre, e.g. transforming the Centre into an independent foundation.
The widening of the remit of the Documentation and Cultural Centre and the
additional inclusion of educational matters impose the increasingly urgent need for
ensuring that all relevant organisations of German gypsies can take part in the
Centre's activities. If this is not ensured, there would be cause for deep concern that
in this field a monopoly might develop which would be defined by one organisation
only and its basic attitude and that work alternatives would be dismissed without prior
consideration.
3. Different positions of both umbrella organizations on central issues
As has already been pointed out in previous state reports, in Germany exist two
umbrella organizations representing the Sinti and Roma, namely the Central Council
of German Sinti and Roma (Central Council), including several Land associations
and the Documentation and Cultural Centre institutionally funded by the Federal
Government, and the Sinti Alliance Germany (Sinti Alliance).
We think it is important to point out once again that both organizations have very
different views on the necessary protection and promotion of the language and
culture as well as on the presentation of their ethnic group and its history. For
example, this regards the question of whether the term “gypsy” should be avoided on
a future Holocaust memorial, because it reflects the National Socialist race doctrine
(position of the Central Council), or whether it should be understood as a historical
term and therefore its use be encouraged because otherwise a large part of the
groups concerned would not be given credit (position of the Sinti Alliance).
The Central Council of Sinti and Roma actively supports a wide scope of protection
of the Romani language, used by German Sinti and Roma, under the language
Charter. The Sinti Alliance is committed to the language Charter and the obligations
under the Charter concerning the promotion of the culture of German Sinti, but it
rejects any state interference with the preservation of the Romani language of
German Sinti.
Previous State Reports have stated on several occasions that one of the reasons
why there are no bodies for protecting and promoting the Romani language is that so
far nobody has expressed a desire for such bodies. It was pointed out in these
reports that the Central Council has tried to influence public perception of German
Sinti and Roma presenting them mostly as victims of both the Nazi Holocaust and

331
current prejudices, and not as an independent ethnic group with an own cultural
identity which could enrich society.
In contrast, the Sinti Alliance does not see its ethnic group as a victim of continuous
discrimination. Owing to its habitual tradition, it is very important to the Alliance that
the language and the culture of German Sinti are shielded from disclosure.
Therefore, it has strong reservations about the Central Council's policy to place the
Romani language under the protection of Part III of the Charter. The Alliance also
rejects the development of a standardized written form and grammatical structures
for the Romani spoken by German Sinti (Sintetikes).
The Sinti Alliance shares the view expressed in previous State Reports that the views
of both organizations differ so widely that it is not clear how they could work together
in one body for the protection and promotion of the Romani language. The Sinti
Alliance underlines its willingness to actively contribute to the work of any body that
addresses this issue, but at the same time it expects that the bases of its cultural
tradition as far as the Romani language of the German Sinti (Sintetikes) is concerned
are respected by the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma and by society as a
whole.
4. The Charter and the Romani (Sintetikes) of the German Sinti
The strongly differing views of the umbrella organizations regarding the protection of
Romani under the Charter have led to a problematic situation, as explained in the
Third State Report.
Initially, the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma, the then only umbrella
organization in Germany, had called upon the Federal Republic of Germany and also
its Länder to ratify the Charter for both the Romani of the Sinti (Sintetikes) and the
Romani of the Roma and to assume as many obligations under its provisions as
possible. But after Germany had ratified the Charter, it turned out that a considerable
number of Romani speakers – namely the German Sinti - refused to create the
necessary conditions to achieve the goals set by numerous provisions of the Charter
(e.g. development of a standard, written form of the language, and instruction about,
or in, the language, including for interested third parties).
Hence, the Committee of Experts observed, and rightly so, as we pointed out, in
No. 745 of its Second Monitoring Report, “that compliance with many of the selected
undertakings (from the Charter) is rendered difficult, or even impossible, by the fact
that the Romani language of German Sinti and Roma has no standard written form,

332
as it has hitherto not been codified, in accordance with the wishes of a number of
speakers.” The different concepts favoured by the Central Council on the one hand
and other associations of German Sinti on the other finally led to the foundation of
another umbrella organization, the Sinti Alliance Germany. Since its foundation, the
Sinti Alliance has called for the recognition of the Romani of German Sinti
(Sintetikes) as a language of the families and family groups of German Sinti in
accordance with the ethnic group’s own, internal rules based on their culture, outside
the public school system.
As was already pointed out in the comments on the Third State Report, the Sinti
Alliance has welcomed the fact that the Central Council of Sinti and Roma in
Germany has come to agree to the Alliance’s view expressed in several policy
papers and comments in the last few years, mainly at the implementation
conferences, that the language of the Sinti is passed on exclusively orally and must
not be used outside this language community.
However, this generally accepted principle is called in question when at the same
time thought is given to using the Sinti's language outside the family sphere and the
ethnic community, as for example in No 4002 of the Third State Report (with
reference to Art. 8, Education) and in No. 50800 in the Draft Fourth State Report´:
”…while the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma is in favour of extra
instruction in Romani at school and outside of school provided by members of the
minority for members of the minority…“ As regards the controversial issue of
instruction in Romani in Hamburg, it has turned out that it refers to teaching in the
Romani language of the East European Roma.
Our community continues to be very concerned about the fact that a growing number
of migrants and refugees from East and South-East European countries has been
intervening in this discussion, although they are not affected by it under the Charter.
The Sinti Alliance Germany informed the Federal Ministry of the Interior that it would
welcome state funding to promote the integration of such groups of persons, while at
the same time it would protest against any kind of intervention in the area referred to
above.
The Charter protects the regional or minority languages traditionally spoken in a
Contracting State. The Federal Government has always emphasized this aspect,
especially when it signed the Charter and ratified the implementing legislation. The
Länder, too, have underlined this. Since state measures to protect these languages
and cultures are put into practice only in consultation with the people concerned,

333
consultation is necessary between the state – and in this particular case – our
umbrella organizations, which as members of the language groups concerned are
elected representatives of users of a minority language. However, this process of
opinion building will be distorted if communities that under the Charter do not have
the status of elected representatives of historically grown language groups are
involved in this discussion and are heard by the state.
Furthermore, we think there is a risk that the scope of protection and promotion rights
under the Charter is extended to include a broader group of persons with different
interests and that thereby the position of autochthonous Gypsies, i.e. the true
stakeholders, will no longer be given due public attention. Also with regard to further
immigration into Germany, we see further need for clarification of this issue. To this
end, the Federal Government should develop a permanent policy based on the
definition of the Charter to avoid that this issue is discussed in public or the political
sphere, which nobody wants and which would benefit only extremist forces.
Once again we underline that our community opposes any use of the Romani
language of the Sinti (Sintetikes) outside the minority, e.g. in the fields of education,
justice, administration, and media, and any instruction in or reporting on the
language. Moreover, the Sinti Alliance Germany requests the state not to undertake
university research and teaching on the language and culture of the Sinti. The
language of the Sinti has an oral tradition and is integral part of the millennia-old
taboo and legal systems, which obligates each member of our ethnic group, for
example, to respect the taboos of our people, to preserve them, and to not disclose
them to any third party outside our community.
The Sinti Alliance once again emphasizes that no representative of the German
Gypsies, neither the Sinti Alliance nor the Central Council of German Sinti and
Roma, can ignore the cultural laws of the community without losing its credibility visà-vis the German Sinti. For this reason, the associations can be active only if they
respect the traditional taboos. Our refusal to use our native language in public,
particularly in accordance with the provisions of Part II of the Charter, is therefore
based on cultural motives.
Like the language, both the traditional legal system and the taboo system belong to
the cultural heritage of the Sinti, which has to be protected by the state in accordance
with the Charter and the Framework Agreement for the Protection of National
Minorities. At the same time it must be respected that for the Sinti imparting their
language is a private task in the exclusive responsibility of their families and family

334
groups, and not a state task as part of minority protection under the Charter. Sinti
organizations respecting the culture and legal system of the Sinti must ensure that
this principle is abided by and must warn the state about unwanted interference.
B. Comments on specific numbers:
No. 00113
The Sinti Alliance of Germany urgently requests that the text of No. 13 (Second State
Report) be retained in full, because it briefly and accurately summarizes the position
of both associations which have an impact on numerous undertakings under the
Charter.
No. 93 of the Second State Report stated that there were no bodies for protecting
and promoting Romani because so far no one had expressed a desire for such
bodies.
It should be added that, despite its contrary opinion given in Nos. 54 and 55, the
Central Council portrays those concerned, at least in public, as primarily only victims
of the Nazi Holocaust and of current stereotypes and hardly as an ethnic group with
its own identity which enriches society; and that while the Sinti Alliance of Germany
does not view its ethnic group as victims of ongoing discrimination in this form, it
wants to protect the language and culture of the German Sinti against access by
outsiders and therefore opposes for example the development of a written language
and grammatical structures for the Romani of the German Sinti.
As a result, the two associations have such different views and seem so unwilling to
compromise that it is not clear how they could work together in a body for protecting
and promoting the Romani language.
No. 01101 – Article 11 (Media)
The interests of the Sinti represented by the Sinti Alliance of Germany are not made
known because they are not represented on the Rhineland-Palatinate broadcasting
board. They have no opportunity to express their ideas because only the Land
association of the Central Council has a seat and a voice. A system for rotating
representatives of both Land associations should be introduced to balance their
representation.
No. 00789

335
In response to the Committee’s statement in No. 65 of its third evaluation report that
the only regional or minority language which is not represented by a consultative
committee is Romani: In connection with the scope of the Charter, the two
associations at federal level, namely the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma
and the Sinti Alliance of Germany disagree, and the government bodies do not
believe that they can work together productively within a consultative committee. In
this context it should also be noted that representatives of German politics, industry
and academia serve on the board of trustees of the Documentation and Cultural
Centre of German Sinti and Roma.
No. 50807
The Sinti Alliance of Germany regrets the fact that the Committee of Experts
repeatedly makes proposals for promoting the language of the German Sinti and
Roma which include the Rommenes or Sintetikes of the German Sinti. The German
Sinti vigorously oppose any teaching of Sintetikes at school or government promotion
of their language, which has traditionally been handed down within the language
group. They expect the Committee to respect their position. If government funding is
provided for language promotion, as the Committee wishes, the position of the Sinti
language group could be undermined. It would create incentives for outsiders who
are not bound by the German Sinti‘s system of taboos to become commercially
active in this field.
No. 50827
According to this text, the Roma teachers’ work “focuses on the culture of Sinti and
Roma”. We assume that these assistants focus on the Roma culture and not the Sinti
culture, of which they have no first-hand experience, and thus that the report
unconsciously used the stereotype “Sinti and Roma”. We ask Hamburg to check this
and correct it. Should the report be accurate, however, and the Roma assistants are
also teaching about Sinti culture, we ask that the following passage be included in
the report:
In this context, the Sinti Alliance of Germany emphasizes its serious concerns that
teaching assistants from the Roma community are also dealing with Sinti culture.
Sinti families view this as a violation of their traditional cultural system of laws.

336

Comments by the Low German Speakers' Group
on the Fourth Report submitted by Germany on the implementation of the
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
Comments by the Federal Council for Low German (Bundesraat för Nedderdüütsch)
on the Fourth State Report on the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages cannot take the place of constructive criticism of the Länder reports.
Except for the report from Lower Saxony, the Speakers’ Group did not have access
to reports for the individual Länder, hindering direct reference which would have been
desirable. This situation is much worse than the procedure used in 2003 and 2006.
The representatives of the Low German language group are convinced that
successful intervention to preserve linguistic diversity in Northern Germany requires
open dialogue between stakeholders. The Federal Council for Low German urges the
Länder to return to a procedure for producing the State Report which is not hindered
by static definitions.
1. General developments, assessments and judgements
Little qualitative progress can be reported for the regional language Low German
during the period 2006 to 2009. As a result, the tenth anniversary of the Charter in
Germany gave the Low German language group little reason to celebrate. This was
demonstrated at a central event on this topic in Schwerin in May 2009 in which
representatives of other language groups also participated. Broad gaps remain
between the idealistic spirit of the Charter, its character as a legally binding set of
regulations and its concrete implementation on the ground. Government
representatives often lack basic knowledge of the Charter’s articles. In order to help
remedy this deficit at least in part, the Federal Council for Low German published the
brochure “Zehn Jahre Europäische Charta der Regional- oder Minderheitensprachen.
Zwischenbericht zur Sprachpolitik für das Niederdeutsche” (The European Charter
for Regional or Minority Languages 10 years on: A progress report on Low German
language policy) in late 2008.
In 2007, the Federal Government Commissioner for Culture and the Media funded a
representative survey on the current status of the regional language in the entire Low
German language area. The results show that while Low German has a very positive
image, the number of active language users has greatly declined. Over the past 23
years, the number of Low German speakers has declined by about half. The age
pyramid shows large numbers of speakers over age 50, while the numbers of

337
younger speakers are much lower. The survey results give all stakeholders reason to
examine the effectiveness of their efforts on behalf of the regional language Low
German and to give clear priority to language learning. Against this backdrop, the
Federal Council for Low German has called on Low German speakers, involved
volunteer organizations and, last but not least, the Länder to take joint and
coordinated action. We are still far from having an interregional master plan which
includes not only statements of intent, but also describes concrete measures and
evaluates their implementation. The Länder could take a much more active role,
especially with regard to coordinating tasks to be carried out.
Even after the 2007 survey on the status of Low German in Northern Germany,
reliable framework data and facts needed for planning considerations are still lacking.
For example, there are no numbers on the proportion of Low German in nursery
schools and schools, in training and occupations, in hospitals, retirement and care
homes, or in the culture and media sector.
The Federal Council for Low German expressly welcomes the resolution of the
German Bundestag of 29 January 2009 addressing numerous aspects of promoting
the regional language. In its resolution, the German Bundestag calls on the Federal
Government and the Länder to work with the Federal Council for Low German to
develop a plan to ensure the survival of this recognized regional language. The
representatives of the language group regret that no government institution has so
far applied this approach, much less developed it constructively.
The various Länder deal very differently with the obligations undertaken under the
Charter. In 2009, the Schleswig-Holstein parliament updated its Land plan for Low
German, which contains clearly formulated goals and describes how to achieve
them. A petition submitted in 2008 to the Bremen parliament on preserving and
strengthening Low German was discussed at a public assembly, but the discussion
revealed extreme ignorance of the legal framework. The petition was referred for
discussion and reporting to the government deputation for culture, where it was never
addressed.
Significant progress was made in 2006-2009 in including the group of Low German
speakers in government-initiated structures and measures. Since 2008, the Federal
Government Commissioner for Culture and the Media has had a budget for Low
German. A total of €50,000 is available in project funding, including the work of the
Federal Council for Low German. In 2006, a consultative committee for issues of the
Low German language group at the Federal Ministry of the Interior was founded.

338
Under the Ministry’s supervision, this body brings together representatives of the
language group, of additional federal ministries, the Länder and the Bundestag
parliamentary groups. The presence of Bundestag members in particular could be
improved. A meeting of the responsible federal and Länder officials has been held
every year since 2006. These meetings advance the multilateral process of
coordination, and since 2008 the officials have paid more attention to the
representatives of the language groups, at least on certain issues.
In line with its role as initiator of action, the Federal Council for Low German has
organized its own topic-related activities, publishing position papers, encouraging
(education, media) or even initiating (hospitals and care facilities) discussion. The
resulting publications bear witness to serious efforts to engage in constructive
dialogue. The Federal Council for Low German hopes that the Länder will show
growing willingness to participate more actively in such discussions and take greater
initiative.
However, significant ground has been lost in various areas during the reporting
period. For example, in 2005, Schleswig-Holstein removed Low German from the title
of the office responsible for Low German language policy. Since 2010, the official title
of this position has been the Schleswig-Holstein Minister-President’s Commissioner
for Minorities. Despite major protests by the Low German Speakers’ Group, the Land
was not willing to accommodate its concerns.
The Federal Council for Low German is very concerned about efforts by right-wing
radical groups to exploit Low German and associated concepts such as homeland,
reliability, etc. for its political aims. The Federal Council for Low German calls on the
government agencies to pay close attention to such activities and to work with
representatives of Low German speakers in the relevant Länder on suitable projects
to counter this political abuse of the language.
Neither the Federation nor the Länder have yet interpreted the Charter as providing
protection and promotion for the Plautdietsche variety of Low German, which is
spoken by about 200,000 ethnic German immigrants from Russia.
Because speakers of Plautdietsche are widely dispersed within the Federal Republic
and because of the general pressure to integrate and become acculturated, their Low
German language faces serious threat. Targeted promotion should be based on a
survey to determine the current situation of this dialect and the level of threat it faces.
Materials should be developed based on the immersion method for teaching

339
Plautdietsche in schools where there is a large proportion of Russian Mennonite
pupils. Those groups actively working to protect Plautdietsche have so far received
no support in planning and carrying out meetings or cultural activities.
The fact that Länder which adopted Part II of the Charter situation hardly provide
sufficient support for Low German is exemplified by the situation in Brandenburg
This situation continues to be characterized by the lack of an umbrella organization
for speakers of Low German. In 2009 there were initial efforts to combine forces. The
various cultural and authors’ groups deserve special mention, as does the group
Rettet die niederdeutsche Sprache (Save the Low German language), because they
provide targeted language teaching for children. There are no structures or funds for
providing special government support.
The Charter calls on the Länder to work actively on behalf of the regional language
Low German. They are encouraged to establish bodies, if necessary, for the purpose
of advising the authorities on all matters pertaining to regional or minority languages
(Art. 7 (4)). So far, such bodies exist only in Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western
Pomerania, Saxony-Anhalt and Schleswig-Holstein. But their influence is limited by
the fact that they meet only at very irregular intervals. In general, any influence
beyond information-sharing which could take the form of ongoing and consistent
efforts to advance the cause has so far remained in the very early stages, such as
the activities of the education sub-committee of the Low German Committee at the
Office of the President of the Schleswig-Holstein parliament. In order to see the
broad range of language policy tasks, it would be advisable for the Working Group on
Low German in Saxony-Anhalt to expand to include representatives of other
ministries, especially the Ministry of Social Affairs, which is responsible for early
childhood education. The supervising ministries are all called on to make the public
more aware of the approaches developed in the bodies for Low German.
Brandenburg, Bremen, Lower Saxony and North Rhine-Westphalia are urged to
establish similar forums and integrate them into the government structures. Low
German representatives in several Länder complain that they have no official point of
contact in their Land government, and that their attempts to contact policy-makers
usually fail.
Low German is especially at risk in those Länder which have so far adopted only Part
II of the Charter. Apart from a few exceptions in Saxony-Anhalt, the efforts of these
Länder have been marginal. In the interest of greater transparency, the Federal
Council for Low German considers it necessary for these Länder to report separately

340
on the progress of their efforts in future State Reports. The Federal Council for Low
German calls on the responsible Council of Europe bodies to pay attention to these
Part II Länder already in the fourth monitoring cycle.
2. Specific areas
2.1. Education
In 2007, the Federal Council for Low German formulated its ideas for forward-looking
educational policy on the regional language Low German in its twelve-point paper,
the Schweriner Thesen. The articles concerning schools in particular were discussed
in the various Länder, but have not yet led to dialogue with the Länder on this point.
In order to teach Low German effectively at public and private schools, it is important
to define age- or grade-related goals, but no coordination among the Länder is
apparent.
In Schleswig-Holstein, the attempt to introduce a new order on Low German at
school in 2009 failed. A draft largely based on the Frisian order of 2008 which did not
go as far as the Schweriner Thesen was ultimately rejected by the responsible
Ministry of Education. This constitutes unequal treatment by the state with regard to
language matters and is unacceptable to Low German speakers.
In Lower Saxony, the order covering Low German (Die Region im Unterricht) was
repealed in 2005. There is currently no legal provision governing the treatment of
Low German at schools in Lower Saxony. In view of the wide variety of activities at
these schools, this situation is untenable. This order laid the groundwork for expert
advising on regional issues, including Low German and Sater Frisian, for all types of
schools. According to the 2009 restructuring plan, in future expert advising will be
provided only for school subjects. Because Low German and Sater Frisian are not
school subjects, these languages will come under German, where they are anchored
in the core curriculum at a very low level (as language encounter). Thus they will not
be covered by expert advising. Promoting these languages will be left to the personal
initiative of individual expert advisers or members of the school authorities.
The situation in North Rhine-Westphalia is similarly unstructured and dependent on
circumstances. The Land’s plan (see No. 60870) to include Low German in the
school’s catalogue of elements for “language reflection” does not represent
qualitative progress.
In Saxony-Anhalt too, most Low German activities in schools are the result of
individual initiative. The Land is called upon to consolidate these activities using

341
overarching measures and to create a structure of responsibility via “Low German
commissioners”.
The Federal Council for Low German recognizes Hamburg’s serious efforts in 2009
to establish Low German as a school subject with a separate curriculum. In so doing,
it is essential to monitor the implementation of the provisions, check progress and
adjust measures as necessary. It is unfortunate that the implementation of the Low
German element of the German curriculum introduced in 2005 has never been
evaluated. The Federal Council for Low German welcomes and supports Hamburg's
announced intention to give hiring preference to teachers trained in the regional
language at university (see No. 60876).
The status of Low German at school continues to be unsatisfactory in structural
terms, especially as Low German has not been established as a separate subject.
Low German is best formally integrated into the school curriculum in MecklenburgWestern Pomerania. But here too, there are clear indications that the 2004
administrative regulation on Low German is not being practically implemented as
consistently as it should. The Federal Council for Low German recognizes that
Schleswig-Holstein creates incentives and sets standards by awarding a Low
German seal of approval for schools. But here too, Low German teaching is arbitrary
and still dependent on the motivation and initiative of individuals. The Federal Council
for Low German appreciates the commitment shown by establishing bilingual history
classes and language immersion in sport classes. Efforts in the area of language
acquisition are hardly adequate; there is a lack of clear rules for school providers and
a lack of specialized further training for teachers, which should be accompanied by a
certification course. All the Länder need institutionalized bodies to safeguard the
individual measures. Schleswig-Holstein has laid a stable foundation by creating the
Low German centres in Ratzeburg and Leck, and is therefore called on to ensure
their long-term survival.
In view of early childhood development and the advantages of early second language
acquisition, in recent years the Länder have increased their focus on early childhood
education. However, the corresponding educational strategies do not provide for Low
German. The Federal Council for Low German calls on the Länder to take early
childhood education specifically into account in their efforts at Low German language
acquisition. This includes directing relevant information to parents and providers of
early childhood education, as conducted in exemplary fashion by the SchleswigHolstein parliament in November 2009 (see No. 60819); the argument of weak or
nonexistent demand (see No. 60811) is inadequate in this context.

342

In all the Länder concerned, rules on the training of teaching staff remain incomplete.
For example, Schleswig-Holstein is the only Land which requires a Low German
module in both the first and second training phase for German teachers. At the same
time, however, the University of Flensburg, where the training of primary and
secondary technical school (Realschule) teachers is concentrated, does not offer
sufficient classes for students. If Low German remains excluded from the bachelor
programme, future students will continue to lack a foundation for the required Low
German module in the second training phase. In the Part II Länder, Low German
teacher training is largely a matter of chance. For example, at the University of
Potsdam, Low German is not an established part of any degree programme,
although seminars on the linguistic landscape of Brandenburg are regularly offered in
order to maintain awareness of Low German among the university teaching staff.
North Rhine-Westphalia describes university education as “stable” without
specifically referring to the proportion of Low German in basic and further training for
teachers (see No. 60878).
Further training for teachers is regularly offered by various providers in SchleswigHolstein, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania and northern Lower Saxony. Some initial
efforts are apparent in Bremen; Hamburg still has only limited offerings. In 2009,
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania issued certificates in Low German as a subsidiary
subject to 86 teachers who successfully completed the necessary course (see No.
60877). However, this course does not have firm structural footing, and some
questions of jurisdiction within the responsible ministry remain unresolved.
Particularly in times of financial difficulty, the regional language Low German requires
special government protection in the education context. The fact that the College for
Social Pedagogy (Fachschule für Sozialpädagogik) in Niebüll has turned to external
sources to fund its Frisian courses may be a sign of the times, but if every element of
Low German is cut in the process, that is unacceptable.
2.2. Judicial authorities
The judicial authorities apparently still have insufficient knowledge of the Charter, so
that individuals are subject to arbitrary decisions of the judges. The only certainty is
the fact that Low German documents may be used.
2.3. Administrative authorities and public services

343
In Lower Saxony, there are several concrete examples of open discrimination against
Low German with regard to public administration. For example, remarks in Low
German were prohibited at a public question-and-answer session and a petition
submitted in Low German by a council member in Emden was rejected even though
all participants understood the content.
2.4. Media
In 2009, the Federal Council for Low German expressed its positions on the use of
Low German in the print media, in radio and television broadcasting and on the
Internet in its 13-point media programme. Current safeguards for Low German
programming offered by both public and private broadcasters are insufficient.
Government could certainly play a more active role with regard to private
broadcasters; a broad range of incentives and initiatives is conceivable. The principle
of government non-intervention frequently invoked with regard to public broadcasting
should not be interpreted to mean that the broadcasters alone determine the choice
of language for certain programmes. Given the stubborn stance of the Länder, in
2009 the Federal Council for Low German commissioned an expert legal opinion on
whether the Charter requires the public broadcasters – at least in those Länder which
have accepted the relevant provisions of its Article 11 – to offer a certain definable
amount of Low German programming as an obligatory element. Under current
practice, by contrast, the broadcasting corporations are responsible for all decisions
in this regard. The Federal Council for Low German calls on the Länder, which are
responsible for funding the public broadcasting corporations, to ensure that the
regional language is an integral part of the structure at the various broadcasters.
Voluntary commitments or target agreements are a good way of arriving at a policy of
mutual understanding.
2.5. Cultural activities and facilities
The same principles of funding from the Länder apply equally to standard German
and Low German projects, so there is no evidence of discrimination based on
language; however, there is also no evidence of targeted linguistic-cultural
promotion. Above all, there is a lack of initiative in project areas where Low German
remains underrepresented, especially in the area of film and current popular music.
Measures taken by North Rhine-Westphalia are almost entirely limited to the field of
research and documentation (see No. 61248). For example, funding is providing to
build a digital archive of Low German texts at the universities in Bielefeld and

344
Münster, but this hardly constitutes an intensified effort to stabilize the regional
language in the face of existential threat.
2.6. Economic and social life
In a five-point paper (Schleswiger Appell) in 2008, the Federal Council for Low
German summarized its ideas and demands for anchoring the regional language in
hospitals and care facilities. This issue first found a larger hearing at an expert
conference. The conference proceedings, background information and arguments
were later published. Despite the statements in No. 61308 – 61315, the Länder have
so far been very hesitant to deal with this issue.
3.

Conclusions

There is no overall strategy for promoting the regional language Low German. As a
result, most of the activities are individual measures and are not coordinated in terms
of content or timing. Integrating these measures within a language plan could
significantly increase their effectiveness. In view of the drastic decline in the number
of Low German speakers, such coordination is urgently needed. The Federal Council
for Low German offers to assist the Länder in all relevant areas, always with a focus
on all efforts aimed at language acquisition.
With this in mind, the Federal Council for Low German calls on Lower Saxony to
report all relevant points concerning schools under Article 8 of the Charter. The Land
should have no difficulty doing so, especially as it claims that it has already taken
such measures (see No. 60808b). The government can help stabilize the language
effectively in society only with the participation of the schools.
In a society in which government is increasingly retreating from its former areas of
responsibility, precisely those areas which are organized commercially or at private
initiative deserve special attention with regard to the effectiveness of measures to
promote language acquisition. Whenever the word “freedom” is invoked – for
example, freedom of the media, or academic freedom – it usually involves negative
consequences for the regional language. For this reason, the Federal Council for
Low German strongly urges the responsible bodies of the Länder, the Federation and
the Council of Europe to re-examine the remaining possibilities for effective language
protection on the basis of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages.

345
During its ten years of existence, the Charter has had almost no impact on the Part II
Länder Brandenburg, North Rhine-Westphalia and Saxony-Anhalt. In view of the
drastic decline in the number of Low German speakers, especially in the southern
part of the Low German language area, the Federal Council for Low German calls on
these Länder to increase measures to protect the regional language Low German
and to adopt Part III of the Charter as soon as possible.
Bremen, 28 October 2009

Dr Reinhard Goltz, Bundesraat för Nedderdüütsch

346

Annex
More recent legislation, agreements and other
arrangements and publications relevant to the
implementation of the European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages and not yet included in any State
Report

347
Joint Declaration of the Bavarian Government and the Bavarian Land
Association of German Sinti and Roma of 16 May 2007
In view of the Sinti and Roma genocide committed under the National-Socialist
regime, the Bavarian Government is aware of its special historical responsibility
towards the members of this minority.
The Land Government expressly acknowledges that the German Sinti and Roma
living in Bavaria, as a national minority traditionally resident in Germany, are afforded
special protection under the Council of Europe Framework Convention for the
Protection of National Minorities. The Land Government confirms its resolve to carry
out, in cooperation with the Bavarian Land Association of German Sinti and Roma,
the principles laid down in the Framework Convention. The Land Government will
continue to work with the Land Association appropriately to promote the necessary
participation of members of the Sinti and Roma in cultural, social and economic life
and in public affairs in line with the European Charter. This includes institutional
funding for the Land office as permitted by budgetary considerations.
Aware that the Romani language used by the German Sinti and Roma is recognized
as a minority language within the meaning of Part II of the European Charter for
Regional or Minority Languages, the Land Government also confirms its commitment
to the undertakings accepted under this Charter. Considering that the Romani
language is an expression of cultural wealth of the Free State of Bavaria, the Land
Government will protect and promote preservation of this language on the basis of
these undertakings. To manage issues especially affecting the Sinti and Roma living
in Bavaria, and to implement the individual undertakings under the European Charter
for Regional or Minority Languages, the Land Government will engage in regular
dialogue with the Bavarian Land Association of German Sinti and Roma.
The Land Association strives for recognition for the minority language Romani under
Part III of the Charter with the required quorum.
The Land Government will promote remembrance of the more than six-hundred-year
history of German Sinti and Roma, especially of their persecution and the systematic
genocide committed by the National Socialists.

348

The existing close cooperation between the Bavarian Land Association of German
Sinti and Roma and the Bavarian Government will continue in a spirit of historical
awareness, public information and promotion of tolerance towards minorities.

349

Gesetz zur Förderung des Friesischen im öffentlichen Raum
(Friesisch-Gesetz - FriesischG)

Act to promote Frisian in the Public Sphere (Frisian Act)
of 13 December 2004
Frisian Act

GS Schl.-H. II, Gl.Nr. 188-1
[Schleswig-Holstein Gazette of Laws and Ordinances, 2004, p. 481]

The Land Parliament has adopted the following Act:
Preamble
ACKNOWLEDGING the Frisians' desire to preserve their language and thus retain their
identity also in future; BEARING IN MIND that everyone is free to declare his or her
affiliation with the Frisian ethnic group; TAKING INTO ACCOUNT that outside the borders
of Federal Republic of Germany, the Frisians do not have any other mother country
that would feel committed to their concerns and would take care of the preservation of
their language; HAVING IN MIND that protecting and fostering the Frisian language are in
the interest of the Land of Schleswig-Holstein; IN CONSIDERATION OF the Council of
Europe Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities and of the
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages; INVOKING Article 3 of the
Basic Law and Article 5 of the Constitution of the Land of Schleswig-Holstein;
the Parliament of Schleswig-Holstein adopts the following Act:
Section 1
The Frisian language used by, and in relations with, public authorities
(1) Schleswig-Holstein Land recognizes the variants of the Frisian language spoken
in Schleswig-Holstein as an expression of the Land's intellectual and cultural wealth.
Use of this language shall be left to the discretion of its speakers. Its use, in spoken
and written form, in public life and encouragement to use it in this way shall be protected and promoted.
(2) Citizens shall have the right to address administrative authorities in Nordfriesland
Kreis and on the Island of Helgoland in Frisian and to submit applications, records,
deeds or other documents in this language; Section 82a, paras. 2 to 4 ["Official Language" (translation and interpretation)] of the Land Administration Act applies mutatis
mutandis whenever the staff of the given public authority have no command of the
Frisian language. If a person, in his/her dealings with the public authorities of Nordfriesland Kreis or on Helgoland, uses the Frisian language, these authorities may also
use the Frisian language in their communications with that person provided that the
respective administrative action does not infringe upon the rights of third parties or
impair the ability to act of other actors in public administration.
(3) The public authorities in Nordfriesland Kreis and on the island of Helgoland may
draft bilingual official forms and public notices in the German and Frisian languages.

350

Section 2
Criterion for the recruitment of public service staff
Schleswig-Holstein Land, Nordfriesland Kreis and its local authorities as well as the
local authorities of Helgoland shall take Frisian language skills into account when
recruiting personnel for the public service if and where this is considered necessary for
performing a specific function.
Section 3
Signs indicating public buildings
(1) In Nordfriesland Kreis and on the island of Helgoland, signs marking buildings of
Land authorities and buildings of public-law corporations, institutions and foundations
that are subject to supervision by the Land shall bear bilingual inscriptions in the German and Frisian languages. Where monolingual signs are provided, these may be
supplemented by Frisian-language inscriptions.
(2) Nordfriesland Kreis and its local authorities and the local authorities of Helgoland
may provide bilingual signs in the German and Frisian languages to mark their public
buildings and buildings of public-law corporations, institutions and foundations that are
subject to their supervision in Nordfriesland Kreis and on the island of Helgoland.
(3) Schleswig-Holstein will strive to ensure that signs marking other public buildings
and topographical markings in Nordfriesland Kreis and on the island of Helgoland will
also bear bilingual inscriptions in the German and Frisian languages.
Section 4
Seals and letterheads
The provisions under Section 3 above may be applied mutatis mutandis to seals and
letterheads used by public authorities and public-law corporations in Nordfriesland
Kreis and on the island of Helgoland.
Section 5
Colours of the Frisian flag, and the Frisian coat of arms
In Nordfriesland Kreis, the colours and the coat of arms of the Frisians may be used
together with the colours and the coat of arms of the Land. The Frisian colours are
gold-red-blue.
Section 6
Place-name signs
In Nordfriesland Kreis, pursuant to Section 46, para. 2, of the German Road Traffic
Regulations, place-name signs (Sign 310 of the Road Traffic Regulations) may bear
bilingual front-side inscriptions in the German and Frisian languages. The public
authorities of the Land shall take account of, and promote this objective; to this end,
they may specify requirements with regard to the design and posting of such signs.
Section 7
Promulgation
This Act shall be promulgated in the German language and in a Frisian translation.

351

Section 8
Entry into Force
This Act shall enter into force on the day following its promulgation.
The above law is hereby enacted and shall be promulgated.

Kiel, 13 December 2004
Heide Simonis
Minister-President
Klaus Buß
Minister of the Interior
Dr Bernd Rohwer
Minister of Economics, Labour and Transport

352
Friesian-language translation
Gesäts
fort stipen foont friisk önj e öfentlikhäid
(Friisk-Gesäts - FriiskG)
Foon e 13. önj e jülmoune 2004
Präambel
Önj önjerkåning, dåt da friiske jare spräke än deerma jare identitäät
uk önj e tukamst bewååre wan, aw grün foon et rucht, dåt följk ham
fri tu e friiske följkefloose bekåne mätj, aw grün foon et waasen,
dåt da friiske bütefor da gränse foon e Bundesrepubliik Tjüschlönj
nån äinen stoot hääwe, wat ham ferplächtet fäilt än stip da friiske
bait bewååren foon jare spräke, önjt bewustweesen, dåt dåt
schöölen än dåt stipen foon e friiske spräke önjt inträse foont lönj
Slaswik-Holstiinj läit, aw grün foon e ,,Rååmeoueriinjskamst foon e
Eurooparädj fort schöölen foon natsjonaale manerhäide“ än e
,,Europääisch charta foon e regjonaal- unti manerhäidespräke“, aw
grün foon artiikel 3 foont grüngesäts än artiikel 5 foon e ferfooting
foont lönj Slaswik-Holstiinj beslüt di Slaswik-Holstiinjsche Loondäi
dåtheer gesäts:

§1
Friiske spräke önj e öfentlik ferwålting
(1) Dåt lönj Slaswik-Holstiinj schucht da friiske spräkeforme, wat
önj Slaswik-Holstiinj brükd wårde, as en diilj foon e gaistie än
kulturäle rikduum foont lönj önj. Följk mötj da änkelte friiske
spräkeforme fri brüke. Dåt brüken foon da änkelte friiske
spräkeforme önj e öfentlike ferwåltinge önj uurd än schraft än e
motiwatsjoon deertu wårt schööld än stiped.
(2) Da bürgerine än bürgere koone ouerfor e ferwåltinge önj e kris
Nordfraschlönj än awt ailönj Hålilönj di friiske spräke brüke än
insäkne, dokumänte, urkunde än ouder schraftlik materiool önj e
friiske spräke forleede. Wan deer niimen önj e ferwålting as, wat
friisk koon, jült § 82 a oufsnit 2 bit 4 foont loonsferwåltingsgesäts
südänji uk fort friisk. Brükt en bürgerin unti en bürger ouerfor e
ferwåltinge önj e kris Nordfraschlönj unti awt ailönj Hålilönj di
friiske spräke, sü koone e ferwåltinge uk di friiske spräke ouerfor
jüdeer bürgerin unti dideere bürger brüke, wan oudere niinj noodiile
deerdöör hääwe unti dåt årbe foon oudere ferwåltinge deerdöör ai
behanerd wårt.
(3) Ofisjäle formulaare än öfentlike bekåndmååginge koone foon e
ferwåltinge önj e kris Nordfraschlönj än awt ailönj Hålilönj
twäärspräket aw tjüsch än aw friisk ütdänj wårde.

353

§2
Kriteerium fort instalen önj e öfentlike tiinjst
Wan huum friisk koon än wan jüdeer kwalifikatsjoon önj e änkelte
fål än önjt konkreet årbefälj nüsi as, wårt jüdeer kwalifikatsjoon
foont lönj Slaswik-Holstiinj än di kris Nordfraschlönj än da komuune
önj e kris Nordfraschlönj än awt ailönj Hålilönj bait instalen önj e
öfentlike tiinjst önjräägend.

§3
Schilde bai gebüüde
(1) Bai gebüüde önj e kris Nordfraschlönj än awt ailönj Hålilönj
schan twäärspräkede schilde aw tjüsch än friisk önjbroocht wårde,
wan et ham am ferwåltinge foont lönj unti am organisatsjoone,
instituutsjoone än stiftinge eeftert öfentlik rucht hoonelt, wat et
lönj tuhiire. Bai üülje iinjspräkede schilde koone schilde aw friisk
tufäiged wårde.
(2) Di kris Nordfraschlönj än da komuune önj e kris Nordfraschlönj
än awt ailönj Hålilönj hääwe et rucht än bräng bai gebüüde önj e
kris Nordfraschlönj än awt ailönj Hålilönj twäärspräkede schilde aw
tjüsch än friisk önj, wan et ham am ferwåltinge unti am
organisatsjoone, instituutsjoone än stiftinge eeftert öfentlik rucht
hoonelt, wat e kris unti e komuune tuhiire.
(3) Dåt lönj Slaswik-Holstiinj seet ham deerfor in, dåt da schilde bai
oudere öfentlike gebüüde än topograafische betiikninge önj e kris
Nordfraschlönj än awt ailönj Hålilönj twäärspräket aw tjüsch än
friisk önjbroocht wårde.

§4
Siigele än bräifhoode
Da bestiminge önj e § 3 mätj huum südänji uk for siigele än
bräifhoode önjwiinje, wat döör ferwåltinge än organisatsjoone önj e
kris Nordfraschlönj än awt ailönj Hålilönj brükd wårde.

§5
Friiske blaie än woopen

354
Da blaie än et woopen foon da friiske koone önj e kris
Nordfraschlönj tubai da blaie än et woopen foont lönj brükd wårde.
Da friiske blaie san gölj-rüüdj-ween.

§6
Toorpsschilde
Jü fordersid foon toorpsschilde (ferkiirstiiken 310 önj e
strooteferkiirsordning) koon önj e kris Nordfraschlönj eefter § 46
oufsnit 2 strooteferkiirsordning twäärspräket aw tjüsch än friisk
weese. Da ferwåltinge foont lönj schan deeraw åchte än jam deerfor
inseete, dåt dåtdeer müülj långd wårde koon - want nüsi deet, schal
deerbai en rååme seet wårde, hüdänji da schilde ütsiinj än apstald
wårde schan.

§7
Bekånd måågen
Dåtheer gesäts wårt aw tjüsch än önj en friisk ouerseeting bekånd
mååged.

§8
Termiin
Dåtheer gesäts jült ouf ån däi eeftert bekånd måågen.

355
Schleswig-Holstein Schools Act
(Schulgesetz – SchulG)
of 24 January 2007
Promulgated as Article 1 of the Act on the Further Development of Education
in Schleswig-Holstein of 24 January 2007 (Gazette of Laws and Ordinances, p.
39)
§ 124
Subsidies irrespective of need, amount of subsidy
Providers of schools of the Danish minority will be granted a subsidy for every pupil
amounting to 100% of the public cost-per-pupil rates established for the previous
year, regardless of need. The public cost-per-pupil rates shall be determined on the
basis of the payroll costs and material expenses (Section 48 (1) second sentence,
Section 36 (2)), which on average were incurred for a pupil at a public school of a
similar school type in the Land the year before such determination is made. Section
119 (1), (2) and (4), Section 122 (4) and Section 123 (1) and (2) shall apply
accordingly, and Section 123 (3) second sentence shall apply with the necessary
modifications.

356
Frisian at schools in the district of Nordfriesland and on the island of
Helgoland
Order of the Ministry for Education and Women of 2 October 2008
Promulgated in the newsletter of the Ministry for Education and Women (2008,
p. 323)
The European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages is intended to protect and
promote the traditional regional and minority languages as a threatened element of
European cultural heritage. In Schleswig-Holstein, North Frisian in the North Frisian
language area is protected under the Charter as a minority language. Based on the
obligations under the Charter Germany has accepted as a contracting party and
Schleswig-Holstein has accepted with regard to Article 8 (Education) on behalf of
North Frisian, the following has been determined:
1. Schools in the district of Nordfriesland and on the island of Helgoland are
required to inform parents that they may request that their child participate in
Frisian instruction.
2. Participation in Frisian instruction shall be voluntary.
3. Frisian instruction will be offered as personnel resources allow and if a
suitable number (usually a minimum of 12) of pupils is available to form a
class. Instruction may include pupils from different grades and from different
types of schools.
4. Schools which concentrate on teaching the Frisian language and culture may
offer Frisian instruction in the absence of applications to this effect, but
Frisian instruction remains voluntary.
5. In grades 5 and 6 of secondary modern and secondary technical schools,
regional and grammar schools as well as comprehensive schools, Frisian
may be offered as an optional subject or within the framework of a Frisianlanguage cultural project.
6. From grade 7 onwards, all secondary schools can offer Frisian as an optional
subject in the normal curriculum.

357
At the upper secondary level, the minority language Frisian can be chosen as
a substitute for a foreign language, if sufficient staff is available. The
possibility of setting up activity groups remains unaffected by this provision.
7. Pupils’ performance in Frisian is to be described and graded based on the
competence levels of the Common European Framework of Reference for
modern languages.
This order shall enter into force upon publication. It shall expire on 31 July 2013.

358
Multilingual town signs and other informational signs
Order of the Schleswig-Holstein Ministry of Research, Economics and
Transport of 31 March 2009
Based on Section 46 (2) first sentence of the Highway Code (StVO) in conjunction
with the administrative regulations on Section 46 (2) of the Highway Code, it shall be
permitted, in derogation from Section 42 (3) of the Highway Code and V and VI of
the administrative regulations on the signs 310 and 311 Highway Code, at the
request of the relevant municipality to erect multilingual town signs (Sign 310
Highway Code) in Standard German and the relevant regional or minority language.
Such multilingual signs shall be permitted under the following conditions:
1. Multilingual town signs may not be erected in addition to, but only in place of,
existing town signs.
2. If multilingual town signs are to be erected, such signage should be
consistent throughout the relevant municipality or district.
3. Town signs should not use more than two languages, especially since a list of
various names would significantly reduce the authority of the individual additional
names. The municipality concerned shall be responsible for deciding in
individual cases.
4. Names in more than one language shall be displayed only on the front of the
sign.
5. Only the name of the municipality or district may be displayed in more than one
language (including additional designations allowed under the administrative
regulations on Sign 310). Signs for administrative districts may not be in more
than one language.
6. The name of the municipality or district in the regional or minority language
must be written directly beneath the Standard German name in noticeably
smaller print.

359
7. The costs for replacing or adding to town signs shall be borne by the relevant
municipality. The relevant municipality shall submit to the responsible road
traffic authority a declaration of intent to assume the costs unless it is anyway
responsible for road construction and maintenance.
Based on Section 46 (2) first sentence of the Highway Code, it shall also be
permitted, in derogation from Section 42 (7) of the Highway Code, at the request of
the relevant community to erect multilingual information signs (Sign 385 Highway
Code) in Standard German and the relevant regional or minority language, where
used to identify places with the official place name.
The conditions for multilingual town signs listed above shall also apply to multilingual
information signs with the necessary modifications.
The same shall apply to polders indicated by signs (Sign 385 of the Highway Code).
Topographical signs
Independent of the special reference to possible bilingual town signs, Section 3 (3)
of the Frisian Act contains the general statement that Schleswig-Holstein will strive
to ensure that signs marking other public buildings and topographical markings in
Nordfriesland Kreis and on the island of Helgoland will also bear bilingual
inscriptions in the German and Frisian languages. This statement shall apply also to
marking topographical elements with official traffic signs as necessary.
With regard to this legal statement, the following rule shall apply:
Based on Section 46 (2) first sentence of the Highway Code (StVO) in conjunction
with the administrative regulations on Section 46 (2) of the Highway Code, it shall be
permitted, in derogation from Section 42 (7) of the Highway Code and the
administrative regulations on Sign 386 Highway Code in conjunction with the
guidelines for tourist information signs, to erect bilingual (Standard German and the
relevant regional or minority language) tourist information signs for special
topographical features (e.g. bodies of water and elevations) on request.
When erecting such information signs, Section 45 (9) Highway Code shall be taken
into account.

360

The cost of replacing existing signs or adding new ones shall be borne by the
requesting party (Section 51 Highway Code).
If existing signs for topographical features (in particular bodies of water) to be
replaced have the format of Sign 385 Highway Code, for reasons of uniformity they
shall be replaced with Sign 386 Highway Code.
Direction signage
The special provisions above shall not affect direction signs.
However, the following special provisions shall apply:
Based on Section 46 (2) first sentence of the Highway Code (StVO) in conjunction
with the administrative regulations on Section 46 (2) of the Highway Code, it shall be
permitted, in derogation from Section 42 (7) and (8) of the Highway Code and the
guidelines for direction signage apart from motorways (RWB 2000) or the guidelines
for tourist information signs, to indicate individual institutions for which the regional
or minority language is clearly relevant (e.g. an institute or cultural centre of the
relevant ethnic group) using bilingual signs (Sign 386 or 432 Highway Code) in
exceptional cases on request.
When erecting such information signs, Section 45 (9) Highway Code shall be taken
into account.
With regard to costs, in such cases the relevant provisions of the Road Traffic Act or
Section 51 of the Highway Code shall apply.
This order replaces the order of 11 June 2007.

361
Opinion of the Federal Ministry of Justice

Berlin, July 2009

Introduction of Frisian as an official language in court
1. The current legal situation does not lead to detrimental results. According to Section 184
first sentence of the Judicature Act (GVG), the official language in court is German.
However, based on the constitutional right to a fair trial (Article 2 (1), Article 20 (3) of the
Basic Law), the right to a legal hearing (Article 103 (1) Basic Law) and the right of
recourse to the courts (Article 19 (4), Article 20 (3) Basic Law), the courts are obligated to
take into account statements by persons involved in proceedings which are in a foreign
language, including documents and evidence in a foreign language. If persons who have
no or insufficient command of German are involved, proceedings may be conducted in
the foreign language if the court is convinced that all persons involved in proceedings
have a sufficient command of that language (Section 185 (2) GVG). If not, an interpreter
must be provided to translate statements into German. In case of a criminal investigation,
the accused shall be informed of the charges in a language he/she understands and shall
have the opportunity to respond to the charges. As soon as it is apparent that
communication is not possible for language reasons, it shall be mandatory to provide an
interpreter also in this case. Articles 5 (2) and 6 (3) (a) of the European Convention for
the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR) also stipulate this
right.
Frisians who also speak German are therefore required to speak German before the
courts. Only if they do not have a sufficient command of German, and only if proceedings
cannot be conducted with all participants in Frisian, is it necessary to provide an
interpreter for oral arguments. Procedural documents are to be submitted in German. If
the court requires that a document in a foreign language is to be submitted, it may
require the submitting party to provide a translation so that the court may take its content
into account (Section 142 (3) of the Code of Civil Procedure (ZPO). The legal situation is
the same as for any other party to proceedings who does not speak German. It has
proven entirely satisfactory in practice.
2. The applicable provisions of Section 184 GVG do not constitute discrimination against
Frisians in comparison to the legal status granted them by Schleswig-Holstein’s Frisian
Act in dealings with the authorities. Under Section 1 (2) of this Act, Frisians in their
settlement areas in Schleswig-Holstein have the right to address administrative

362
authorities in Frisian, even if they are able to speak German. If the administrative
authorities are unable to read Frisian, however, the documents submitted in Frisian must
be accompanied by a German translation provided at the submitter’s expense (Section
82a (2) of the Schleswig-Holstein Administrative Act (LVwG SH). If no translation is
provided, the authorities may commission one. The costs of such translation and of any
necessary interpreting are to be borne by the person who exercises his/her right to use
the Frisian language (Section 82a (2) third and fourth sentences LVwG SH).
This also applies in the (rare) event that the person speaks only Frisian and no German.
In this case, the federal legislation governing the official language in court is much more
favourable to the Frisian speaker, as the losing party in civil cases must bear the costs of
language mediation (Section 91 ZPO).

In criminal cases, the costs of language

mediation are always borne by the state, in compliance with Article 6 (3) (e) ECHR, even
if the defendant is found guilty; the court may charge such costs to the defendant only if
he/she unnecessarily causes them (e.g. through neglect) (No. 9005 of the index of costs
for the Act on Court Costs (GKG), Sections 464c, 467 (2) first sentence of the Code of
Criminal Procedure).
Current federal law on the language in court differs from Schleswig-Holstein's rules on
official language to the disadvantage of the Frisians only in that it requires them to use
German if they are able. The advantage of Schleswig-Holstein’s rules is however
significantly limited by requiring those who wish to use Frisian to pay for the cost of
language mediation.
2. The current legal situation complies with the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages. As far as the use of Frisian in court proceedings is concerned, Germany
has accepted only the following obligations under the Charter:
•

allowing documents and evidence to be presented in Frisian in proceedings before
civil and administrative courts, if necessary by providing interpreters or translations
(Article 9 (1) (b) (iii) in conjunction with Article 2 (2) and Article 3 (1) of the Charter),
and

363
•

not denying the validity of legal documents written in Germany only because they
are written in Frisian (Article 9 (2) (a) in conjunction with Article 2 (2) and Article 3 (1)
of the Charter).

As far as the first point is concerned, which is the only one relevant here (presentation of
documents and evidence), Section 142 (3) ZPO (in conjunction with Section 173 of the
Code of Administrative Court Procedure (VwGO)) implements this with regard to the
obligation undertaken under the Charter for proceedings in civil and administrative courts.
According to this provision, the court may order the provision of translations as
necessary. The provisions of the Charter which Germany has accepted explicitly do not
state that the participating parties should not incur additional expenses, as demonstrated
by other provisions of the Charter (compare Article 9 (1) (a) (iv), (b) (ii), (c) (ii), and (d)).
However, Section 142 (3) ZPO applies directly only to contested civil proceedings. As far
as matters of non-contentious jurisdiction (in this case, the register of associations) are
concerned, the current Act on matters of non-contentious jurisdiction (FGG) contains no
reference to this provision. The literature provides different answers to the question
whether the original of the association statutes must be in German to be entered in the
register of associations, or whether it suffices to present a foreign-language original
accompanied by a German translation. To be correct, one would have to say that, due to
Germany's acceptance of the above-mentioned provisions of the European Charter for
Regional or Minority Languages in the jurisdiction of the Flensburg local court, presenting
a Frisian original accompanied by a German translation is sufficient. When the Act to
Reform the Act on Procedures in Family Matters and in Matters of Non-Contentious
Jurisdiction enters into force on 1 September 2009, this conclusion will also be able to
draw on Section 97 (1) first sentence of the Act on Procedures in Family Matters and in
Matters of Non-Contentious Jurisdiction (FamFG), which explicitly grants priority to
international agreements applicable nationally in matters of non-contentious jurisdiction.
The European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages constitutes such an
international agreement and has applied to the federal territory since 1 January 1999. In
case of doubt, however, the German translation must be authoritative. This is essential
from the perspective of law on associations and also complies with the above-mentioned
provision in Article 9 (1) (b) (iii) of the Charter, which allows documents and evidence to
be produced in the regional or minority languages, if necessary “by the use of interpreters
and translations”.

364

4. Nor does the applicable law violate the principle of equal treatment. Expanding Section
184 second sentence GVG in order to give Frisians the same right to use their minority
language in court as the Sorbs cannot be derived from the general principle of equality in
Article 3 (1) and (3) of the Basic Law. The principle of equality only prohibits lawmakers
from unequal treatment of matters that are essentially the same without reasonable
cause, and it makes certain specific differences subject to special justification. The
current rule does not violate this principle.
Sorbs were granted the right to use their minority language also in court by the German
Democratic Republic in 1949 (Article 11 of the GDR constitution of 7 October 1949 and
Article 40 of the GDR constitution of 6 April 1968 in the version of 7 October 1974). At the
request of the GDR, this right was maintained in the Unification Treaty. In addition to a
joint note of both German states on Article 35 of the Unification Treaty, Annex I Chapter
III Sub-section A III 1 r on the Treaty states that the right of the Sorbs to speak Sorbian in
court in their areas of settlement shall not be affected by Section 184 GVG. The First Act
on the Reform of Federal Law within the remit of the Federal Ministry of Justice (1.
RBerG) declared (r) above to be no longer applicable and added the second sentence to
Section 184 GVG with effect from 25 April 2006. The explanatory memorandum to the
government draft (Bundestag document 16/47 p. 50 on Article 17 no. 8) explicitly states
that this establishes the previous legal situation unchanged.
So the law gives preference to Sorbian not based on its linguistic characteristics, but
because of a previous title under the GDR constitution, which was included in the
Unification Treaty and was ultimately to be incorporated into judicature law.

The

preservation of this old title, which arose outside the influence of federal lawmakers
before coming under their regulatory powers, constitutes a reason of fact justifying the
privilege of the Sorbs over other ethnic groups with their own regional or minority
languages, because these groups cannot point to a similar entitlement.
There is no basis for claiming equal treatment with the German language. The principle
of equality, also expressed as a prohibition against discrimination on the basis of
language, is subject to a constitutional limitation, in that the Federal Republic of Germany
is constituted as a nation-state based on monolingualism. This allows for qualification
based on language use.

365
5. In addition, expanding Section 184 second sentence GVG would also entail the risk of
unnecessary errors in proceedings, as it is safe to assume that neither the judges nor
the other parties in the settlement areas of the Frisian ethnic group have a command of
Frisian. This would regularly require providing interpreters and translators to translate
from Frisian into German. Interpreting and translating may be unavoidable at times but
always represent an additional risk of error. Because Section 184 GVG orders the use of
German as the general means of communication in court, this provision also serves the
purpose of ascertaining the truth and fulfilling the right to a legal hearing. As provided in
Section 185 GVG, exceptions to this principle should be limited to those cases when a
party does not have a sufficient command of German. This is not likely to apply in most
cases to be discussed here; according to the Federal Ministry of the Interior, almost all
members of the Frisian ethnic group speak German as well as their minority language.
…………
Brandenburg Administrative Procedure Act
(Verwaltungsverfahrensgesetz für das Land Brandenburg, VwVfGBbg)
of 7 July 2009
Section 4
Sorbian participants in legal proceedings
Section 23 (2) to (4) of the Administrative Procedure Act applies in the Sorbian settlement area under
the condition that Sorbian participants in proceedings are not charged for interpreters and translators.
Notwithstanding Section 23 (3) of the Administrative Procedure Act, the time limit begins the day an
authority in the Sorbian settlement area receives a notice, application or statement of intent in
Sorbian.

366

PARLIAMENT
OF THE FREE AND HANSEATIC CITY OF HAMBURG

Document 19/4341

19. Legislative Term

20.10.09

Minor interpellation
of MP Ole Thorben Buschhüter (SPD) of 13 October 2009

and the Senate’s response
Subject: Implementation of the Resolution “Schiller op plattdüütsch”
At its meeting of 7 February 2008, the Hamburg Parliament unanimously
passed the following resolution (Doc. 18/7833):
1. De Senot schall kieken, wat an de groten roden Schiller mit „Freie
und Hansestadt Hamburg“ un dat Stadtwappen dorop ünnen en Iütt
Schild mit „Hamborg seggt Goden Dag“ un op de anner Sied „Hamborg seggt Tschüß“ anbummelt warrn kann.
2. De Senot schall dat meuglich moken, wat op de witten (oder roden)
Schiller för de Deele vun de Stadt so as „Moorwerder/Moorwarder“
un „Neuengamme/Neigamm“ de Namen in beide Sproken stohn
kann, wenn de Lüüd dat dor so wüllt un ook betolt un ook de Regionolutschuss/de Bezirksversammlung nix dorgegen hett.
In this context, I ask the Senate:
1.

What is the current status of the Hamburg signs at the Land borders?

2.

Has the plan for implementing this resolution been completed?
If so: when and with what content?
If not: Why not? When can we expect it to be completed?

The parliamentary request in Doc. 18/7833 has fallen victim to discontinuity and is
therefore not being pursued by the responsible authority.
3.

Is there already a proposal for how the signs should look?
If so: What does the proposed design look like? (Please enclose.)
If not: Why not? When will the proposal be presented?

4.

Have the phrases “Hamborg seggt Goden Dag” and “Hamborg seggt
Tschüß” already been added to the Hamburg signs at the Land
borders?
If so: How many and where?
If not: Why not?

How many Hamburg signs are there at the Land borders?

5.

There are currently eight red Hamburg signs (3x2-metre signs with the coat of arms and the
writing “Freie und Hansestadt Hamburg”) at the Land borders with Lower Saxony and SchleswigHolstein.
In the districts, there are 13 red entry signs with the coat of arms and the writing “FREIE UND
HANSESTADT HAMBURG” at the Land border with Schleswig-Holstein. At least 45 additional points
of entry are marked with yellow entry signs with the words “Hamburg” and in some cases “Freie
und Hansestadt Hamburg”.
6.

Does the responsible authority already have a model showing how the signs
(special signs 313-51) will appear with bilingual text?
If so: What does the proposed design look like? (Please enclose.)
If not: Why not? When will the proposal be presented? NA; see answer to

question 1.
7.

What are the Low German names for the 105 Hamburg neighbourhoods?

The Senate does not have a Low German translation of the neighbourhood names.
8.

Have bilingual neighbourhood signs already been erected in Hamburg?
If so: Where, when and at whose initiative? Who paid for them?

No.
9.

How much
a)

does a Hamburg sign, and

b)

a neighbourhood sign with bilingual text cost?

Including pole, foundation and installation, the 3x2-metre Hamburg sign on the motorway costs
about €2,100.
A Hamburg sign at the Land border costs about €1,000 and a bilingual neighbourhood sign costs
about €500.

