COUNCIL
OF EUROPE

CONSEIL
DE L’EUROPE
H/Inf (2008) 9

Human rights guidelines
for Internet service providers
Developed by the Council of Europe
in co-operation with
the European Internet Services Providers Association
(EuroISPA)

H/Inf (2008) 9

Human rights guidelines
for Internet service providers
Developed by the Council of Europe
in co-operation with
the European Internet Services Providers Association
(EuroISPA)

Directorate General
of Human Rights and Legal Affairs
Council of Europe
2008

Directorate General of Human Rights and Legal Affairs
Council of Europe
F-67075 Strasbourg Cedex

© Council of Europe 2008
1st printing, July 2008
Printed at the Council of Europe

Developed by the Council of Europe in close co-operation with the European Internet Services
Providers Association (EuroISPA), these guidelines provide human rights benchmarks for
internet service providers (ISPs). While underlining the important role played by ISPs in delivering key services for the Internet user, such as access, e-mail or content services, they stress
the importance of users’ safety and their right to privacy and freedom of expression and, in this
connection, the importance for the providers to be aware of the human rights impact that their
activities can have.
For more information on the activities of the Council of Europe and EuroISPA: www.coe.int •
www.euroispa.org

Contents
Understanding the role and position of Internet service providers in respecting and
promoting human rights, page 3
Scope of these guidelines . . . . . . . 4

Human rights guidelines for Internet service providers, page 5
Guidelines for ISPs providing
access services. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

Guidelines for ISPs providing other
information society services
(hosting, applications
and content). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

Guidelines for ISPs with regard to
the right to respect for private life
and data protection. . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

Extracts from existing Council of Europe standards relevant to the roles and
responsibilities of ISPs, page 8
Recommendation No. R (99) 5 of
the Committee of Ministers to
member states for the protection of
privacy on the Internet . . . . . . . . . 8

Declaration of the Committee of
Ministers on human rights and the
rule of law in the Information
Society . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

Declaration of the Committee of
Ministers on freedom of
communication on the Internet . 9

Recommendation No. Rec (2007)
11 of the Committee of Ministers to
member states on promoting
freedom of expression and
information in the new information
and communications
environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

Recommendation No. Rec (2007)
16 of the Committee of Ministers to
member states on measures to
promote the public service value of
the Internet. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .10
Recommendation No. CM/Rec
(2008) 6 on measures to promote
the respect for freedom of
expression and information with
regard to Internet filters. . . . . . . .11

Everyone has the right to freedom of expression and information. This
right shall include freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impart
information and ideas without interference by public authorities and
regardless of frontiers. This article shall not prevent States from requiring
the licensing of broadcasting, television or cinema enterprises.
The exercise of these freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or
penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public
safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health
or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for preventing the disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.

Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights

Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life, his home
and his correspondence.
There shall be no interference by a public authority with the exercise of
this right except such as is in accordance with the law and is necessary in a
democratic society in the interests of national security, public safety or
the economic well being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or
crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the
rights and freedoms of others.

Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights

Understanding the role and position of Internet service
providers in respecting and promoting human rights
1. Internet
service
providers
(ISPs), in providing the basic infrastructure and the basic services that
allow users to access and use the
Internet and thereby exercise their
rights to benefit from the information society, deliver services with a
significant public service value to
society.
2. ISPs have a unique position and
possibility of promoting the exercise
of and respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms. In addition,
the provision of Internet services is
increasingly becoming a prerequisite
for a comprehensive participatory
democracy. ISPs also play an important role vis-à-vis states which are
committed to protecting and promoting these rights and freedoms as
part of their international law obligations.
3. ISPs provide a variety of services
to their customers, be it as accessproviders or as providers of other
information society services (application-providers, content-providers
and/or host-providers). It is recognised in these guidelines that not all
ISPs have the same roles and responsibilities vis-à-vis users but that these
may depend on the types of services
the ISP delivers and what segment of
customers the ISP serves.
4. Access-providers facilitate entry
to the Internet and therefore to a
diversity of information, culture and
languages; they are often the first
point of contact and trust for users.
Their role is a prerequisite for enabling and empowering users to
access the benefits of the informa-

tion society, in particular to seek and
impart information and ideas, to create and to access knowledge and
education.
5. Access-providers, in particular
those serving home-users and families, can be seen as fulfilling a part
public service role that promotes
their customers’ rights to benefit
from the information society and, to
this end, strengthen the exercise and
enjoyment of their rights and
freedoms.
6. Equally, to the extent that
access-providers and particularly
host-providers may enforce decisions and actions with regard to the
accessibility of services (e.g. remove,
block or filter content), this can
impact on rights and freedoms.
7. ISPs have access to varying
amounts of information (content
and/or traffic data) which underlines
their important role and position visà-vis the rights and freedoms of
users. ISPs should not be put under a
general obligation to actively monitor content and traffic data; however
there may be specific cases defined
by law and upon specific orders
where an ISP may need to assist in
monitoring content or data or impart
information about a user to a third
party. Such cases could have an
impact on freedom of expression or
the right to private life.
8. Overall, there is considerable
potential for ISPs, particularly host
and content providers, to promote
the opportunities and benefits of the
information society, and this should
be underlined and communicated to

users, to states and, most importantly, to ISPs themselves.
9. In this regard, ISPs are encouraged to take note of, discuss and
make their best efforts to comply
with the following guidelines (overleaf ) and to consider making reference to them on their websites and in
their end-user agreements.
10. ISPs, in co-operation with associations of ISPs, member states, and,
where appropriate, with the assistance of the Council of Europe, are
also encouraged to make key personnel in their organisations aware of
these guidelines and the issues raised
therein.
11. Associations of ISPs can play an
important role by assuming collective responsibility with regard to
raising awareness and providing
information about the issues raised
in these guidelines. They are encouraged to actively promote these guidelines among their members, for
instance by making reference to or
incorporating them in their own
codes of conduct and by providing
expert knowledge.
12. As regards the information that
should be provided towards customers, ISPs may choose to provide this
information via associations of ISPs,
particularly in the case of small
enterprises and in those cases where
the information is not provider-specific (such as information about risks
on the Internet). Associations of ISPs
can furthermore contribute to a harmonisation of user information and
aggregate knowledge as regards the
issues raised in the guidelines. In

Human rights guidelines for Internet service providers

3

Understanding the role and position of Internet Service Providers in respecting and promoting human rights
addition they can provide for
cooperation and exchange of knowledge with existing structures in the
field of Internet safety, such as the

European Union Safer Internet Plus
Programme.
13. The guidelines are without prejudice to and must be read in con-

junction with the obligations applicable to ISPs and their activities
under national, European and international law.

Scope of these guidelines
14. The following guidelines are
grouped in several chapters, according to the respective roles of the ISPs.
The first chapter applies to Internet
access providers (providers of ondemand or dedicated Internet access

4

services). The second chapter applies
to providers of other information
society services, such as is the case
for providers of hosting services,
content providers and application
providers. The third chapter applies

to all Internet service providers
accordingly.
15. The guidelines do not apply to
mere transit providers.

Human rights guidelines for Internet service providers

Human rights guidelines for Internet service providers
Guidelines for ISPs providing access services
• 16. Ensure that your customers
have access to information about
potential risks to their rights, security and privacy online, including
information on what you are doing to
help your customers counter those
risks. Provide information about
available tools and software that your
customers may use to protect themselves further. If you provide this
information yourself, ensure that it is
provided in the most accurate, accessible and up-to-date way possible. If
you do not provide this information
yourself, link your customers to adequate information resources, particularly those of associations of ISPs or
networks in the field of Internet
safety. In particular information on
the following risks could be made
available:

16.1. Illegal and/or harmful
content, risks for children
• Provide information or link to
information about risks of encountering or contributing to the dissemination of illegal content on the Internet as well as the risks for children of
being exposed to harmful content or
behaviour when they are online. The
latter may include content or behaviour capable of adversely affecting
the physical, emotional and psychological well-being of children, such as
online pornography, the portrayal
and glorification of violence and selfharm, demeaning, discriminatory or
racist expressions or apologia for
such conduct, solicitation (groom-

ing), bullying, stalking and other
forms of harassment. Although you
will not be expected to advise on
what content or behaviours are illegal and/or harmful, the information
you give could usefully include:
– explanations on what you are
doing to counter such content and
behaviour,
particularly
your
cooperation with hotlines against
illegal content (e.g. Inhope);
– guidance on how users can protect themselves against the risks of
encountering illegal and/or harmful
content and
– behaviour (e.g. by linking them to
relevant information on Internet
safety websites);
– information on available software
tools designed to protect users
against illegal and/or harmful content, including information about
how the tools work and can be
adapted by the users to meet their
individual needs.
• Provide information or link to
information on what your customers
can do to protect their children
online. Make reference to websites
with child-friendly content and to
available online safety resources such
as the Council of Europe Internet
Literacy Handbook (www.coe.int/
internet-literacy), the Council of
Europe online game Through the
Wild
Web
Woods
(www.
wildwebwoods.org) or websites of
Internet
safety
nodes
(www.
saferinternet.org).

16.2. Security risks
• If appropriate, explain what you
are doing to protect your customers
against security risks. Such risks may
concern data integrity (viruses,
worms, trojans, etc.), confidentiality
(e.g. when making transactions
online), network security or other
risks (e.g. phishing).
• Raise your customers’ awareness
or link your customers to further
information on how to counter risks
to their security on the Internet.

16.3. Privacy risks
• Provide for information or link to
information about potential risks of
customers to their privacy when
using the Internet. Such risks may
concern the hidden collection,
recording and processing of data
(spyware, profiling). If appropriate,
link to websites of your national
authorities with available information of applicable laws on privacy
and protection of personal data.
• Offer further information and
guidance to your customers about
the technical means which they may
use to protect themselves against privacy risks (anti-spyware tools etc.).
• 17. When your customers need
support in dealing with the risks
identified above, ensure that they can
either make further enquiries in the
appropriate form (e.g. telephone,
e-mail, writing, personal contact) or
link them to appropriate information resources.

Human rights guidelines for Internet service providers

5

Human rights guidelines for Internet service providers
• 18. Be careful about blocking or
degrading the quality of your services for the use of certain applications or software based on a given
technical protocol. If you apply
bandwidth caps, filter or block certain traffic, make sure that your customers are informed about such
service restrictions in a clear manner beforehand.

• 19. Cutting access to individual
customer accounts constitutes a
restriction on your customer’s rights
to access the benefits from the information society and to exercise their
rights to freedom of expression and
information. Cutting access should
only be done for law enforcement or
other legitimate and strictly necessary reasons, such as a violation of

contractual obligations or intentional
abuse, while having regard to legal
safeguards that may be applicable
under national law. The customer
should, where appropriate, be properly warned and informed beforehand, be given adequate reasons for
the cutting of access and be
instructed of the steps to be taken to
re-establish the access.

Guidelines for ISPs providing other information society services (hosting,
applications and content)
• 20. Make sure any filtering or
blocking of services carried out is
legitimate, proportional and transparent to your customers in accordance with the Council of Europe Recommendation on measures to
promote the respect for freedom of
expression and information with
regard to Internet filters, CM/Rec
(2008) 6. Inform your customers of
any filtering or blocking software
installed on your servers that may
lead to a removal or inaccessibility of
content as well as the nature of the
filtering that takes place (form of filtering, general criteria used to filter,
reasons for applying filters).
• 21. In respect of filtering, blocking or removal of illegal content, you
should do so only after a verification
of the illegality of the content, for
instance by contacting the competent law enforcement authorities.
Acting without first checking and
verifying may be considered as an
interference with legal content and
with the rights and freedoms of those
creating, communicating and accessing such content, in particular the

right to freedom of expression and
information.
• 22. Inform your customers about
your general policy dealing with
complaints on alleged illegal content
you might be hosting. Give clear
indications to the general public on
how to complain, and to your customers on how to respond to such
complaints.
• 23. If you provide your customers
with specific application services,
such as the use of chat, e-mail, blogs
etc., you should take care to ensure
the use of the applications is as safe
as possible and that your customers
are made aware of the way the applications work. When providing facilities such as chat rooms or discussion
forums, make sure that clear rules for
user registration and use of nicknames are established and that users
are informed about the rules in a
clear manner before they start using
your services.
• 24. Although you will not be
expected to provide advice on what
content or behaviours are illegal and/
or harmful, you could usefully give
information to teachers and parents

on risks to children when using
application services provided by you
(chat rooms, messageboards etc.), in
particular the risks of encountering
harmful content or behaviour
(grooming, bullying, etc.) when
using your services.
• 25. When providing applications
for e-mailing to your customers
make sure that any measures you
provide, such as spam-recognition or
spam-filtering software, are effective
(recognising or filtering spam while
not interfering with legitimate emails)
and your customers are
properly informed about their functionality and methodology as well as
the possibility to adapt their configuration.
• 26. If you provide content services to your customers, such as webbased information or news services,
consider offering users a right of
reply allowing the rapid correction of
incorrect information along the lines
of the minimum principles contained
in the Council of Europe Recommendation (2004) 16 on the right of
reply in the new media environment.

Guidelines for ISPs with regard to the right to respect for private life and
data protection
• 27. Establish appropriate procedures and use available technologies
to protect the privacy of users and
secrecy of content and traffic data,
especially by ensuring data integrity,
confidentiality as well as physical and
logical security of the network and of
the services provided over the network. The level of protection should

6

be adapted to the type of service you
provide accordingly.

firewalls, encryption technology or
digital signatures, etc.).

• 28. Offer further information and
guidance to your customers about
the technical means they may use to
protect themselves against security
risks to data and communications
(such as anti-spyware software tools,

• 29. When acting with regard to
the communications of users (for
example by allowing the interception or monitoring of users’ e-mails)
such action should only be undertaken in case of a legal duty to do so,
on specific orders or instructions

Human rights guidelines for Internet service providers

Guidelines for ISPs with regard to the right to respect for private life and data protection
from a competent public authority
made in accordance with the law. Do
not actively monitor the content of
communications on your network.
Furthermore, the deletion and modification of the user’s correspondence
(e.g. by spam-filters) should depend
on the explicit consent of the user
before the spam-filter, etc. is activated.
• 30. Do not to reveal the identity
of users, their traffic data or the content of data accessed by them to a
third party, unless under a legal duty
to do so or following specific orders
or instructions from the competent
public authority made in accordance
with the law. Requests in this respect
brought to you from abroad should

be handled through the competent
authorities in your country.
• 31. Inform your customers in
which circumstances you are under a
legal duty to reveal their identification, connection or traffic data by
request from law enforcement agencies etc. Such information could particularly be provided by associations
of ISPs to whom you might want to
link. If you receive a request to disclose such data, make sure to check
the authenticity of the request and
that it is made by a competent
authority in accordance with the law.

legitimate purposes in accordance
with data protection laws. Do not
store data for longer than required by
law or than is necessary to achieve
the purpose of processing of the
data.
• 33. Do not use personal data on
users for your own promotional or
marketing purposes unless the user
concerned, after having been
informed, has given his or her consent and this consent has not been
revoked. Do not make personal data
publicly available! Such publication
may infringe other people’s privacy
and may also be prohibited by law.

• 32. Do not collect, process or
store data about users, unless this is
necessary for explicit, specified and

Human rights guidelines for Internet service providers

7

Extracts from existing Council of Europe standards
relevant to the roles and responsibilities of ISPs
Recommendation No. R (99) 5 of the Committee of Ministers to member
states for the protection of privacy on the Internet1
Guidelines for the
protection of individuals
with regard to the
collection and processing
of personal data on
information highways
which may be incorporated
in or annexed to codes of
conduct
III. For Internet service providers
1. Use appropriate procedures and
available technologies, preferably
those which have been certified, to
protect the privacy of the people
concerned (even if they are not users
of the Internet), especially by ensuring data integrity and confidentiality
as well as physical and logical security of the network and of the services provided over the network.
2. Inform users of privacy risks presented by use of the Internet before
they subscribe or start using services. Such risks may concern data
integrity, confidentiality, the security
of the network or other risks to privacy such as the hidden collection or
recording of data.
3. Inform users about technical
means which they may lawfully use
to reduce security risks to data and
communications, such as legally
available encryption and digital sig-

natures. Offer such technical means
at a cost-oriented price, not a deterrent price.

9. Do not store data for longer than
is necessary to achieve the purpose
of processing.

4. Before accepting subscriptions
and connecting users to the Internet, inform them about the possibilities of accessing the Internet anonymously, and using its services and
paying for them in an anonymous
way (for example, pre-paid access
cards). Complete anonymity may not
be appropriate because of legal constraints. In those cases, if it is permitted by law, offer the possibility of
using pseudonyms. Inform users of
programmes allowing them to search
and browse anonymously on the
Internet. Design your system in a
way that avoids or minimises the use
of personal data.

10. Do not use data for your own
promotional or marketing purposes
unless the person concerned, after
having been informed, has not
objected or, in the case of processing
of traffic data or sensitive data, he or
she has given his or her explicit consent.

5. Do not read, modify or delete
messages sent to others.
6. Do not allow any interference
with the contents of communications, unless this interference is provided for by law and is carried out by
a public authority.
7. Collect, process and store data
about users only when necessary for
explicit, specified and legitimate purposes.
8. Do not communicate data unless
the communication is provided for
by law.

11. You are responsible for proper
use of data. On your introductory
page highlight a clear statement
about your privacy policy. This statement should be hyperlinked to a
detailed explanation of your privacy
practice. Before the user starts using
services, when he or she visits your
site, and whenever he or she asks, tell
him or her who you are, what data
you collect, process and store, in
what way, for what purpose and for
how long you keep them. If necessary, ask for his or her consent. At
the request of the person concerned,
correct inaccurate data immediately
and delete them if they are excessive,
out of date or no longer required and
stop the processing carried out if the
user objects to it. Notify the third
parties to whom you have communicated the data of any modification.
Avoid the hidden collection of data.
12. Information provided to the user
must be accurate and kept up to date.

1. Adopted on 23 February 1999.

Human rights guidelines for Internet service providers

8

Freedom of communication on the Internet
13. Think twice about publishing
data on your site! Such publication
may infringe other people's privacy
and may also be prohibited by law.

14. Before you send data to another
country seek advice, for example
from the competent authorities in
your country, on whether the trans-

fer is permissible. You may have to
ask the recipient to provide safeguards necessary to ensure protection of the data.

Declaration of the Committee of Ministers on freedom of communication
on the Internet2
Principle 6 – Limited
liability of service
providers for Internet
content
Member states should not impose on
service providers a general obligation
to monitor content on the Internet to
which they give access, that they
transmit or store, nor that of actively
seeking facts or circumstances indicating illegal activity.
Member states should ensure that
service providers are not held liable
for content on the Internet when
their function is limited, as defined
by national law, to transmitting
information or providing access to
the Internet.
In cases where the functions of service providers are wider and they
store content emanating from other
parties, member states may hold
them co-responsible if they do not
act expeditiously to remove or disable access to information or services
as soon as they become aware, as
defined by national law, of their illegal nature or, in the event of a claim
for damages, of facts or circumstances revealing the illegality of the
activity or information.
When defining under national law
the obligations of service providers
as set out in the previous paragraph,
due care must be taken to respect the
freedom of expression of those who
made the information available in the
first place, as well as the corresponding right of users to the information.
In all cases, the above-mentioned
limitations of liability should not
affect the possibility of issuing
injunctions where service providers
are required to terminate or prevent,
to the extent possible, an infringement of the law.

Extracts from the
Explanatory memorandum
to the Declaration on
freedom of communication
on the Internet
Principle 6 – Limited liability of
service providers for Internet content
Here it is established that as a general rule intermediaries in the communication chain should not be held
liable for content transmitted
through their services, except in certain limited circumstances. Along
the lines of Articles 12-15 of the
Directive on electronic commerce,
the exemptions to liability take into
account the different types of activities of the intermediaries, namely
providing access to communication
networks, transmitting data and
hosting information. The degree of
liability depends on the possibilities
of service providers to control the
content and whether they are aware
of its illegal nature. The limitations
on liability do not apply if intermediaries intentionally disseminate illegal content.

1st paragraph – No general
obligation to monitor
This paragraph is based on Article 15
of the Directive on electronic commerce. Member states should not
impose any general obligation on
service providers to monitor the
information on the Internet to which
they give access, that they transmit
or store. Nor should they be subject
to a general obligation to actively
seek facts or circumstances indicating illegal activity, since this might
have the effect of curbing freedom of
expression.

This paragraph of Principle 6 does
not prevent public authorities in
member states from obliging service
providers in certain cases, for example during a criminal investigation,
to monitor the activities of their clients.

2nd paragraph – “Mere conduit”
In the case of mere transmission of
information or providing access to
communication networks, intermediaries should not be held liable
for illegal content. When the role of
intermediaries goes beyond that, in
particular when they initiate the
transmission, select the receiver of
the transmission or select or modify
the information transmitted, their
liability may be invoked.
The activity of the intermediary
which is at stake here, and which
should be exempt from liability, is
sometimes referred to as “mere conduit” (cf. Article 12 of the Directive
on electronic commerce).

3rd paragraph – “Hosting”
In the case of hosting content emanating from third parties, intermediaries should in general not be held
liable (cf. Article 14 of the Directive
on electronic commerce). This does
not apply, however, when the third
party is acting under the control of
the intermediary, for example when a
newspaper company has its own
server to host content produced by
its journalists. However, if the host
becomes aware of the illegal nature
of the content on its servers or, in the
event of a claim for damages, of facts
revealing an illegal activity, it may
reasonably be held liable. The precise
conditions should be laid down in
national law.

2. Adopted on 28 May 2003.

Human rights guidelines for Internet service providers

9

Extracts from existing Council of Europe standards relevant to the roles and responsibilities of ISPs
4th paragraph – “Notice and take
down” procedures and freedom of
expression and information
As stipulated in paragraph 3 of Principle 6 of the Declaration, service
providers may be held liable if they
do not act expeditiously to remove or
disable access to information or services when they become aware, as
defined by national law, of their illegal nature. It is to be expected that
member States will define in more
detail what level of knowledge is
required of service providers before
they become liable. In this respect,

so-called “notice and take down”
procedures are very important.
Member States should, however,
exercise caution imposing liability on
service providers for not reacting to
such a notice. Questions about
whether certain material is illegal are
often complicated and best dealt
with by the courts. If service providers act too quickly to remove content after a complaint is received,
this might be dangerous from the
point of view of freedom of expression and information. Perfectly legit-

imate content might thus be suppressed out of fear of legal liability.

5th paragraph – The possibility of
issuing injunctions remains intact
It is highlighted here, in line with
Articles 12-14 of the Directive on
electronic commerce, that despite
the above-mentioned limitations of
liability, the possibility of issuing
injunctions where service providers
are required to terminate or prevent,
to the extent possible, an infringement of law, remains intact.

Declaration of the Committee of Ministers on human rights and the rule of
law in the Information Society3
With regard to self- and co-regulatory measures which aim to uphold
freedom of expression and communication, private sector actors are

encouraged to address in a decisive
manner the following issues:
• private censorship (hidden censorship) by Internet service provid-

ers, for example blocking or removing content, on their own initiative
or upon the request of a third party;

Recommendation No. Rec (2007) 11 of the Committee of Ministers to
member states on promoting freedom of expression and information in
the new information and communications environment4
Member states, the private sector
and civil society are encouraged to
develop common standards and
strategies to promote transparency
and the provision of information,

guidance and assistance to the individual users of technologies and
services, in particular in the following situations:

…
vii. the removal of content deemed
to be illegal with regard to the rule of
law considerations;

Recommendation No. Rec (2007) 16 of the Committee of Ministers to
member states on measures to promote the public service value of the
Internet5
Member states should adopt or
develop policies to preserve and,
whenever possible, enhance the protection of human rights and respect
for the rule of law in the information
society. In this regard, particular
attention should be paid to:
• the right to private life and private
correspondence on the Internet and
in the use of other ICTs, including
the respect for the will of users not to

disclose their identity, promoted by
encouraging individual users and
Internet service and content providers to share the responsibility for
this;
Member states should promote public discussion on the responsibilities
of private actors, such as Internet
service providers, content providers
and users, and encourage them – in
the interests of the democratic proc-

ess and debate and the protection of
the rights of others – to take self-regulatory and other measures to optimise the quality and reliability of
information on the Internet and to
promote the exercise of professional
responsibility, in particular with
regard to the establishment, compliance with, and monitoring of the
observance of codes of conduct.

3. Adopted on 13 May 2005.
4. Adopted on 26 September 2007.
5. Adopted on 7 November 2007.

10

Human rights guidelines for Internet service providers

Measures to promote the respect for freedom of expression and information with regard to Internet filters

Recommendation No. CM/Rec (2008) 6 on measures to promote the
respect for freedom of expression and information with regard to
Internet filters
The Committee of Ministers, under
the terms of Article 15.b of the Statute of the Council of Europe,
Considering that the aim of the
Council of Europe is to achieve
greater unity between its members
for the purpose of safeguarding and
realising the ideals and principles
which are their common heritage;
Recalling that States Parties to the
Convention for the Protection of
Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms (European Convention on
Human Rights, ETS No. 5) have
undertaken to secure to everyone
within their jurisdiction the human
rights and fundamental freedoms
defined in the Convention;
Reaffirming the commitment of
member states to the fundamental
right to freedom of expression and to
receive and impart information and
ideas without interference by public
authorities and regardless of frontiers, as guaranteed by Article 10 of
the European Convention on Human
Rights;
Aware that any intervention by
member states that forbids access to
specific Internet content may constitute a restriction on freedom of
expression and access to information in the online environment and
that such a restriction would have to
fulfil the conditions in Article 10,
paragraph 2, of the European Convention on Human Rights and the
relevant case-law of the European
Court of Human Rights;
Recalling in this respect the Declaration on human rights and the rule of
law in the information society,
adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 13 May 2005, according to
which member states should maintain and enhance legal and practical
measures to prevent state and private
censorship;
Recalling Recommendation Rec
(2007) 11 of the Committee of Ministers to member states on promoting freedom of expression and information in the new information and

communications
environment,
according to which member states,
the private sector and civil society
are encouraged to develop common
standards and strategies to promote
transparency and the provision of
information, guidance and assistance to the individual users of technologies and services concerning,
inter alia, the blocking of access to
and filtering of content and services
with regard to the right to receive
and impart information;
Noting that the voluntary and
responsible use of Internet filters
(products, systems and measures to
block or filter Internet content) can
promote confidence and security on
the Internet for users, in particular
children and young people, while
also aware that the use of such filters
can impact on the right to freedom
of expression and information, as
protected by Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights;
Recalling Recommendation Rec
(2006) 12 of the Committee of Ministers on empowering children in the
new information and communications environment, which underlines the importance of information
literacy and training strategies for
children to enable them to better
understand and deal with content
(for example violence and self-harm,
pornography, discrimination and
racism) and behaviours (such as
grooming, bullying, harassment or
stalking) carrying a risk of harm,
thereby promoting a greater sense of
confidence, well-being and respect
for others in the new information
and communications environment;
Convinced of the necessity to ensure
that users are made aware of, understand and are able to effectively use,
adjust and control filters according
to their individual needs;
Recalling Recommendation Rec
(2001) 8 of the Committee of Ministers on self-regulation concerning
cybercontent (self-regulation and
user protection against illegal or
harmful content on new communi-

cations and information services),
which encourages the neutral labelling of content to enable users to
make their own value judgements
over such content and the development of a wide range of search tools
and filtering profiles, which provide
users with the ability to select content on the basis of content descriptors;
Aware of the public service value of
the Internet, understood as people’s
significant reliance on the Internet as
an essential tool for their everyday
activities (communication, information, knowledge, commercial transactions, entertainment) and the
resulting legitimate expectation that
Internet services be accessible,
affordable, secure, reliable and ongoing and recalling in this regard Recommendation Rec (2007) 16 of the
Committee of Ministers on measures
to promote the public service value
of the Internet;
Recalling the Declaration of the
Committee of Ministers on freedom
of communication on the Internet of
28 May 2003, which stresses that
public authorities should not,
through general blocking or filtering
measures, deny access by the public
to information and other communication on the Internet, regardless of
frontiers, but that this does not prevent the installation of filters for the
protection of minors, in particular in
places accessible to them, such as
schools or libraries;
Reaffirming the commitment of
member states to everyone’s right to
private life and secrecy of correspondence, as protected by Article 8
of the European Convention on
Human Rights, and recalling the
Convention for the Protection of
Individuals with regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data
(ETS No. 108) and its Additional
Protocol regarding supervisory
authorities and transborder data
flows (ETS No. 181) as well as Recommendation No. R (99) 5 of the

Human rights guidelines for Internet service providers

11

Extracts from existing Council of Europe standards relevant to the roles and responsibilities of ISPs
Committee of Ministers on the protection of privacy on the Internet,
Recommends that member states
adopt common standards and strategies with regard to Internet filters to
promote the full exercise and enjoyment of the right to freedom of
expression and information and
related rights and freedoms in the
European Convention on Human
Rights, in particular by:
• taking measures with regard to
Internet filters in line with the guidelines set out in the appendix to this
recommendation;
• bringing these guidelines to the
attention of all relevant private and
public sector stakeholders, in particular those who design, use (install,
activate, deactivate and implement)
and monitor Internet filters, and to
civil society, so that they may contribute to their implementation.

Appendix to
Recommendation CM/Rec
(2008) 6: Guidelines
Using and controlling Internet filters
in order to fully exercise and enjoy
the right to freedom of expression
and information
Users’ awareness, understanding of
and ability to effectively use Internet
filters are key factors which enable
them to fully exercise and enjoy their
human rights and fundamental
freedoms, in particular the right to
freedom of expression and information, and to participate actively in
democratic processes. When confronted with filters, users must be
informed that a filter is active and,
where appropriate, be able to identify
and to control the level of filtering
the content they access is subject to.
Moreover, they should have the possibility to challenge the blocking or
filtering of content and to seek clarifications and remedies.
In co-operation with the private sector and civil society, member states
should ensure that users are made
aware of activated filters and, where
appropriate, are able to activate and
deactivate them and be assisted in
varying the level of filtering in operation, in particular by:

12

i. developing and promoting a
minimum level of information for
users to enable them to identify
when filtering has been activated and
to understand how, and according to
which criteria, the filtering operates
(for example, blacklists, whitelists,
keyword blocking, content rating,
etc., or combinations thereof );
ii. developing minimum levels of
and standards for the information
provided to the user to explain why a
specific type of content has been filtered;
iii. regularly reviewing and updating filters in order to improve their
effectiveness, proportionality and
legitimacy in relation to their
intended purpose;
iv. providing clear and concise
information and guidance regarding
the manual overriding of an activated filter, namely whom to contact
when it appears that content has
been unreasonably blocked and the
reasons which may allow a filter to be
overridden for a specific type of content or Uniform Resource Locator
(URL);
v. ensuring that content filtered by
mistake or error can be accessed
without undue difficulty and within a
reasonable time;
vi. promoting initiatives to raise
awareness of the social and ethical
responsibilities of those actors who
design, use and monitor filters with
particular regard to the right to freedom of expression and information
and to the right to private life, as well
as to the active participation in public life and democratic processes;
vii. raising awareness of the potential
limitations to freedom of expression
and information and the right to private life resulting from the use of filters and of the need to ensure proportionality of such limitations;
viii.facilitating an exchange of experiences and best practices with
regard to the design, use and monitoring of filters;
ix. encouraging the provision of
training courses for network administrators, parents, educators and
other people using and monitoring
filters;

x. promoting and co-operating with
existing initiatives to foster responsible use of filters in compliance with
human rights, democracy and the
rule of law;
xi. fostering filtering standards and
benchmarks to help users choose
and best control filters.
In this context, civil society should
be encouraged to raise users’ awareness of the potential benefits and
dangers of filters. This should
include promoting the importance
and significance of free and unhindered access to the Internet so that
every individual user may fully exercise and enjoy their human rights
and fundamental freedoms, in particular the right to freedom of
expression and information and the
right to private life, as well as to
effectively participate in public life
and democratic processes.

Appropriate filtering for children and
young people
The Internet has significantly
increased the number and diversity
of ideas, information and opinions
which people may receive and impart
in the fulfilment of their right to freedom of expression and information
without interference by public
authorities and regardless of frontiers. At the same time, it has
increased the amount of readily
available content carrying a risk of
harm, particularly for children and
young people. To satisfy the legitimate desire and duty of member
states to protect children and young
people from content carrying a risk
of harm, the proportionate use of filters can constitute an appropriate
means of encouraging access to and
confident use of the Internet and be a
complement to other strategies on
how to tackle harmful content, such
as the development and provision of
information literacy.
In this context, member states
should:
i. facilitate the development of
strategies to identify content carrying a risk of harm for children and
young people, taking into account
the diversity of cultures, values and
opinions;

Human rights guidelines for Internet service providers

Measures to promote the respect for freedom of expression and information with regard to Internet filters
ii. co-operate with the private sector and civil society to avoid overprotection of children and young
people by, inter alia, supporting
research and development for the
production of “intelligent” filters that
take more account of the context in
which the information is provided
(for example by differentiating
between harmful content itself and
unproblematic references to it, such
as may be found on scientific websites);
iii. facilitate and promote initiatives
that assist parents and educators in
the selection and use of developmental-age appropriate filters for children and young people;
iv. inform children and young people about the benefits and dangers of
Internet content and its filtering as
part of media education strategies in
formal and non-formal education.
Furthermore, the private
should be encouraged to:

sector

i. develop “intelligent” filters offering
developmental-age appropriate filtering which can be adapted to follow the child’s progress and age
while, at the same time, ensuring that
filtering does not occur when the
content is deemed neither harmful
nor unsuitable for the group which
the filter has been activated to protect;
ii. co-operate with self- and co-regulatory bodies in order to develop
standards for developmental-age
appropriate rating systems for content carrying a risk of harm, taking
into account the diversity of cultures,
values and opinions;
iii. develop, in co-operation with
civil society, common labels for filters to assist parents and educators
in making informed choices when
acquiring filters and to certify that
they meet certain quality requirements;
iv. promote the interoperability of
systems for the self-classification of
content by providers and help to
increase awareness about the potential benefits and dangers of such classification models.
Moreover, civil society should be
encouraged to:

i. debate and share their experiences and knowledge when assessing and raising awareness of the
development and use of filters as a
protective measure for children and
young people;
ii. regularly monitor and analyse
the use and impact of filters for children and young people, with particular regard to their effectiveness and
their contribution to the exercise and
enjoyment of the rights and
freedoms guaranteed by Article 10
and other provisions of the European
Convention on Human Rights.

Use and application of Internet filters
by the public and private sector
Notwithstanding the importance of
empowering users to use and control filters as mentioned above, and
noting the wider public service value
of the Internet, public actors on all
levels (such as administrations,
libraries and educational institutions) which introduce filters or use
them when delivering services to the
public, should ensure full respect for
all users’ right to freedom of expression and information and their right
to private life and secrecy of correspondence.
In this context, member states
should:
i. refrain from filtering Internet
content in electronic communications networks operated by public
actors for reasons other than those
laid down in Article 10, paragraph 2,
of the European Convention on
Human Rights, as interpreted by the
European Court of Human Rights;
ii. guarantee that nationwide general blocking or filtering measures
are only introduced by the state if the
conditions of Article 10, paragraph 2,
of the European Convention on
Human Rights are fulfilled. Such
action by the state should only be
taken if the filtering concerns specific and clearly identifiable content,
a competent national authority has
taken a decision on its illegality and
the decision can be reviewed by an
independent and impartial tribunal
or regulatory body, in accordance
with the requirements of Article 6 of

the European Convention on Human
Rights;
iii. introduce, where appropriate
and necessary, provisions under
national law for the prevention of
intentional abuse of filters to restrict
citizens’ access to lawful content;
iv. ensure that all filters are assessed
both before and during their implementation to ensure that the effects
of the filtering are proportionate to
the purpose of the restriction and
thus necessary in a democratic society, in order to avoid unreasonable
blocking of content;
v. provide for effective and readily
accessible means of recourse and
remedy, including suspension of filters, in cases where users and/or
authors of content claim that content
has been blocked unreasonably;
vi. avoid the universal and general
blocking of offensive or harmful content for users who are not part of the
group which a filter has been activated to protect, and of illegal content for users who justifiably demonstrate a legitimate interest or need to
access such content under exceptional circumstances, particularly for
research purposes;
vii. ensure that the right to private
life and secrecy of correspondence is
respected when using and applying
filters and that personal data logged,
recorded and processed via filters are
only used for legitimate and noncommercial purposes.
Furthermore, member states and the
private sector are encouraged to:
i. regularly assess and review the
effectiveness and proportionality
regarding the introduction of filters;
ii. strengthen the information and
guidance to users who are subject to
filters in private networks, including
information about the existence of,
and reasons for, the use of a filter and
the criteria upon which the filter
operates;
iii. co-operate with users (customers, employees, etc.) to improve the
transparency, effectiveness and proportionality of filters.
In this context, civil society should
be encouraged to follow the development and deployment of filters both

Human rights guidelines for Internet service providers

13

Extracts from existing Council of Europe standards relevant to the roles and responsibilities of ISPs
by key state and private sector actors.
It should, where appropriate, call
upon member states and the private
sector, respectively, to ensure and to

14

facilitate all users’ right to freedom of
expression and information, in particular as regards their freedom to
receive information without interfer-

ence by public authorities and
regardless of frontiers in the new
information and communications
environment.

Human rights guidelines for Internet service providers

Developed by the Council of Europe in close co-operation with the European
Internet Services Providers Association (EuroISPA), these guidelines provide
human rights benchmarks for Internet service providers (ISPs). While underlining
the important role played by ISPs in delivering key services for the internet user,
such as access, e-mail or content services, they stress the importance of users’ safety
and their right to privacy and freedom of expression and, in this connection, the
importance for the providers to be aware of the human rights impact that their
activities can have.

For more information on the activities
of the Council of Europe and EiroISPA:
www.coe.int • www.euroispa.org

Directorate General
of Human Rights and Legal Affairs
Council of Europe
F-67075 Strasbourg Cedex

