COUNCIL
OF EUROPE

CONSEIL
DE L’EUROPE
H/Inf (2008) 8

Human rights guidelines
for online games providers
Developed by the Council of Europe
in co-operation with
the Interactive Software Federation of Europe

H/Inf (2008) 8

Human rights guidelines
for online games providers
Developed by the Council of Europe in co-operation with the
Interactive Software Federation of Europe

Directorate General
of Human Rights and Legal Affairs
Council of Europe
2008

Directorate General of Human Rights and Legal Affairs
Council of Europe
F-67075 Strasbourg Cedex

© Council of Europe 2008
1st printing, July 2008
Printed at the Council of Europe

Developed by the Council of Europe in close co-operation with the Interactive Software Federation of Europe (ISFE), these guidelines provide human rights benchmarks for online games
providers and developers. While underlining the primary value of games as tools for expression
and communication, they stress the importance of gamers safety and their right to privacy and
freedom of expression and, in this connection, the importance for the games industry to be
aware of the human rights impact that games can have.
For more information on the activities of the Council of Europe and ISFE: www.coe.int •
www.isfe-eu.org

Contents
Understanding the role and position of online games providers in respecting and
promoting human rights, page 5
Scope of the guidelines . . . . . . . . . 5

Human rights guidelines for online games providers, page 7
Extracts from existing Council of Europe standards relevant to the roles and
responsibilities of games providers, page 9
Recommendation No. R (92) 19 on
video games with a racist content 9
Recommendation No. R (97) 19 on
the portrayal of violence in the
electronic media. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

Declaration of the Committee of
Ministers on protecting the dignity,
security and privacy of children on
the Internet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

Recommendation No. CM/Rec
(2008) 6 on measures to promote the
respect for freedom of expression
and information with regard to
Internet filters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .13

Everyone has the right to freedom of expression and information. This
right shall include freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impart
information and ideas without interference by public authorities and
regardless of frontiers. This article shall not prevent States from requiring
the licensing of broadcasting, television or cinema enterprises.
The exercise of these freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or
penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public
safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health
or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for preventing the disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.

Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights

Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life, his home
and his correspondence.
There shall be no interference by a public authority with the exercise of
this right except such as is in accordance with the law and is necessary in a
democratic society in the interests of national security, public safety or
the economic well being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or
crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the
rights and freedoms of others.

Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights

Understanding the role and position of online games
providers in respecting and promoting human rights
1. Providers (designers and publishers) of online games design and
make available products which can
promote the exercise and enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, in particular the freedom
to express, to create and to exchange
content and communications while
respecting the rights of others.
Designed and provided in an appropriate manner, games can be powerful tools to enhance learning, creativity and social interaction, thereby
helping users to benefit from the
information society.
2. However, like other content,
online games may also inadvertently
impact on the rights and sensibilities
of individuals, in particular children,
as well as their dignity. The potential
impact of such games may increase
as they allow the gaming experience
to become more creative and interactive (as the possibilities for expression, interaction and exchange of
content with other gamers increase)

and ever more realistic (as the visual
effects of games develop).
3. Online games can play an
important positive role in the lives
and development of individuals,
especially for children and young
people. It suffices to consider the
importance of rights and freedoms,
values and dignity, into the embedded design and marketing of games.
In this regard, it is recalled that the
exercise of freedom of expression
carries with it duties and responsibilities, in particular as regards the protection of health and morals and the
rights of others, which publishers of
online games are encouraged to bear
in mind when deciding on the content of their games.
4. Games designers and publishers
are therefore encouraged to promote and facilitate gamers’ wellbeing and should regularly assess
and evaluate their information policies and practices, in particular
regarding child safety and responsible use, while respecting fundamen-

tal rights, in particular the right to
freedom of expression and the right
to privacy and secrecy of correspondence. At the same time it
should be noted that member states,
civil society, other private sector
actors, parents and gamers themselves have important roles to play in
engaging in multi-stakeholder cooperation, promoting gaming literacy for children and assisting game
providers in fulfilling their role.
5. In this regard, designers and
publishers of online games are
encouraged to take note of, discuss
and make their best efforts to comply
with the following guidelines (below)
and to consider making reference to
them within their games and in their
end-user agreements.
6. The appended guidelines are
without prejudice to and must be
read in conjunction with the obligations applicable to online games providers and their activities under
national, European and international law.

Scope of the guidelines
7. The main focus of the following
guidelines is online games although
some of the guidelines can also be
applied to games which are only
playable offline. These online games
include (i) classic board and card
games mostly offered by web portals; (ii) personal computer (PC) or
console games with network options;
(iii) multiplayer games i.e. Massively
Multiplayer Online Games where
players play individually or in teams

in a virtual evolving world, and (iv)
entertainment games that provide a
platform for other types of learning,
training and interactive applications.
It should be noted that these guidelines are applicable to all online
games irrespective of the platform
used for delivery of the gaming content (fixed or mobile gaming console,
PC or mobile phone).
8. These guidelines are mainly
directed towards developers and

publishers of online games. Some
guidelines, such as those concerning
the development of parental control
tools, may also be applied by producers of gaming consoles and platforms
in their activities.
9. Although online virtual universes, such as Second Life, are confronted with some of the same issues
connected with online social interaction as games, they are, for the purposes of these guidelines, not seen as

Human rights guidelines for online games providers

5

online games. In comparison with
online games, such universes only to
a lesser degree constitute a programmed experience under the control of a game publisher. Virtual uni-

verses also lack a specified gaming
scenario and set of goals to achieve
for the gamer, characteristics which
are normally found in online video
games.

10. Finally, the guidelines are not
intended to apply to online gambling
sites, such as online casino or online
bookmaking websites.

Human rights guidelines for online games providers
11.
Before publishing your game,
take care to consider and evaluate
how the game content may impact
on human dignity, the sensibilities
and values of gamers, in particular
children. In this regard specific
attention should be paid to the risks
connected with the dissemination of
the following gaming content:

ism, references to drugs, strong language, horror, or gambling;

• gratuitous portrayal of violence
(physical, mental or sexual violence),
especially in games targeting minors
whose physical, mental or moral
development may be impaired by
exposure to such portrayal;

13. When publishing games targeted for children and young people,
provide appropriate information to
gamers, parent and carers of the risks
connected with online gaming. Such
information, which should be available in the local language of the country where the game is marketed and
could usefully be provided in an educational guide written for parents, in
the game manual and/or the game
itself, may in particular concern:

• other content which, on account
of its inhuman, cruel, sexist or
degrading nature, may impact on the
physical, mental or moral development of minors;
• content which may be seen as
advocating criminal or harmful
behaviour (theft, violence, sale and
abuse of drugs etc.);
• content which conveys messages
of aggressive nationalism, ethnocentrism, xenophobia, racism or intolerance in general including when such
messages are concealed;
12. Consider promoting and applying independent, including combined, labelling and rating systems to
your game, especially the Pan-European Game Information (PEGI) system and the PEGI Online Safety
Code (POSC), to help inform gamers, parents and carers about games
containing content which may affect
their sensibilities and values, in particular by:
• using easily recognisable labels for
sensitive content (for example using
symbols or pictograms), in particular with regard to violence, sex, rac-

• ensuring that such labels are
clearly indicated and visible on the
packaging of games and the game
website, as well as in the references
to them such as in catalogues, advertisements and in the materials provided with the game itself.

assment or stalking), and information and guidance about how to
identify and deal with such risks;
• the risks to privacy of exchanging
personal data (name, address, credit
card details, images or videos) when
playing the game online.

• the risk of excessive use of online
games and the potential negative
physical and psychological effects of
such excessive use (e.g. isolation, loss
of the sense of reality, disturbed sleep
patterns, etc.);

14. Consider developing in-game
parental control tools to assist parent
and carers in protecting minors.
Such parental control tools could
include facilities for setting time-limits and slots for gaming thereby limiting the risks of excessive use and
addiction. If the parental tool include
the option of filtering or blocking
certain content, make sure that the
filtering process is transparent both
to the parent and gamer and can be
adjusted to the level of protection
required for the individual gamer, in
accordance with the guidelines in
Council of Europe Recommendation
CM/Rec (2008) 6 on measures to
promote the respect for freedom of
expression and information with
regard to Internet filters.

• the fact that the game is a work of
fiction which can be a simulation of
reality but is not comparable to the
real world, and therefore that actions
and behaviours in the game should
not necessarily be re-enacted in the
real lives of gamers;

15. Consider developing in-game
mechanisms
allowing
gamers
encountering illegal or harmful content or behaviour easy access to a
facility to report the problems
encountered, notify a game moderator and seek assistance.

• the risk of encountering illegal or
harmful content uploaded by other
gamers when playing the game
online, and information and guidance for parents and carers on where
to report the existence of such content within the game;

16. Before removing gamer-generated content from a game, you
should take care to verify the illegality or harmfulness of the content, for
instance by contacting the competent authority law-enforcement
authorities. Acting without first
checking and verifying may be considered as an interference with legal
content and with the rights and free-

• the risk of harm associated with
interaction with other gamers (for
example with regard to bullying, har-

Human rights guidelines for online games providers

7

doms of those gamers creating and
communicating such content, in particular the right to freedom of
expression and information.

could challenge their dignity, security and privacy or otherwise render
them vulnerable now or at a later
stage in their lives.

17. Consider developing mechanisms for the automatic removal of
gamer-generated content after a certain time of inactivity, in particular
for games targeting children and
young people. Creating a lasting or
permanently accessible online record
of the content created by gamers

18. Provide gamers with clear information about the presence of advertisements or product placements
within the game along the lines of
the principles contained in Article 10
of the PEGI Online Safety Code.
When the game is targeted for
minors, ensure that the content of

advertisements and product placements is appropriate having regard
to the age of the target group. As far
as in-game advertising is concerned,
make sure that there is no confusion
between games for children and
games for adults by respecting the
labelling of the game, in particular by
not including advertising for or clips
from games treating mature subjects
in children’s games.

Extracts from existing Council of Europe standards
relevant to the roles and responsibilities of games
providers
Recommendation No. R (92) 19 on video games with a racist content
The Committee of Ministers, under
the terms of Article 15.b of the Statute of the Council of Europe,
Considering that the aim of the
Council of Europe is to achieve a
greater unity between its members,
particularly for the purpose of safeguarding and realising the ideals and
principles which are their common
heritage;
Being aware that video games with a
racist content, whose existence in
member countries is unfortunately
beyond doubt, convey a message of
aggressive nationalism, ethnocentrism, xenophobia, anti-Semitism or
intolerance in general, concealed
behind or combined with violence or
mockery;
Considering therefore that such
games cannot be tolerated in democratic societies, which respect inter
alia the right to be different, whether

that difference be racial, religious or
other;
Convinced that it is all the more necessary to take measures designed to
put an end to the production and
distribution of these games as they
are used mainly by young people;
Recalling the terms of its Resolution
(68) 30 relating to measures to be
taken against incitement to racial,
national and religious hatred and its
Resolution (72) 22 on the suppression of and guaranteeing against
unjustifiable discrimination;
Bearing in mind the Declaration
regarding intolerance – a threat to
democracy which it adopted on
14 May 1981;
Having regard to Recommendation
No. R (89) 7 concerning principles
on the distribution of videograms
having a violent, brutal or pornographic content, and the European

Convention on Transfrontier Television (European Treaty Series,
No 132),
Recommends that the governments
of member states:
a. review the scope of their legislation in the fields of racial discrimination and hatred, violence and the
protection of young people, in order
to ensure that it applies without
restriction to the production and distribution of video games with a racist
content;
b. treat video games as mass media
for the purposes of the application,
inter alia, of Recommendation No. R
(89) 7 concerning principles relating
to the distribution of videograms
having a violent, brutal or pornographic content, and of the European
Convention on Transfrontier Television (European Treaty Series, No.
132).

Recommendation No. R (97) 19 on the portrayal of violence in the
electronic media
The Committee of Ministers, under
the terms of Article 15.b of the Statute of the Council of Europe,
Considering that the aim of the
Council of Europe is to achieve a
greater unity between its members
for the purpose of safeguarding and
realising the ideals and principles
which are their common heritage;

Recalling its commitment to the fundamental right to freedom of expression as guaranteed by Article 10 of
the Convention for the Protection of
Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms, and to the principles of
the free flow of information and
ideas and the independence of media
operators as expressed, in particular,
in its Declaration on the freedom of

expression and information of 29
April 1982;
Bearing in mind the international
dimension of the gratuitous portrayal of violence and the relevant
provisions of the European Convention on Transfrontier Television
(1989);
Recalling that at the 4th European
Ministerial Conference on Mass

Human rights guidelines for online games providers

9

Extracts from existing Council of Europe standards
Media Policy (Prague, 7-8 December
1994), the Ministers responsible for
media policy addressed to the Committee of Ministers of the Council of
Europe an Action plan containing
strategies for the promotion of the
media in a democratic society, in
which they requested the Committee
of Ministers to “prepare, in close
consultation with media professionals and regulatory authorities, possible guidelines on the portrayal of violence in the media”;
Recalling that the exercise of freedom of expression carries with it
duties and responsibilities, which
media professionals must bear in
mind, and that it may legitimately be
restricted in order to maintain a balance between the exercise of this
right and the respect for other fundamental rights, freedoms and interests
protected by the European Convention on Human Rights;
Concerned at the overall increase in
the portrayal of violence in the electronic media, which makes it an
important social issue;
Recalling that violence cannot be
considered a proper means for conflict-resolution of any kind, including
inter-personal conflicts;
Noting, nevertheless, that violence is
part of the daily reality of society and
that the right of the public to be
informed also covers the right to be
informed about various manifestations of violence;
Noting that there are many ways in
which violence may be portrayed by
the media, corresponding to different contexts, ranging from information to entertainment and that, especially in the latter case, violence is
sometimes trivialised or even glorified so as to attract large audiences;
Noting also that, regardless of the
aim invoked, violence is sometimes
portrayed in the electronic media in
a gratuitous manner, in no way justified by the context, reaching unacceptable inhuman and degrading levels as well as an excessive overall
volume;
Aware that this may impair the physical, mental or moral development of
the public, particularly young people,
by creating, for instance, growing

10

insensitivity to suffering, feelings of
insecurity and mistrust;
Noting that not all persons in charge
of the various electronic media perceive the increased portrayal of violence as a problem;
Considering that the economic reasons advanced by certain persons in
charge of electronic media cannot
justify the gratuitous portrayal of
violence;
Convinced that the various sectors of
society should assume their responsibilities in regard to the portrayal of
violence in the electronic media;
Convinced also that all electronic
media professionals must assume
their responsibilities and that they
are best placed to address the question of gratuitous portrayal of violence; and welcoming efforts already
made by certain professionals and
sectors,
Recommends that the governments
of the member States:
a. draw the attention of the professionals in the electronic media sector, the regulatory bodies for this
sector, the educational authorities
and the general public, to the overall
policy framework represented by the
appended guidelines;
b. take concrete measures to implement these;
c. ensure, by all appropriate means,
that these guidelines are known by
the persons and bodies concerned,
and encourage general debate on this
subject;
d. keep the effective application of
them in their internal legal orders
under review.
Instructs the Secretary General of
the Council of Europe to transmit
this recommendation to the governments of those States party to the
European
Cultural
Convention
which are not members of the Council of Europe.

Scope
This recommendation concerns the
gratuitous portrayal of violence in
the various electronic media at
national and transfrontier level. The
gratuitous nature is to be assessed

with reference to the parameters
contained in the appendix to this
recommendation.

Definitions
For the purposes of this recommendation:
a. the term “gratuitous portrayal of
violence” denotes the dissemination
of messages, words and images, the
violent content or presentation of
which is given a prominence which is
not justified in the context;
b. the term “electronic media”
denotes radio and television programme services, services such as
video-on-demand, Internet, interactive television, and so on, and
products such as video games, CDROMs, and so on, with the exception of private communications
which are not accessible to the public;
c. the term “those responsible for
the content” denotes natural or legal
persons responsible for the content
of messages, words and images made
available to the public by the various
electronic media.

Guidelines
Guideline No. 1 – General framework
Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights, as interpreted
in the case-law of the European
Court of Human Rights, must constitute the general legal framework for
addressing questions concerning the
portrayal of violence in the electronic media.
Freedom of expression also includes,
in principle, the right to impart and
receive information and ideas which
constitute portrayal of violence.
However, certain forms of gratuitous
portrayal of violence may lawfully be
restricted, taking into account the
duties and responsibilities which the
exercise of freedom of expression
carries with it, provided that such
interferences with freedom of
expression are prescribed by law and
are necessary in a democratic society.
More specifically, measures taken to
counter gratuitous portrayal of vio-

Human rights guidelines for online games providers

The portrayal of violence in the electronic media
lence in the electronic media may
legitimately aim at upholding respect
for human dignity and at the protection of vulnerable groups, such as
children and adolescents, whose
physical, mental or moral development may be impaired by exposure
to such portrayal.

Guideline No. 2 – Responsibilities
and means of action of non-state
actors
Those responsible for the content
Member states should recognise and
take into account that it is first and
foremost for those responsible for
the content to assume the duties and
responsibilities which the exercise of
their freedom of expression entails,
since they have primary responsibility for the content of the messages,
words and images they disseminate.
In particular, operators of electronic
media have certain responsibilities
when they decide to disseminate
messages, words and images portraying violence, in view of the potentially harmful effects on the public,
especially young people, as well as on
society as a whole. These responsibilities have been assumed by media
professionals in various ways,
depending on the kind of electronic
media, including, for example:
i. ensuring, through appropriate
means, that the public is made sufficiently aware in advance of messages,
words and images of a violent content which they will make available;
ii. the establishment of sectoral
codes of conduct which specify the
concrete responsibilities of the professional sector concerned;
iii. the establishment of internal
guidelines, including standards for
evaluating content, in the various
electronic media enterprises;
iv. the establishment, at both sectoral level and within individual media
enterprises, of appropriate consultation and control mechanisms for
monitoring the implementation of
self-regulatory standards;
v. taking self-regulatory standards
into account in contracts with other
sectors, such as audiovisual produc-

vi. regular contacts and exchange of
information with national regulatory
authorities, as well as with self-regulatory authorities, in other countries.

respect for human dignity. However,
as concerns the gratuitous portrayal
of violence in the electronic media,
member states only bear subsidiary
responsibility, since the primary
responsibility lies with those responsible for the content.

The various sectors of society

National media policy

Member states should recognise and
take into account the fact that various sectors of society have responsibilities in their own fields of activity.
They may assume their responsibilities in various ways, for example by
approaching those responsible for
the content, in particular by awareness-raising campaigns; by promoting and providing media education;
by promoting or undertaking
research on the portrayal of violence, and so on.

Member states should adopt a global
approach which is not limited to
those responsible for the content but
addresses the professional and social
sectors concerned as a whole. This
approach should, where appropriate,
aim to:

ers, manufacturers of video games,
advertising agencies, and so on;

As regards access to and the use of
electronic media by children and
adolescents at home and at school, as
well as with respect to their understanding of violent messages, words
and images transmitted by these
media, parents and teachers have a
special responsibility. They may
assume this responsibility in various
ways, including by:
i. developing and maintaining a
critical attitude towards the gratuitous portrayal of violence;
ii. using the electronic media in a
conscious and selective manner, as
well as by demanding quality products and services;
iii. stimulating children and adolescents to develop a critical attitude,
for example through media education within the family and in schools;
iv. examining ways of restricting
access of children and adolescents to
the violence portrayed in the electronic media where this is likely to
impair the latter’s physical, mental or
moral development.

Guideline No. 3 – Responsibilities
and means of action of member
states
Member states bear general responsibility for, inter alia, the well-being
of their population, for protecting
human rights and for upholding

i. promote the establishment of
independent regulatory authorities
for the various electronic media.
These
authorities
should
be
endowed with appropriate competence and means for regulating the
portrayal of violence at national
level;
ii. enable electronic media consumers, both national and foreign, who
criticise the violent content of certain services or products, to lodge a
complaint with the regulatory
authority or another competent
national body;
iii. include among the licensing conditions for broadcasters certain obligations concerning the portrayal of
violence, accompanied by dissuasive
measures of an administrative
nature, such as non-renewal of the
licence when these obligations are
not respected;
iv. establish methods to facilitate
the division of responsibilities
between those responsible for the
content and the public (warnings,
“watersheds”, and so on);
v. raise the electronic media professionals’ awareness of the problems
connected with the gratuitous portrayal of violence and the public’s
concern about them;
vi. promote research on the portrayal of violence in the electronic
media, in particular on trends in the
various media, and studies of the
effects of such portrayal on the public.

Human rights guidelines for online games providers

11

Extracts from existing Council of Europe standards
International co-operation
In addition to their existing international obligations and activities carried out within the framework of the
Council of Europe, member States
should co-operate bilaterally and
multilaterally as well as within the
framework of competent international organisations, with a view to
developing policies for addressing
problems related, in particular, to the
international dimension of the gratuitous portrayal of violence in the
electronic media.
In this respect, they should facilitate
the exchange of information and cooperation between competent regulatory authorities, in particular as
concerns content classification and
the handling of any complaints
lodged from abroad.

Legal measures
Where those responsible for the content engage in the gratuitous portrayal of violence which grossly
offends human dignity or which, on
account of its inhuman or degrading

nature, impairs the physical, mental
or moral development of the public,
particularly young people, member
States should effectively apply relevant civil, criminal or administrative
sanctions.
Member states which are not yet
Parties to the European Convention
on Transfrontier Television (1989)
are invited to accede to this instrument. All States Parties to the Convention should ensure its effective
implementation, in particular as concerns the provisions dealing with the
portrayal of violence, and regularly
evaluate its effectiveness. Member
states are also invited to give an
appropriate follow-up to Recommendation No. R (89) 7 of the Committee of Ministers on principles on
the distribution of videograms having a violent, brutal or pornographic
content.

Promotion of non-violent quality
programmes, services and products
Within the framework in particular
of the various national and Euro-

pean programmes of support for the
production and distribution of
audiovisual works, and in close cooperation with European bodies and
professional
circles
concerned,
member states should promote the
principle of non-violent quality programmes, services and products
which reflect the cultural diversity
and richness of European countries.

Guideline No. 4 – Shared
responsibility for electronic media
education
States should consider electronic
media education as a responsibility
shared between themselves, those
responsible for the content and the
various sectors of society. Such education constitutes a particularly
appropriate way of helping the public, especially the young, to develop a
critical attitude in regard to different
forms of portrayal of violence in
these media and to make informed
choices.

Declaration of the Committee of Ministers on protecting the dignity,
security and privacy of children on the Internet1
The Committee of Ministers of the
Council of Europe,
Recalling the fundamental right to
freedom of expression and to receive
and impart information and ideas
without interference by public
authorities and regardless of frontiers, as guaranteed by Article 10 of
the Convention for the Protection of
Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms (European Convention on
Human Rights – ETS No. 5);
Recalling the 1989 United Nations
Convention of the Rights of the
Child, in particular the inherent right
for children to dignity, to special protection and care as is necessary for
their well-being, to protection
against all forms of discrimination or
arbitrary or unlawful interference
with their privacy and to unlawful
attacks on their honour and reputation;

Convinced that the well-being and
best interests of children are fundamental values shared by all member
states, which must be promoted
without any discrimination;
Convinced that the Internet is an
important tool for children’s everyday activities, such as communication, information, knowledge, education and entertainment;
Concerned however by the enduring
presence of content created by children which can be damaging to their
dignity, security, privacy and honour
both now and in the future as adults;
Recalling the Committee of Ministers’ Declaration on freedom of communication on the Internet, adopted
on 28 May 2003, which stresses that
the exercise of such freedom should
not prejudice the dignity or fundamental rights and freedoms of others, especially children;

Conscious that the traceability of
children’s activities via the Internet
may expose them to criminal activities, such as the solicitation of children for sexual purposes, or otherwise illegal or harmful activities,
such as discrimination, bullying,
stalking and other forms of harassment, by others;
Recalling the measures to protect
children referred to in the 2001 Convention on Cybercrime (ETS No.
185), in particular concerning child
pornography, and the 2007 Convention on the Protection of Children
against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse (CETS No. 201), in particular concerning the solicitation of
children for sexual purposes;
Convinced of the need to inform
children about the enduring presence and risks of the content they
create on the Internet and, in this
connection, of the need to develop

1. Adopted on 20 February 2008.

12

Human rights guidelines for online games providers

Measures to promote the respect for freedom of expression and information with regard to Internet filters
and promote their information literacy, defined as the competent use of
tools providing access to information, the development of critical
analysis of content and the appropriation of communication skills to foster citizenship and creativity, as
referred to in Recommendation Rec
(2006) 12 of the Committee of Ministers on empowering children in the
new information and communications environment;
Aware that communication using
new technologies and new information and communication services
must respect the right to privacy and
to secrecy of correspondence, as
guaranteed by Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights
and as elaborated by the case-law of
the European Court of Human
Rights, as well as the Convention for
the Protection of Individuals with
regard to Automatic Processing of
Personal Data (ETS No. 108);

Concerned by the profiling of information and the retention of personal
data regarding children’s activities
for commercial purposes;
Noting the outcome documents of
the United Nations World Summit
on the Information Society (Geneva,
2003/Tunis, 2005), in particular the
2005 Tunis Agenda for the Information Society which reaffirmed the
commitment to effective policies and
frameworks to protect children and
young people from abuse and exploitation through information and communication technologies;
Noting also the mandate of the
United Nations Internet Governance Forum, in particular to identify
emerging issues regarding the development and security of the Internet
and to help find solutions to the
issues arising from the use and misuse of the Internet, of concern to
everyday users;

Aware of the emerging tendency for
certain types of institutions, such as
educational establishments, and prospective employers to seek information about children and young people when deciding on important
issues concerning their lives,
Declares that, other than in the context of law enforcement, there should
be no lasting or permanently accessible record of the content created by
children on the Internet which challenges their dignity, security and privacy or otherwise renders them vulnerable now or at a later stage in
their lives;
Invites member states, together,
where appropriate, with other relevant stakeholders, to explore the feasibility of removing or deleting such
content, including its traces (logs,
records and processing), within a
reasonably short period of time.

Recommendation No. CM/Rec (2008) 6 on measures to promote the
respect for freedom of expression and information with regard to
Internet filters
The Committee of Ministers, under
the terms of Article 15.b of the Statute of the Council of Europe,
Considering that the aim of the
Council of Europe is to achieve
greater unity between its members
for the purpose of safeguarding and
realising the ideals and principles
which are their common heritage;
Recalling that States Parties to the
Convention for the Protection of
Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms (European Convention on
Human Rights, ETS No. 5) have
undertaken to secure to everyone
within their jurisdiction the human
rights and fundamental freedoms
defined in the Convention;
Reaffirming the commitment of
member states to the fundamental
right to freedom of expression and to
receive and impart information and
ideas without interference by public
authorities and regardless of frontiers, as guaranteed by Article 10 of
the European Convention on Human
Rights;

Aware that any intervention by
member states that forbids access to
specific Internet content may constitute a restriction on freedom of
expression and access to information in the online environment and
that such a restriction would have to
fulfil the conditions in Article 10,
paragraph 2, of the European Convention on Human Rights and the
relevant case-law of the European
Court of Human Rights;
Recalling in this respect the Declaration on human rights and the rule of
law in the information society,
adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 13 May 2005, according to
which member states should maintain and enhance legal and practical
measures to prevent state and private
censorship;
Recalling Recommendation Rec
(2007) 11 of the Committee of Ministers to member states on promoting freedom of expression and information in the new information and
communications
environment,
according to which member states,

the private sector and civil society
are encouraged to develop common
standards and strategies to promote
transparency and the provision of
information, guidance and assistance to the individual users of technologies and services concerning,
inter alia, the blocking of access to
and filtering of content and services
with regard to the right to receive
and impart information;
Noting that the voluntary and
responsible use of Internet filters
(products, systems and measures to
block or filter Internet content) can
promote confidence and security on
the Internet for users, in particular
children and young people, while
also aware that the use of such filters
can impact on the right to freedom
of expression and information, as
protected by Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights;
Recalling Recommendation Rec
(2006) 12 of the Committee of Ministers on empowering children in the
new information and communications environment, which under-

Human rights guidelines for online games providers

13

Extracts from existing Council of Europe standards
lines the importance of information
literacy and training strategies for
children to enable them to better
understand and deal with content
(for example violence and self-harm,
pornography, discrimination and
racism) and behaviours (such as
grooming, bullying, harassment or
stalking) carrying a risk of harm,
thereby promoting a greater sense of
confidence, well-being and respect
for others in the new information
and communications environment;
Convinced of the necessity to ensure
that users are made aware of, understand and are able to effectively use,
adjust and control filters according
to their individual needs;
Recalling Recommendation Rec
(2001) 8 of the Committee of Ministers on self-regulation concerning
cybercontent (self-regulation and
user protection against illegal or
harmful content on new communications and information services),
which encourages the neutral labelling of content to enable users to
make their own value judgements
over such content and the development of a wide range of search tools
and filtering profiles, which provide
users with the ability to select content on the basis of content descriptors;
Aware of the public service value of
the Internet, understood as people’s
significant reliance on the Internet as
an essential tool for their everyday
activities (communication, information, knowledge, commercial transactions, entertainment) and the
resulting legitimate expectation that
Internet services be accessible,
affordable, secure, reliable and ongoing and recalling in this regard Recommendation Rec (2007) 16 of the
Committee of Ministers on measures
to promote the public service value
of the Internet;
Recalling the Declaration of the
Committee of Ministers on freedom
of communication on the Internet of
28 May 2003, which stresses that
public authorities should not,
through general blocking or filtering
measures, deny access by the public
to information and other communication on the Internet, regardless of
frontiers, but that this does not pre-

14

vent the installation of filters for the
protection of minors, in particular in
places accessible to them, such as
schools or libraries;
Reaffirming the commitment of
member states to everyone’s right to
private life and secrecy of correspondence, as protected by Article 8
of the European Convention on
Human Rights, and recalling the
Convention for the Protection of
Individuals with regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data
(ETS No. 108) and its Additional
Protocol regarding supervisory
authorities and transborder data
flows (ETS No. 181) as well as Recommendation No. R (99) 5 of the
Committee of Ministers on the protection of privacy on the Internet,
Recommends that member states
adopt common standards and strategies with regard to Internet filters to
promote the full exercise and enjoyment of the right to freedom of
expression and information and
related rights and freedoms in the
European Convention on Human
Rights, in particular by:
• taking measures with regard to
Internet filters in line with the guidelines set out in the appendix to this
recommendation;
• bringing these guidelines to the
attention of all relevant private and
public sector stakeholders, in particular those who design, use (install,
activate, deactivate and implement)
and monitor Internet filters, and to
civil society, so that they may contribute to their implementation.

Appendix to
Recommendation CM/Rec
(2008) 6: Guidelines
Using and controlling Internet filters
in order to fully exercise and enjoy
the right to freedom of expression
and information
Users’ awareness, understanding of
and ability to effectively use Internet
filters are key factors which enable
them to fully exercise and enjoy their
human rights and fundamental
freedoms, in particular the right to
freedom of expression and information, and to participate actively in

democratic processes. When confronted with filters, users must be
informed that a filter is active and,
where appropriate, be able to identify
and to control the level of filtering
the content they access is subject to.
Moreover, they should have the possibility to challenge the blocking or
filtering of content and to seek clarifications and remedies.
In co-operation with the private sector and civil society, member states
should ensure that users are made
aware of activated filters and, where
appropriate, are able to activate and
deactivate them and be assisted in
varying the level of filtering in operation, in particular by:
i. developing and promoting a
minimum level of information for
users to enable them to identify
when filtering has been activated and
to understand how, and according to
which criteria, the filtering operates
(for example, blacklists, whitelists,
keyword blocking, content rating,
etc., or combinations thereof );
ii. developing minimum levels of
and standards for the information
provided to the user to explain why a
specific type of content has been filtered;
iii. regularly reviewing and updating filters in order to improve their
effectiveness, proportionality and
legitimacy in relation to their
intended purpose;
iv. providing clear and concise
information and guidance regarding
the manual overriding of an activated filter, namely whom to contact
when it appears that content has
been unreasonably blocked and the
reasons which may allow a filter to be
overridden for a specific type of content or Uniform Resource Locator
(URL);
v. ensuring that content filtered by
mistake or error can be accessed
without undue difficulty and within a
reasonable time;
vi. promoting initiatives to raise
awareness of the social and ethical
responsibilities of those actors who
design, use and monitor filters with
particular regard to the right to freedom of expression and information
and to the right to private life, as well

Human rights guidelines for online games providers

Measures to promote the respect for freedom of expression and information with regard to Internet filters
as to the active participation in public life and democratic processes;
vii. raising awareness of the potential
limitations to freedom of expression
and information and the right to private life resulting from the use of filters and of the need to ensure proportionality of such limitations;
viii.facilitating an exchange of experiences and best practices with
regard to the design, use and monitoring of filters;
ix. encouraging the provision of
training courses for network administrators, parents, educators and
other people using and monitoring
filters;
x. promoting and co-operating with
existing initiatives to foster responsible use of filters in compliance with
human rights, democracy and the
rule of law;
xi. fostering filtering standards and
benchmarks to help users choose
and best control filters.
In this context, civil society should
be encouraged to raise users’ awareness of the potential benefits and
dangers of filters. This should
include promoting the importance
and significance of free and unhindered access to the Internet so that
every individual user may fully exercise and enjoy their human rights
and fundamental freedoms, in particular the right to freedom of
expression and information and the
right to private life, as well as to
effectively participate in public life
and democratic processes.

Appropriate filtering for children and
young people
The Internet has significantly
increased the number and diversity
of ideas, information and opinions
which people may receive and impart
in the fulfilment of their right to freedom of expression and information
without interference by public
authorities and regardless of frontiers. At the same time, it has
increased the amount of readily
available content carrying a risk of
harm, particularly for children and
young people. To satisfy the legitimate desire and duty of member
states to protect children and young

people from content carrying a risk
of harm, the proportionate use of filters can constitute an appropriate
means of encouraging access to and
confident use of the Internet and be a
complement to other strategies on
how to tackle harmful content, such
as the development and provision of
information literacy.

into account the diversity of cultures,
values and opinions;

In this context, member states
should:

iv. promote the interoperability of
systems for the self-classification of
content by providers and help to
increase awareness about the potential benefits and dangers of such classification models.

i. facilitate the development of
strategies to identify content carrying a risk of harm for children and
young people, taking into account
the diversity of cultures, values and
opinions;
ii. co-operate with the private sector and civil society to avoid overprotection of children and young
people by, inter alia, supporting
research and development for the
production of “intelligent” filters that
take more account of the context in
which the information is provided
(for example by differentiating
between harmful content itself and
unproblematic references to it, such
as may be found on scientific websites);
iii. facilitate and promote initiatives
that assist parents and educators in
the selection and use of developmental-age appropriate filters for children and young people;
iv. inform children and young people about the benefits and dangers of
Internet content and its filtering as
part of media education strategies in
formal and non-formal education.
Furthermore, the private
should be encouraged to:

sector

i. develop “intelligent” filters offering
developmental-age appropriate filtering which can be adapted to follow the child’s progress and age
while, at the same time, ensuring that
filtering does not occur when the
content is deemed neither harmful
nor unsuitable for the group which
the filter has been activated to protect;
ii. co-operate with self- and co-regulatory bodies in order to develop
standards for developmental-age
appropriate rating systems for content carrying a risk of harm, taking

iii. develop, in co-operation with
civil society, common labels for filters to assist parents and educators
in making informed choices when
acquiring filters and to certify that
they meet certain quality requirements;

Moreover, civil society should be
encouraged to:
i. debate and share their experiences and knowledge when assessing and raising awareness of the
development and use of filters as a
protective measure for children and
young people;
ii. regularly monitor and analyse
the use and impact of filters for children and young people, with particular regard to their effectiveness and
their contribution to the exercise and
enjoyment of the rights and
freedoms guaranteed by Article 10
and other provisions of the European
Convention on Human Rights.

Use and application of Internet filters
by the public and private sector
Notwithstanding the importance of
empowering users to use and control filters as mentioned above, and
noting the wider public service value
of the Internet, public actors on all
levels (such as administrations,
libraries and educational institutions) which introduce filters or use
them when delivering services to the
public, should ensure full respect for
all users’ right to freedom of expression and information and their right
to private life and secrecy of correspondence.
In this context, member states
should:
i. refrain from filtering Internet
content in electronic communications networks operated by public
actors for reasons other than those
laid down in Article 10, paragraph 2,
of the European Convention on

Human rights guidelines for online games providers

15

Extracts from existing Council of Europe standards
Human Rights, as interpreted by the
European Court of Human Rights;
ii. guarantee that nationwide general blocking or filtering measures
are only introduced by the state if the
conditions of Article 10, paragraph 2,
of the European Convention on
Human Rights are fulfilled. Such
action by the state should only be
taken if the filtering concerns specific and clearly identifiable content,
a competent national authority has
taken a decision on its illegality and
the decision can be reviewed by an
independent and impartial tribunal
or regulatory body, in accordance
with the requirements of Article 6 of
the European Convention on Human
Rights;
iii. introduce, where appropriate
and necessary, provisions under
national law for the prevention of
intentional abuse of filters to restrict
citizens’ access to lawful content;
iv. ensure that all filters are assessed
both before and during their implementation to ensure that the effects
of the filtering are proportionate to
the purpose of the restriction and

16

thus necessary in a democratic society, in order to avoid unreasonable
blocking of content;

i. regularly assess and review the
effectiveness and proportionality
regarding the introduction of filters;

v. provide for effective and readily
accessible means of recourse and
remedy, including suspension of filters, in cases where users and/or
authors of content claim that content
has been blocked unreasonably;

ii. strengthen the information and
guidance to users who are subject to
filters in private networks, including
information about the existence of,
and reasons for, the use of a filter and
the criteria upon which the filter
operates;

vi. avoid the universal and general
blocking of offensive or harmful content for users who are not part of the
group which a filter has been activated to protect, and of illegal content for users who justifiably demonstrate a legitimate interest or need to
access such content under exceptional circumstances, particularly for
research purposes;
vii. ensure that the right to private
life and secrecy of correspondence is
respected when using and applying
filters and that personal data logged,
recorded and processed via filters are
only used for legitimate and noncommercial purposes.
Furthermore, member states and the
private sector are encouraged to:

iii. co-operate with users (customers, employees, etc.) to improve the
transparency, effectiveness and proportionality of filters.
In this context, civil society should
be encouraged to follow the development and deployment of filters both
by key state and private sector actors.
It should, where appropriate, call
upon member states and the private
sector, respectively, to ensure and to
facilitate all users’ right to freedom of
expression and information, in particular as regards their freedom to
receive information without interference by public authorities and
regardless of frontiers in the new
information and communications
environment.

Human rights guidelines for online games providers

Developed by the Council of Europe in close co-operation with the Interactive
Software Federation of Europe (ISFE), these guidelines provide human rights
benchmarks for online games providers and developers. While underlining the
primary value of games as tools for expression and communication, they stress the
importance of gamers safety and their right to privacy and freedom of expression
and, in this connection, the importance for the games industry to be aware of the
human rights impact that games can have.

For more information on the activities
of the Council of Europe and ISFE:
www.coe.int • www.isfe-eu.org

Directorate General
of Human Rights and Legal Affairs
Council of Europe
F-67075 Strasbourg Cedex

