Strasbourg, 4 October 2001

ECRML (2001) 4

European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

APPLICATION OF THE CHARTER IN HUNGARY

A.

Report of the Committee of Experts on the Charter

B.

Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers of
the Council of Europe on the application of the
Charter by Hungary

The European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages provides for a control
mechanism to evaluate how the Charter is applied in a State Party with a view to,
where necessary, making Recommendations for improvements in its legislation,
policy and practices. The central element of this procedure is the Committee of
Experts, established in accordance with Article 17 of the Charter. Its principal
purpose is to report to the Committee of Ministers on its evaluation of compliance
by a Party with its undertakings, to examine the real situation of the regional or
minority languages in the State and, where appropriate, to encourage the Party to
gradually reach a higher level of commitment.
To facilitate this task, the Committee of Ministers adopted, in accordance with
Article 15.1, an outline for the initial periodical report that a Party is required to
submit to the Secretary General. The report should be made public by the State.
This outline requires the State to give an account of the concrete application of the
Charter, the general policy for the languages protected under its Part II and in
more precise terms all measures that have been taken in application of the
provisions chosen for each language protected under Part III of the Charter. The
Committee’s first task is therefore to examine the information contained in the
initial periodical report for all the relevant regional or minority languages on the
territory of the State concerned.
The Committee’s role is to evaluate the existing legal acts, regulations and real
practice applied in each State for its regional or minority languages. It has
established its working methods accordingly. The Committee gathers information
from the respective authorities and from independent sources within the State, so
as to attempt to obt ain a just and fair overview of the real language situation. After
a preliminary examination of an initial periodical report, the Committee submits, if
necessary, a number of questions to each Party to procure supplementary
information from the authorities on matters it considers insufficiently developed in
the report itself. This written procedure is usually followed up by an “on-the-spot
visit” of a delegation of the Committee to the respective State. During this visit the
delegation meets bodies and associations whose work is closely related to the
use of the relevant languages, and consults the authorities on matters that have
been brought to its attention. This information-gathering process is designed to
enable the Committee to better evaluate the application of the Charter in the State
concerned.
Having concluded this process, the Committee of Experts adopts its own report.
This report is submitted to the Committee of Ministers together with suggestions
for recommendations that the latter could decide to address to one or more
Parties as may be required.

2

CONTENTS

A.

B.

Report of the Committee of Experts on the application of
the Charter in Hungary ……………………………….

5

Chapter 1:

Background information …………………

7

Chapter 2:

The Committee’s evaluation in respect of
Part II and Part III of the Charter ………..

11

Chapter 3:

Findings of the Committee ……………….

35

Appendix I:
Appendix II:

Instrument of ratification ……………….
Comments of the Hungarian authorities

39
41

Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers of the
Council of Europe on the application of the Charter by
Hungary …………………………………………………….

3

47

Strasbourg, 7 February 2001

European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

A. Report of the Committee of Experts on the application of the Charter

presented to the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
in accordance with Article 16 of the Charter

HUNGARY

CONTENTS
Chapter 1

Background information

1.1
1.2
1.3

The work of the Committee of Experts
Presentation of the regional or minority language situation in Hungary
Particular issues arising in the evaluation of the application of the
Charter in Hungary

Chapter 2

The Committee’s evaluation in respect of Part II and Part III of the
Charter

2.1
2.2

The evaluation in respect of Part II of the Charter
The evaluation in respect of Part III of the Charter

Chapter 3

Conclusions

Appendix I:

Instrument of Ratification

Appendix II: Comments of the Hungarian authorities

6

Chapter 1

Background information

1.
The Republic of Hungary signed the European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages (hereafter referred to as the Charter) on 5 November 1992 and
deposited its instrument of ratification on 26 April 1995. The Charter entered into
force for Hungary on 1 March 1998. The Hungarian authorities published the text of
the Charter in the Official Gazette in Volume 1999, N°. 34.
2.
In accordance with Article 15.1 of the Charter, Hungary presented its initial
periodical report to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe on 7 September
1999. The Hungarian report was not made accessible to the general public in written
form by the authorities in accordance with the requirement in Article 15.2. However,
at the time of adoption of this report, the Government made it accessible to the public
on its official website.
3.

This report was adopted by the Committee of Experts on 6 February 2001.

1.1

The work of the Committee of Experts

4.
After the Committee of Experts had made its preliminary examination of the
Hungarian report, a questionnaire was drawn up and addressed to the Hungarian
authorities. The Committee received the replies shortly before its “on-the-spot visit”
organised in Hungary in April 2000. During the “on-the-spot visit”, the Committee met
the Parliamentary Commissioner for the Rights of Minorities, the representatives of
regional or minority language associations, members of Parliamentary Committee of
Human Rights, Religious Freedom and Minorities, representatives of minority selfgovernments and the Office for National and Ethnic Minorities. On the same occasion
the Committee had the opportunity to consult with representatives of relevant
Ministries. The Committee travelled to various municipalities in Pest County and
visited schools where regional or minority languages are used, local administrations
and cultural institutions.
5.
On the basis of the information gathered from the initial periodical report, the
questionnaires and the “on-the-spot-visit”, the Committee of Experts was better able
to prepare its evaluation of the application of the Charter in the Republic of Hungary.
6.
The Committee has established a list of general proposals for the preparation
of recommendations of the Committee of Ministers to Hungary, as provided in Article
16.4 (Chapter 3.2 of this report). Furthermore, where necessary, the Committee has
made in the body of the report more detailed observations which it encourages the
Hungarian authorities to take into consideration when developing their policy with
regard to regional or minority languages.
7.
This report is based on the political and legal situation at the time when the
Charter was ratified by Hungary and at the time when Hungary presented its initial
periodical report to the Council of Europe. The Committee is aware of the fact that
changes in legislation and practice may have taken place at a later stage. These
changes will be taken into account in the next report of the Committee of Experts
concerning Hungary.

7

1.2

Presentation of the regional or minority language situation in Hungary

8.
In its instrument of ratification Hungary has identified the following languages
as protected under Part III: Croatian, German, Romanian, Serbian, Slovak and
Slovene. The instrument of ratification, which is reproduced in Appendix I to this
report, has been drawn up in such a manner as to provide the exact same level of
protection for each of these six languages. The Charter, however, is constructed in
such a way that the State can adapt the protection of the various languages to the
real situation of each language. That is indeed the principal justification for the right
accorded to each State Party in Article 2.2 to choose among the provisions of Part III.
9.
The last population census was carried out in Hungary in 1990. Two figures
are provided for each language, one identifying the number of persons belonging to
the minority and the second identifying the number of mother tongue speakers. The
number of mother tongue speakers identified in the 1990 census is presented below
and not the number of persons belonging to the specific minority. The Committee is
aware of the fact that the number of persons having command of a regional or
minority language can be higher than those that consider it a mother tongue.
Language

Croatian

Mother tongue
speakers
(minorities)
17.577

German

37.511

Romanian

8.730

Serbian

2.953

Slovak

12.745

Slovene
Roma/Gypsies

2.627
48.072

Regions
with
significant
concentrations
of
minority
language speakers
Baranya
and
Bács-Kiskun
Counties
Györ-Moson-Sopron, Vas and
Zala Counties
Budapest
Baranya County
Pest County
Györ-Moson-Sopron, KomáromEsztergom
and
Veszprém
Counties
Bács-Kiskun and Tolna Counties
Békés County
Hajdú-Bihar
and
Csongrád
Counties
Budapest
Budapest and surrounding Pest
County
Bács-Kiskun,
Baranya
and
Csongrád Counties
Békés County
Pest and Komárom-Esztergom
Counties
Vas County
The various languages of the
Roma/Gypsy communities are
used on the whole of the territory
of Hungary

10.
Besides these larger communities of regional or minority language users
there exist several small communities of users of minority languages traditionally
spoken in Hungary. The official statistics list them as Armenian, Greek, Bulgarian,
Polish, Ukrainian and Ruthenian. Except for the Polish community, for which the

8

official number of native speakers exceeds 3.000, these communities are rather
small, with not much more than 1.000 speakers (or even less in the case of the
Armenians, Ukrainians and Ruthenians). The small communities seem to be rather
scattered, with concentrations only in Budapest. Only the Polish and Ruthenian
communities have sizeable settlements, both situated in the north-east of Hungary.
11.
The numbers of minority-language speakers in general are rather disputed.
Owing to the historical situation of minority languages during the last few decades, it
is evident that users of such languages are reluctant to declare officially that they are
mother-tongue speakers of a minority language. The official census thus
systematically underestimated the number of users of regional or minority languages.
On the other hand, estimates given by the minority associations themselves are not
necessarily reliable. It is obvious, however, that the numbers of minority language
users are higher than the figures in the 1990 census, even if one looks into the
differences of official statistics. The official numbers (counted in 1990) of people
having command of the minority languages are much higher than the numbers of
native speakers counted in the census of 1990, in case of German at least five times
as high as the official number of native speakers. Estimates run up to more than
500.000 Roma/Gypsies (with some 150.000 speaking a minority language), more
than 200.000 German-speakers, some 100.000 Slovaks speakers and 80.00090.000 Croatians-speakers In the case of the other languages, differences in
numbers are not as extreme, lying mostly below 10.000 (with the exception of
Romanian – 25.000 – and Polish – some 10.000).
12.
The socio-linguistic situation makes it extremely difficult (if not impossible) to
come to reliable numbers. Minority language communities are well integrated (with
the exception of Roma/Gypsies). Large segments of them are in a process of
wholesale assimilation. Practically all the speakers of minority languages live in a
situation of “diglossia”, speaking Hungarian like a mother tongue and using it daily as
the main medium of communication. Some 40%-60% of the adult minority population
lives in ethnically mixed marriages, in which the minority language often will not be
transferred to the following generation. As a consequence, the number of native
speakers of minority languages steadily declines, with two important exceptions: the
Gypsy and German languages, which have experienced a revival during the last ten
years.
13.
The situation of Roma/Gypsies is of particular complexity. The majority of
Roma/Gypsies have lost their native language, speaking only Hungarian as mother
tongue (although often with severe deficiencies in linguistic skills). Only some 20% of
people of Roma/Gypsy origin still speak Romani. An additional 10% of
Roma/Gypsies still use ´Beas´, an archaic version of the Romanian language. For
the purpose of the Charter, only these some 30% of minority-language-speaking
Roma/Gypsies are relevant, not the large majority of Hungarian-speaking
Roma/Gypsies whose main problems are social exclusion and discrimination.
1.3

Particular issues arising in the evaluation of the application of the
Charter in Hungary

14.
The Committee recognises that the Hungarian instrument of ratification
promises protection that is far-reaching on a normative scale. It undertakes to protect
the users of regional or minority languages in all the places where they are living,
extending the protection over the entire territory of the Republic. Such an approach
has some justification bearing in mind the drastic changes in the social and economic
situation and the demographic changes, which have territorially uprooted significant

9

numbers of users of regional or minority languages. The instrument of ratification is
based on internal minority legislation developed during the past ten years. The
Committee recognises that Hungary has undertaken an ambitious effort in drafting a
form of a model legislation on the protection of minorities, resulting in a scheme of
functional autonomy of minorities that has found wide recognition. The legislation is
directed towards the rights of minorities including the protection and promotion of
regional or minority languages. Bearing in mind the recent origin of such legislation,
as well as its experimental character and the lack of material resources typical for a
country in transition, one should not be astonished that there still exist severe
difficulties in implementing the ambitious scheme developed by Hungarian
legislation. The Committee learned during its “on-the-spot visit” and its evaluation of
the Hungarian situation that there continue to exist severe deficiencies in the
practical implementation of the minority legislation. The competent Hungarian
authorities very frankly admitted that such deficiencies still exist and thus showed a
consciousness of the existing problems and a willingness to overcome them in the
future. The Committee acknowledges this positive atmosphere.
15.
At the time of the presentation of the initial periodical report to the Council of
Europe, the following legal acts and provisions were relevant to the application of the
Charter:
§
§

The Constitution of the Republic of Hungary, specifically Articles 68 and 70/A;
The Act LXXVII of 1993 on the Rights of National and Ethnic Minorities.

These two basic instruments prescribe the use of regional or minority languages in
Hungary, with reference in detail to other legal instruments that are to implement
these provisions. These instruments include, inter alia, Act LXIV of 1990 on the
Election of Local Self-Government Representatives and Mayors, Act I of 1973 on
Criminal Procedure, Act LXXIX of 1993 on Public Education, Act CXL of 1997 on the
Protection of Cultural Goods, Museum Institutions, the Supply of Public Libraries, and
Public Education, as well as Act I of 1996 on Radio and Television Broadcasting. On
the legislative scale, protection of minorities and regional or minority languages is
rather elaborate and has the potential to serve as a model for future development of
minority protection in Europe.
16.
Due to the specific socio-linguistic situation in Hungary, however,
implementation of such ambitious legislation has to cope with important obstacles.
The extension of linguistic rights to the entire territory of Hungary, irrespective of any
demographic concentration of minority-language speakers, makes it extremely
difficult, if not impossible, for the authorities to take the necessary organisational
measures in advance which are needed to make linguistic rights operational. This is
less of a problem in education, where the existence of certain minimum numbers of
minority-language-speaking pupils makes it possible to organise education in the
minority language in public schools. To implement linguistic rights in public
administration and the judiciary, however, specific organisational measures are
needed in advance. Public authorities have to adopt certain modifications of routine
administrative procedures and have to hire administrative personnel qualified in
minority languages. If such measures are not taken in advance, speakers of minority
languages that insist on the use of their language when dealing with public
authorities are easily perceived as “trouble-makers". This is particularly true in a
“diglossia” situation like the Hungarian one, where practically all the users of minority
languages master the Hungarian language as a second mother tongue. Deficiencies
in the organisational adaptation to linguistic rights will usually create a social climate
hostile to any public use of minority languages, which – as can be seen in Hungary –
makes the elaborate legislative scheme on the use of minority languages largely

10

inoperational in practice. It also creates a danger of undermining the credibility of the
legislation itself. It is obvious that overcoming such a situation is not a mere question
of political will, but is linked to questions of public resources and to the general
reform of structures of public administration. Accordingly, it will take considerable
time to overcome these difficulties.
Chapter 2

The Committee’s evaluation in respect of Part II and Part III of the
Charter

17.
The text of the Charter, when read in conjunction with the instrument of
ratification, indicates in some detail the exact undertakings that apply in respect of
the different languages in the areas covered by the Charter. The Committee has
therefore evaluated how Hungary has fulfilled each undertaking in Article 7 for Part II
and in Articles 8-14 for Part III, using the paragraphs and sub-paragraphs specified in
the instrument of ratification.
2.1 The evaluation in respect of Part II of the Charter
18.
Part II of the Charter sets out a number of general objectives and principles
that a Party is obliged to apply to all the regional or minority languages on its territory.
Hungary did not specify explicitly in its instrument of ratification or its initial periodical
report or in its replies to the Committee’s questions, which languages besides those
identified for Part III are considered as regional or minority languages in accordance
with the definition in the Charter.
19.
Chapter 1(2) of Act LXXVII of 1993 on the Rights of National and Ethnic
Minorities (hereafter referred to as the Minorities Act) gives an abstract definition of
the notion of ´minorities´. According to the same act, the autochthonous minorities of
Hungary comprise the communities of Armenians, Bulgarians, Croatians, Germans,
Roma/Gypsies (speaking Romany and Beas), Greek, Polish, Romanians,
Ruthenians, Serbs, Slovaks, Slovenes and Ukrainians. There are no indications that
other linguistic communities fulfilling the requirements of Art.1 (a) of the Charter exist
in Hungary. Minority languages within the meaning of the Charter which are not
covered by Part III are thus Armenian, Bulgarian, Romany, Beas, Greek, Polish,
Ruthenian and Ukrainian. The number of users of these languages is rather diverse.
By far the largest of these communities is the group of Romany-speaking
Roma/Gypsies, speaking a variety called Lovari, estimated at some 100.000
speakers. The other large minority-language community is the Beas-speaking
Roma/Gypsies (Beas being an archaic version of Romanian taken over by an
important group of South-Eastern European Roma/Gypsies some centuries ago).
The size of this community is estimated at some 50.000 speakers. All the other
linguistic minorities not covered by Part III are rather small in numbers. Two of these
small communities probably have to be qualified as having a territorial base, since
both communities historically settled in the north-east of Hungary in (still existing)
distinct settlements. The few Ruthenian villages have some thousands of inhabitants
(with minority-language speakers ranging from several hundreds counted in the
census of 1990 up to 6.000 according to unofficial estimates). The Polish community
is larger, with nearly 4.000 native Polish-speakers according to the official census of
1990 and an estimated number of up to 10.000. The Armenian, Bulgarian, Greek and
Ukrainian communities are scattered throughout the country, living mostly in urban
centres, particularly Budapest. The size of these communities is rather small,
encompassing some 2.000-4.000 members at the most, with only parts of them still
speaking the minority language. Some of these communities, like the Armenians and

11

Greek, however, have a long tradition of preserving their cultural and linguistic
identity in expatriate colonies with an intensive community life and an elaborate
system of community education.
Article 7 - Objectives and principles
“Paragraphe 1
In respect of regional or minority languages, within the territories in which such languages are
used and according to the situation of each language, the Parties shall base their policies,
legislation and practice on the following objectives and principles:
a.

the recognition of the regional or minority languages as an expression of cultural
wealth;”

20.
The Committee of Experts considered that the languages specified in the
instrument of ratification have been recognised by the Hungarian State in accordance
with this obligation, i.e. the Croatian, German, Romanian, Serbian, Slovak and
Slovene languages. As for the other languages, the Minorities Act of 1993 in its
Section 42 recognises these linguistic groups also as autochthonous minorities
protected by Hungarian legislation. They are included in the system of minority selfgovernments and receive funding from the State. The initial periodical report states
that there is virtually no demand on the part of the speakers of six of the eight
languages not included in Part III with respect to the use of their languages and
seems to deduce from this fact that the members of these communities are not
interested in preserving their language and culture. Given the practical impossibility
to use these languages (Armenian, Bulgarian, Greek, Polish, Ruthenian and
Ukrainian) in education and before public authorities, such reluctance by the
speakers of these languages to insist on language rights is understandable. But one
should not deduce from such reluctance a lack of will on their part to preserve their
cultural and linguistic identity. Indeed, the Committee has noted that the speakers of
these languages have made use of the possibility to form minority self-governments
and use State funding received through that system for educational and cultural
purposes.
21.
The situation is different with the two minority languages used by Hungarian
Roma/Gypsies. The number of users of these languages is quite considerable, and
the Hungarian Government has undertaken certain efforts to upgrade the social
standing of these languages. Because the traditional prestige of these two
Roma/Gypsy languages has been extremely low, much more effort is needed to raise
their reputation as a means of communication. Without an energetic effort and
constant symbolic gestures, it will be difficult to overcome deeply rooted historical
prejudice against the two Roma/Gypsy languages. The practical recognition of these
two languages as an expression of cultural wealth of Hungary and as part of the
European cultural heritage needs a high political profile in order to have positive
consequences in the public consciousness.

12

“b.

the respect of the geographical area of each regional or minority language in
order to ensure that existing or new administrative divisions do not constitute an
obstacle to the promotion of the regional or minority language in question;”

22.
Although there seems to be no explicit mechanisms ensuring the respect of
the geographical area of each regional or minority language, there are no indications
that any problem has arisen in that regard in recent years. Bearing in mind the
geographical dispersion of users of minority languages in Hungary, the determination
of territorial divisions for administrative purposes will probably affect the promotion of
minority languages only on the level of the division of local self-government units.
The general legislative schemes ensuring participation of the local communities
concerned seem to protect minority languages adequately.
“c.

the need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in order to
safeguard them;”

23.
Hungary has taken important initiatives that raise the awareness of the need
to protect and promote regional or minority languages, both by the establishment of
the Governmental Office for National and Ethnic Minorities and by the work of the
Parliamentary Committee for Human Rights, Minorities and Religions. Of particular
significance has been the creation of the office of Parliamentary Commissioner for
National and Ethnic Minority Rights (Minorities Ombudsman) and the development of
the scheme of minority self-governments instituted by the Minorities Act of 1993. The
office of Parliamentary Commissioner for National and Ethnic Minority Rights
(Minorities Ombudsman) was legally instituted by Subsection (2) of Section 32/B of
the Constitution; the first Ombudsman (a member of a linguistic minority) was elected
by Parliament in July 1995. The Ombudsman deals with all complaints linked to
alleged infringements of minority rights and has successfully mediated in a series of
cases where minority rights had been violated. Although only two cases have dealt
with linguistic issues, the Ombudsman’s activities have raised awareness of the need
for resolute action in favour of minority languages. The creation of the system of
minority self-governments has also raised public attention for minority issues in
general and could further help to develop a public consciousness of the needs of
minority languages.
“d.

the facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of regional or minority
languages, in speech and writing, in public and private life;”

24.
The users of all regional or minority languages in Hungary have the possibility
of using their language in public life. The term “public life” is fairly wide and could
include the use of the language in education, justice, administration, economic and
social life and cultural life as well as in transfrontier exchanges. This is developed in
the next chapter in respect of the Part III languages. As for the other languages, the
Committee did not receive sufficient information to permit it to evaluate how the use
of the other languages in public life is facilitated or encouraged. The Minorities Act of
1993 as well as the specific minority language provisions in other acts cover also
these languages and on paper guarantee the right of the users of these minority
languages to use the language in public life, such as in relations with the
administration and before the courts as well as in economic and social life. Since no
organisational measures have been taken to enable the administration, the judiciary
and public services to deal with the public in such languages, the guarantees are by
and large inoperational in practice. The Government Office for National and Ethnic
Minorities finances programmes of minority self-governments and associations that
promote some of these minority languages and cultures. For the Polish and
Ruthenian communities that are territorially rooted in distinct settlements, the
Hungarian Government could develop certain active programmes in order to foster
the use of their languages in public life. As far as the other minority languages are

13

concerned, the promotion of their public use will meet severe difficulties, due to the
dispersion of these communities.
“e.

the maintenance and development of links, in the fields covered by this Charter,
between groups using a regional or minority language and other groups in the
State employing a language used in identical or similar form, as well as the
establishment of cultural relations with other groups in the State using different
languages;”

25.
The multi-level system of minority self-governments ensures that users of the
same minority language inside Hungary have close links with each other since they
form altogether an upper level of self-administration in the form of a national selfgovernment. This national body serves as a spokesperson towards the national
government and enables the local and regional levels of self-government to coordinate their activities. Links between the various groups using regional or minority
languages also seem to be quite close, with an intense co-operation of minority
associations and self-governments on local and regional level, and also on the
national level.
“f.

the provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of
regional or minority languages at all appropriate stages;”

26.
The Committee has found that the legislative framework for the teaching of
the regional or minority languages in Hungary is well developed and endeavours to
solve the problems of minority education. Practical implementation of this legislative
framework, however, still has to cope with serious difficulties. The comments on the
Part III languages are set out in the next section of this chapter. As for the Part II
languages, the Act on Public Education provides – as for the Part III languages - that
on the initiative of at least eight parents an independent school class or study group
has to be established. In so far as such a demand is apparent, the local selfgovernment that is responsible for primary schooling is obliged to organise and
maintain education in the minority language, in a form which meets the demands of
the parents. For secondary and other higher education, comparable rules exist. The
organisational details have to be fixed by the responsible authorities, which leaves
room for considerable variations. Since the Hungarian Government has not given
detailed information concerning minority language education in the languages not
covered by Part III, it is difficult for the Committee to judge whether the Hungarian
authorities have directed their policies and practice towards the objective of providing
appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of the relevant minority
languages at all appropriate stages. At least for the two Part II languages having a
territorial base, Polish and Ruthenian, educational policies should lead to an
appropriate scheme of minority language education at public schools in the
respective minority settlements. For both languages, education seems to be based
purely on Sunday schools up to now. In addition, the importance of the availability of
appropriate teaching materials, as a foundation of good teaching in and of the
language, has to be stressed. This is particularly true for native language training in
Romani and Beas. There exist practically no textbooks and manuals. If at all, higher
education offers only some courses in “Roma studies”, but almost no language
education in Romani, and none in Beas. To change this situation in the short or
medium term will be extremely difficult, since there is hardly any professional training
of teachers in Romani and Beas, which in turn makes it practically impossible to
introduce education in these languages in the curriculum on an organised basis. The

14

first step to improve this situation of the languages would be to train teachers and
produce teaching materials.
“g.

the provision of facilities enabling non-speakers of a regional or minority
language living in the area where it is used to learn it if they so desire;”

27.
The Committee found that no provisions exist that promote the teaching of
minority languages to non-speakers of the language living inside the area where it is
mostly used. The organisation of such classes is allowed on the initiative of private
organisers. The scheme of minority language education at public schools is also in
principle open for pupils from other linguistic groups. In the case of the German
schools, there is a significant proportion of Hungarian-speaking children attending
these schools. If resources are scarce, this might lead, however, to shortages in
minority language education for children of the minority itself. In general, there seems
to be no measure that specifically facilitates the learning of a regional or minority
language by non-speakers in the area where they reside and the language is used.
Such endeavour would be a positive step in furthering tolerance on the part of those
that speak the official language and should be actively encouraged by the State.
“h.

the promotion of study and research on regional or minority languages at
universities or equivalent institutions;”

28.
Government funds exist to finance research on the various regional or
minority languages. This is a good initiative on the part of the authorities and should
be continued and enlarged in scope. In particular the study and research on the
Romani and Beas languages should be intensified and the funds devoted to this
purpose increased, bearing in mind the high numbers of speakers of these
languages and the severity of the problems they experience.
“i.

the promotion of appropriate types of transnational exchanges, in the fields
covered by this Charter, for regional or minority languages used in identical or
similar form in two or more States.”

29.
The Hungarian authorities have taken initiatives to encourage and promote
different types of transnational exchanges for their regional or minority languages in
the various fields covered by the Charter. The Committee considers that these
initiatives are both a significant means of promoting regional or minority languages
and an important element of European integration. They should therefore be
continued for the benefit of the protection of the regional or minority languages that
exist on the Hungarian territory.
“Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake to eliminate, if they have not yet done so, any unjustified distinction,
exclusion, restriction or preference relating to the use of a regional or minority language and
intended to discourage or endanger the maintenance or development of it. The adoption of
special measures in favour of regional or minority languages aimed at promoting equality
between the users of these languages and the rest of the population or which take due account
of their specific conditions is not considered to be an act of discrimination against the users of
more widely-used languages.”

30.
There is no indication that any unjustified distinction, exclusion, restriction or
preference relating to the use of a regional or minority language has persisted in

15

Hungarian legislation. In order to fight the social practices of discrimination, Hungary
included already in 1978, according to the general practice of anti-discrimination
legislation, a penal provision in its Criminal Code covering all forms of racial
discrimination. Since the international legal notion of ´racial discrimination´ is rather
wide, this covers also open forms of ethnic and linguistic discrimination. Other laws
also contain provisions against discrimination on ethnic and linguistic grounds. With
the office of the Minorities Ombudsman, Hungary has also created an institutional
mechanism to combat practices of discrimination against ethnic and linguistic
minorities. This does not mean that all practices of discrimination in social life have
come to an end; the Gypsy population, in particular, still suffers considerably under
phenomena of social and economic discrimination. The Hungarian state, however, is
investing considerable efforts in combating such discrimination.
“Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to promote, by appropriate measures, mutual understanding between all
the linguistic groups of the country and in particular the inclusion of respect, understanding and
tolerance in relation to regional or minority languages among the objectives of education and
training provided within their countries and encouragement of the mass media to pursue the
same objective.”

31.
The National Basic Curriculum that fixes the basic goals of education contains
a whole series of educational goals advocating understanding, tolerance and respect
for other nations´ values. The detailed requirements set up in the curriculum for the
various educational fields, such as ´knowledge of the country and the nation´,
Hungarian language and literature, social and economic studies, include information
about the minorities, their literature, music and cultural traditions as well as their
organisation. Moreover, the legislative guidelines for the media contain comparative
goals. In addition, the Minorities Ombudsman and the minority self-governments play
a valuable role in furthering understanding of the complex situation of linguistic
minorities and in educating the general public towards the aims of tolerance in
relation to minority languages.
“Paragraph 4
In determining their policy with regard to regional or minority languages, the Parties shall take
into consideration the needs and wishes expressed by the groups which use such languages.
They are encouraged to establish bodies, if necessary, for the purpose of advising the
authorities on all matters pertaining to regional or minority languages.”

32.
The whole system of minority self-governments created by Hungarian
legislation during the last decade secures participation of the minorities in the
formulation of minority-related policies. These self-governments have the possibility
to take over responsibilities in education and culture from the local and central
governments, and could thus decide on their own administrative policies. Moreover,
also in the other fields that remain in the competence of the municipalities or the
State, the legal framework guarantees a far-reaching participation of the
representatives of the minorities in determining the policies with regard to the
minorities. In addition, the administrative staff of the Government Office for National
and Ethnic Minorities in Hungary is by and large drawn from the minorities
themselves, which also secures involvement of the minorities in their affairs.

16

“Paragraph 5
The Parties undertake to apply, mutatis mutandis, the principles listed in paragraphs 1 to 4
above to non-territorial languages. However, as far as these languages are concerned, the nature
and scope of the measures to be taken to give effect to this Charter shall be determined in a
flexible manner, bearing in mind the needs and wishes, and respecting the traditions and
characteristics, of the groups which use the languages concerned.”

33.
Most of the minority languages that are not covered under Part III of the
Charter are non-territorial languages within the meaning of Article 7.5 of the Charter
(with the possible exception of Polish and Ruthenian). As far as the rather small and
scattered linguistic groups – Bulgarians, Greeks, Armenians and Ukrainians – are
concerned, the necessary adaptation of the measures envisaged under Part II to the
needs and wishes of such groups allows only limited measures. By applying the
system of minority self-governments also to these groups, Hungary has
demonstrated its willingness to take into consideration their needs and wishes.
34.
A serious problem obviously exists with the two Romani linguistic
communities. The overall phenomenon of deeply rooted social discrimination against
people of Roma background that had to be dealt with by the Advisory Committee for
the Framework Convention is not an issue as such under Article 7.5 of the Charter.
The aim of the Charter is to protect languages. The Roma/Gypsy community of
Hungary is accordingly a subject to be analysed under the Charter in so far as its
members speak a minority language within the definition of Article 1 (a) of the
Charter. This is the case only with a smaller part, probably some 30%, of the people
of Roma/Gypsy background, according to the information the Committee has
received. Estimates are rather insecure, but investigations undertaken by social
scientists allow the conclusion that at least some 20% of Roma/Gypsies are bilingual,
with Romani as their native tongue, and an additional segment of nearly 10% speak
Beas. If one follows the estimates that put the number of Roma/Gypsies at some
500.000, this would mean a significant group of some 150.000 Gypsy people
speaking a minority language. Despite these rather high numbers of speakers, there
have been practically no efforts to upgrade the standing of the two Roma/Gypsy
languages in public life, and few educational programmes fostering the linguistic
capabilities of minority children in the minority languages of their families. This is
undoubtedly due to traditional conception of anti-discrimination policy as entailing
assimilation and past efforts to free the Roma population from its marginal status,
with its economic, social and cultural disadvantages. For a long time the approach to
integration into Hungarian society consisted of the attempt to assimilate the Roma to
Hungarian majority population. The strategy seems to have been only partly
successful. Discrimination persists, but the majority of Roma people have lost their
traditional culture and language, without becoming really integrated. As a
consequence, demands for a fostering of the two Roma/Gypsy languages, in
particular in education, have been gaining more and more support. Under Article 7.5
of the Charter, the Republic of Hungary should pay primary attention to the problem
and should take measures to preserve the languages of the Roma/Gypsy population,
without endangering the important goal of putting an end to the marginalisation and
social discrimination that have traditionally plagued members of this community. The
measures to be developed could include intensified efforts in Romani and Beas
language planning and an attempt to draw up a viable model of bilingual education
for children of Roma/Gypsy background. The aim should be at the same time to
preserve the language and cultural identity of the community and to enhance the
social integration of its members into Hungarian society.

17

The Committee encourages the Hungarian authorities to intensify their efforts in Romani
and Beas languages planning and their attempts to develop a viable model of bilingual
education for children with Romani and Beas as native tongue. This could constitute a
decisive step in combining the endeavours to overcome traditional discrimination with the
goals of the Charter, the maintenance and promotion of minority languages.

2.2

The evaluation in respect of Part III of the Charter

The Committee of Experts examined in more detail the existing protection of the
languages that have been identified under the protection mechanism of Part III of the
Charter. The languages in question are Croatian, German, Romanian, Serbian,
Slovak and Slovene, with guarantees for the maintenance and use of these
languages extending over the whole territory of the Republic of Hungary.
The paragraphs and sub-paragraphs that are quoted in bold italics are the actual
obligations chosen by the Republic of Hungary.
Article 8 – Education
“Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are
used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the
teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
Pre-school education
“a.i.

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages;
or

a.ii.

to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant regional or
minority languages; or

a.iii.

to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those pupils
whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient; or

a.iv.

if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school
education, to favour and/or encourage the application of the measures referred
to under i to iii above.”

35.
The obligation is fulfilled. Pre-school education exists in all the languages that
are relevant to Part III. Pre-school groups are either organised by the municipalities,
by the minority self-governments or by private associations. The educational
authorities of the State have drawn up pre-school model programmes for all the
minority languages relevant here and grant budgetary support to minority language
pre-school education in the form of supplementary funds for pre-school
establishments educating in minority languages. There exist two types of pre-school
establishment teaching in minority languages – a native language pre-school that
organises all pre-school life in the minority language, and dual language pre-schools
that use Hungarian and the minority language side by side. The overwhelming
majority of pre-school establishments use the bilingual model, due to the sociolinguistic situation of the linguistic groups. There exist, however, 40 monolingual preschool groups in German and 15 in Croatian, 5 in Romanian and Serbian and 4 in
Slovak. The number of bilingual pre-school groups ranges from nearly 1.000 (in
German) with more than 13.000 children attending, to 5 groups (with 88 children) in
Slovene. The state of minority language pre-school education by and large may be
perceived as meeting the needs. However, problems in funding remain and the
establishments are sometimes rather distant from the homes of the families

18

concerned. It is also not clear whether there exists a subjective right to receive preschool education in a minority language if the family so requests and the number of
pupils is considered sufficient.
Primary education
“b.i.

to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

b.ii.

to make available a substantial part of primary education in the relevant regional or
minority languages; or

b.iii

to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or minority
languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

b. iv.

to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those
pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient.”

36.
The obligation is fulfilled. The Committee has received information showing
that primary school education exists in all the languages concerned. The relevant
legislation fixes a minimum number of eight children. If the families of eight children
demand the creation of a class or study group in a minority language, the relevant
authority (the local municipality) has to organise a group where the minority language
is taught. Depending on the socio-linguistic situation and the resulting needs and
wishes of parents, three different models are used that correspond to the three
variants listed in Art.8 para.1 (b) of the Charter. The primary education is either
provided purely in the minority language, or it is organised bilingually, with a
substantial part taught in the minority language but another part in Hungarian, or
Hungarian is used as the medium of instruction, with supplementary teaching of the
minority language as an integral part of the curriculum.
37.
The mix of the models used varies considerably from language to language.
Primary school education in Serbian is mostly given in monolingual classes in
Serbian only (18 groups with 144 pupils), with no bilingual classes and only 8 groups
taught in Hungarian with supplementary teaching in Serbian. A comparable situation
exists for Romanian. The opposite is true for primary education in Slovenian. There
are no monolingual classes teaching only in Slovenian, only 7 bilingual classes with
40 pupils, but 14 classes (with 80 children) taught in Hungarian with supplementary
education in Slovenian as a second language. The other three languages are
characterised by a wide-ranging mix of monolingual classes in the minority language,
bilingual classes and classes taught in Hungarian with supplementary language
education in the minority language. In general, however, forms of bilingual education
continue to be rather underdeveloped, although they would correspond best to the
needs and wishes of the minorities, and most children from the minorities are taught
in Hungarian, with only additional courses in the minority language as a foreign
language. For Croatians there are nearly 200 classes with some 2.500 pupils, for
Slovaks more than 300 classes with some 4.500 pupils, in German nearly 3.500
classes with some 45.000 pupils (of which some 2.500 classes with 37.640 children
are classes in Hungarian with additional education in German). The number of
children learning German is extremely high; but as noted already above, there is a
tendency of families of purely Hungarian background to send their children to classes
with teaching of German, and German is mostly taught only as a foreign language.
According to the information received, this is largely in accordance with the sociolinguistic situation of the minority, since most of the children of German origin do not
speak German as their mother tongue.
38.
The State covers (at least partly) the extra expenses incurred by
municipalities that organise primary education in minority languages. This makes it
easier for municipalities to respect the needs and wishes of minority language

19

speakers. Some complaints have been raised, however, that municipalities misuse
funds granted for minority education for other educational purposes. The easiest way
of preventing such misuse would be to transfer minority language education to the
minority self-governments. Although this was one of the basic ideas underlying the
whole system of minority self-governments, there are only a few cases where this
has happened so far. The basic obstacles for the minority self-governments are
usually of a financial nature, since the minority self-governments can only take over
the burden of education if the State and the municipality transfer, together with the
responsibilities, also the resources needed for maintaining schooling institutions.
Secondary education
“c.i.

to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority languages;
or

c.ii.

to make available a substantial part of secondary education in the relevant regional or
minority languages; or

c.iii.

to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

c. iv.

to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those
pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number
considered sufficient.”

39.
The Committee has received data showing that secondary school education
exists in all six languages covered under Part III. For Romanian, Serbian and
Slovenian, there exists one grammar school teaching in each language; for Croatian
and Slovak, there are two grammar schools for each language, and for German
eleven such schools exist. The Hungarian report states, however, that secondary
education is the least satisfactory field concerning minority language education.
Although the general statutory requirement is valid also for secondary education, i.e.
the demand of eight families obliges educational authorities to create a class or study
group in a minority language, it is difficult from an organisational point of view to fulfil
this statutory requirement. Owing to lack of teachers and finance, the demands of
parents frequently remain unfulfilled. At the same time, it is obvious, bearing in mind
the geographical dispersion of the minorities, that one grammar school only for a
minority like the Romanians, Serbs or Slovenes does not really meet the demands.
The report does not give information on the geographical locations of these
secondary school institutions, but it is evident that Hungary should offer more
decentralised opportunities for secondary education in minority languages, even if it
were only supplementary courses in the minority language as an additional language
course. Representatives of some of the minority languages expressed a preference
for a scheme of bilingual education. This mode of teaching the minority language
remains, however, rather undeveloped up to now. The Committee concludes that the
obligation is only partly fulfilled, with the need to offer more viable opportunities for
secondary education in minority languages.
Vocational training
“d.i.

to make available technical and vocational education in the relevant regional or
minority languages; or

d.ii.

to make available a substantial part of technical and vocational education in the
relevant regional or minority languages; or

d.iii.

to provide, within technical and vocational education, for the teaching of the relevant
regional or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

20

d. iv.

to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those
pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number
considered sufficient.”

40.
The obligation seems only partly fulfilled. The Hungarian report itself states
that minority language vocational training is still in an experimental stage, with the
first programmes launched in the 1990´s. Such an experimental form of vocational
training in a minority language exists at several places in German and in at least one
place also in Slovak. For Croatian, Serbian, Romanian and Slovenian, no indication
is given that comparable vocational training opportunities in the minority language
exist, or at least vocational training institutions where the relevant minority language
is taught as a second language (as an integral part of the curriculum).
Higher education
“e.i.

to make available university and other higher education in regional or minority
languages; or

e.ii.

to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher education
subjects; or

e.iii.

if, by reason of the role of the State in relation to higher education institutions,
sub-paragraphs i and ii cannot be applied, to encourage and/or allow the
provision of university or other forms of higher education in regional or minority
languages or of facilities for the study of these languages as university or
higher education subjects.”

41.
One may doubt whether the obligation for which Hungary opted in its
instrument of ratification really conforms to the legal situation of the Hungarian
university and higher education system. Option (iii) covers the cases where the State
does not organise higher education itself but regulates a privately owned and
administered university system. Hungary, however, has a traditional system of staterun universities and higher education establishments, which is characteristic for
continental Europe. Option (ii) would seem to be better suited to such a situation. In
substance, however, this does not really affect the obligations undertaken by
Hungary. In Hungarian universities, most of the languages covered under Part III
may be studied as languages and/or as subjects of linguistic studies. The same is
true, concerning other forms of higher education, for the various teacher-training
colleges. For students from the minority desiring to study a subject in their native
tongue, Hungary provides, via its extensive network of bilateral treaties with its
neighbouring states, extensive opportunities to undergo an all-round mother-country
education in any subject. Together with a system of scholarships and facilitated
procedures of recognition of the foreign qualifications obtained, this may be judged
as fulfilling the requirements of Article 8.1(e) of the Charter.

21

Adult and continuing education
"f.i.
f.ii.
f.iii

to arrange for the provision of adult and continuing education courses which are taught
mainly or wholly in the regional or minority languages; or
to offer such languages as subjects of adult and continuing education; or
if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult education,
to favour and/or encourage the offering of such languages as subjects of adult
and continuing education.”

42.
There seems to be some difficulties in the field of adult and continuing
education. As the Hungarian report states, the entire system of adult education is in a
process of reorganisation. Until now, there is no comprehensive scheme of adult and
continuing education offered in minority languages. The minority self-governments,
however, with the financial help of the State, have developed various programmes of
adult education in their respective languages. This by and large would fulfil the
obligation undertaken under paragraph (f) (iii). The Committee, for the time being,
does not consider the undertaking to be fulfilled and will examine this question with
interest in its next report.
Teaching of the history and culture of the minority language
“g.

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture
which is reflected by the regional or minority language.”

43.
The information received by the Committee indicates that the obligation is
fulfilled.
Basic and further training of teachers
“h.

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement
those of paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party.”

44.
There seems to be some difficulties concerning the provision of adequate
teacher training. The Committee has received information about teacher training
colleges educating in the various minority languages covered under Part III, although
it seems that in the meantime some of these institutions have been closed or have at
least abandoned their minority language courses. In general, Hungary fulfils the
obligation, since it offers teacher training in all the languages concerned. The various
discussions during the on-the-spot visit indicated, however, that the number of
teachers trained, as well as the quality of professional education in the minority
languages, are not really sufficient to implement seriously the obligations undertaken
by Hungary under Article 8. Hungary should therefore intensify its efforts in teacher
training, by developing a comprehensive scheme of teacher training colleges that
educate in the minority languages, as well as by upgrading the quality of such
training.
The Committee encourages the Hungarian authorities to intensify their efforts in teacher
training oriented towards minority language education. There should be a stable structure of
teacher training colleges preparing for minority language education with sufficient
capacities to meet the demands. The quality of such teacher training should also be raised.

22

Article 9 – Judicial authorities
“Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents
using the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to the
situation of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by
the present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of
justice:

Criminal proceedings

“a. ii.

to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or minority language.”

45.
There seems to exist practical problems concerning this obligation. The initial
periodical report states that this right is guaranteed by Section 8 paragraphs 1 and 2
of Act I of 1973 on Criminal Procedure. Paragraph 2 of Section 8 provides that
everyone is entitled to use his/her native language, in both oral and written form.
Paragraph 1, in addition, provides that “nobody may suffer any disadvantage
because of the lack of command of the Hungarian language”. Formally, this
legislation might be seen to comply with the requirements of Article1.1 (a) (ii) of the
Charter. However, the unclear formula contained in Section 8 paragraph 1 of Act I of
1973 – “lack of command of the Hungarian language” – risks being interpreted in
such a way that judges qualify the usual member of a linguistic minority in Hungary
as not falling under this protective clause. The initial periodical report refers to some
judgments of lower courts interpreting the provision in another manner, deducing
from it an unconditional right of minority members to use their language. Judicial
practice, however, seems to be disparate in that regard. Since speakers of minority
languages in Hungary all live in a situation of “diglossia”, having a good command of
the national language, judicial practice will inevitably have a tendency to restrict the
formula to foreigners without any serious command of Hungarian. Section 218
paragraph 1 converges with such an interpretation, by providing that the State only
bears the costs of interpretation if they are “costs arising from the inability of the
accused to understand Hungarian”. That tendency in interpretation, however,
deprives the speakers of minority languages of the protection formally granted under
Section 8 of Act I of 1973. In order to clarify that there is an unconditional obligation
upon judicial authorities in criminal proceedings to allow the accused the use of
his/her native tongue, the Hungarian legislator should change the wording of Section
8 so as to remove any uncertainty.
46.
There exists a second difficulty which is decisive for the entire field of the use
of minority languages before judicial authorities. Using the minority language before a
court would usually require an interpreter. Since the assistance of interpreters is
costly and makes the procedure cumbersome, accused persons that are users of a
minority language but can also speak Hungarian, are afraid to be perceived as
“trouble-makers” if they use their right to speak in the minority language before the
court. The right guaranteed in Article 9.1 (a), (ii) of the Charter thus becomes only
operational if the courts take certain measures in advance to ensure that proceedings
in which the minority language is used are practically possible. To take such
measures in advance, however, is only possible in a geographical area where there
is a certain concentration of speakers of a given minority language, with the resulting
probability that a certain number of cases will occur where the mechanism is used.
To take such organisational measures on the whole national territory for all six
languages is practically impossible. The Hungarian authorities should accordingly

23

examine the question whether it would not be sensible to construct a specific
legislative device for the use of minority languages before the courts, a normative
mechanism that would be limited in geographical scope to the main areas of
settlement of the linguistic minorities. This would formally restrict the scope of
minority rights, but would enable the State to create an operational system that
ensures the use of minority languages before courts.
The Committee encourages the Hungarian authorities to modify Section 8 of the Act on
Criminal Procedure so as to remove any uncertainty as to the possibility to use a minority
language before the courts.

“a. iii.

to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not be
considered inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a regional or
minority language;”

47.
The report states that these rights are guaranteed by Sections 8 and 80 of
Act I of 1973 on Criminal Procedure. Concerning Article 9 paragraph 1, (a), (iii) of the
Charter, the Committee concludes that the obligation is fulfilled.
“a.iv.

to produce, on request, documents connected with legal proceedings in the
relevant regional or minority language.”

48.
The report states that these rights are guaranteed by Sections 8 and 80 of
Act I of 1973 on Criminal Procedure. Concerning Article 9 paragraph 1 (a) (iv) of the
Charter, the Hungarian report substantiates only that there exists a right to have the
charge sheet translated if the accused has not sufficient command of the Hungarian
language to understand a document drafted in Hungarian. There are no indications
that other documents might be produced in minority languages. Even the limited right
referred to does not cover the ordinary case of a criminal proceeding against a user
of a minority language who also understands the Hungarian language. The initial
periodical report indicates, however, that a reform of the Code on Criminal Procedure
has just been adopted and that, according to Section 9 para.3 of the new Criminal
Procedure Act XIX of 1998, court proceedings may in future even be conducted
entirely in the minority language. It may be hoped that the existing shortcomings will
thus be overcome in future. Nevertheless, the Committee must conclude that the
obligation is only partly fulfilled.

Civil proceedings

“b.ii.

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or
she may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring
additional expense.”

49.
The same practical problems seem to exist as were mentioned already under
Article 9.1 (a) (ii) of the Charter. The Hungarian initial periodical report states that the
right is guaranteed by Section 8 paragraphs 1 and 2 of Act III of 1952 on Civil
Procedure. The formula used in this provision is the same as the formula used in
Section 8 of the Criminal Procedure Act. The right to use one's native language in
judicial proceedings is guaranteed, but the protective clause that nobody should
suffer disadvantage due to the use of another language than Hungarian is restricted
to the cases of “lack of command of the Hungarian language”. The remarks made
above in paragraphs 45 and 46 are thus also valid here. The Hungarian initial
periodical report indicates, however, that with Act CX of 1999 amending Section 8 of

24

the Civil Procedure Act the formula has been clarified, confirming expressis verbis
that speakers of a minority language have the right to use their language in judicial
proceedings. The Committee concludes that the obligation is formally fulfilled.
“b.iii.

to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
language.”

50.
The Hungarian report does not substantiate with any legislative reference its
statement that there is an opportunity to submit documents in minority languages
before civil courts. In judicial practice, however, there do not seem to be any
difficulties with this obligation. The Committee concludes that the obligation is
fulfilled.
Proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters

“c. ii.

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or
she may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring
additional expense.”

51.
The Committee received no information about regional or minority languages
in connection with proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters.
Since such proceedings are exclusively in writing, there seems to be no party or
litigant appearing in person before the court. If this is the case, the obligation does
not seem to be capable of fulfilment.
“c. iii.

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters: to allow
documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages.”

52.
The Committee has been informed that as far as public, legally issued
documents in a minority language are concerned, no provision of any law excludes
their validity. The Committee has received no information regarding the rules of
procedure concerning administrative matters and is therefore not in a position to
evaluate whether the obligation is fulfilled.
“Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake:
“a.
b.

c.

not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely
because they are drafted in a regional or minority language; or
not to deny the validity, as between the parties, of legal documents drawn up
within the State solely because they are drafted in a regional or minority
language, and to provide that they can be invoked against interested third
parties who are not users of these languages on condition that the contents of
the document are made known to them by the person(s) who invoke(s) it; or
not to deny the validity, as between the parties, of legal documents drawn up
within the State solely because they are drafted in a regional or minority
language.”

53.
Hungary has chosen all options under Article 9 paragraph 2. These three
options of article 9.2 are however alternatives and Hungary should therefore have
opted for only one of them. The initial periodical report also indicates that the
Hungarian authorities only related this undertaking to the use of minority languages
before judicial authorities. Article 9 paragraph 2 of the Charter is concerned,
however, with the validity of legal documents drawn up in minority languages in
general. The report and other documents submitted by Hungary do not indicate any
legal provision that guarantees the legal validity of legal documents drawn up in a

25

minority language. From the general information received by the Committee it seems
that as far as public, legally issued documents in a minority language are concerned,
no provision of law excludes their validity. The information is insufficient for the
Committee to reach a conclusion on fulfilment of this undertaking.
Article 10 – Administrative and public services
State administration
“Paragraph 1:
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of
regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the
situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
“a.v.

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a
document in these languages.”

54.
Section 51 para.1 of Act LXXVII of 1993 on the Rights of National and Ethnic
Minorities provides that “everyone may use freely, at any time and anywhere, his/her
native language. The State is obliged to ensure, in cases stipulated in a separate act,
the conditions for the use of the languages of the minorities.” Such a separate act on
the use of minority languages in relation to state authorities has not been enacted so
far. The only provision existing is sub-paragraph 10 of Article 10 of Act IV of 1957 on
State Administrative Procedure, stating that everyone may use his/her native
language and that no one should suffer disadvantage as a result of “lack of command
in Hungarian language”. The formula is practically the same as the one used in the
Code on Criminal Procedure and on Civil Procedure, implying the same practical
problems as for these provisions. Since practically all the speakers of minority
languages have sufficient command of Hungarian, the provision does not really
guarantee that the persons concerned may use their respective minority languages
before state authorities. The information received by the Committee indicates that
there is a strong reservation on the part of state authorities towards documents
drawn up in minority languages, since the public authorities (beyond the level of local
communities) are not organisationally equipped, in particular not staffed with the
adequate personnel, to process such documents. Because the users of minority
languages know that their counterparts in administration are not prepared to deal
with documents in minority languages, they understandably hesitate to make use of
the right. If Hungary wants to make such a right operational, it should make the
necessary preparations in administrative organisation. It should staff the
administrative authorities with personnel having command of the relevant minority
language in geographical areas where such languages are used. Taking these
measures in advance will only be possible on a geographically limited scale, but
Article10.1.a.v of the Charter requires practical measures only in administrative
districts where the number of speakers of minority languages justifies such an effort.
The Committee recommends to the Hungarian authorities to clarify, in the Act on State
Administrative Procedure the possibility to submit documents to State authorities in minority
languages.

26

“c.

to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in a regional or
minority language.”

55.
Hungary has not substantiated its claim that this obligation is fulfilled. Even
the replies to the questions addressed by the Committee to Hungary contain only a
reference to certain normative and regulatory texts that are routinely published in the
minority languages. The investigations undertaken by the Committee, however, seem
to confirm the general statement given by the government in its replies that the
administrative authorities are allowed, according to the Hungarian legal system, to
draft documents in a minority language as far as there is a need. Since the right to
use a minority language in relation to the state administration is only rarely used,
there seems to exist virtually no practice concerning this theoretical possibility.
Accordingly, the obligation might be formally fulfilled, but owing to practical obstacles
no use is made of the possibilities.
Local and regional authorities
“Paragraph 2
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who
are users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below,
the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
b.

the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or
written applications in these languages.”

56.
For both local and regional authorities, the same provisions find application as
those mentioned above concerning state administration. There exists a right to use
the minority language before local and regional authorities. In areas where the users
of a certain minority language live in significant numbers, there exists a common
practice to submit applications in the minority language. As the replies to the
questions formulated by the Committee indicate, applications are submitted orally on
a regular basis– and handled either in Hungarian or sometimes also in the minority
language. Written applications in minority languages are less frequent, but occur as
well and usually create no problem. Regional authorities – the county governments
and assemblies as well as the councils of regional development – are allowed by the
same rule on administrative procedure to use the minority languages. Since these
authorities do not have direct contact with the public, the obligation is largely
inoperative. However, the obligation is fulfilled in relation to local authorities.
“e

the use by regional authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the
State.”

57.
The obligation seems to be fulfilled. The working language of regional
assemblies is Hungarian, but the right of representatives who are minority language
speakers to use their minority language seems to exist. As the Committee learned
during its “on-the-spot visit”, such use is practically non-existent in reality, but at least
the legal possibility exists, and this is sufficient under Article10 paragraph 2, (e) of the
Charter.
“f.

the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the
State.”

58.
The obligation is fulfilled. Section 52 paragraph 2 of the 1993 Act on the
Rights of National and Ethnic Minorities grants expressly the right to minority

27

representatives in the local self-government representative bodies to use their
minority languages.
“g.

the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official
language(s), of traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or
minority languages.”

59.
The obligation is fulfilled. Section 53 lit. (c) of the 1993 Act on the Rights of
National and Ethnic Minorities provides expressly that, if the local minority selfgovernment so demands, the local authorities have to indicate place and street
names, public offices and the names of bodies carrying out public services also in the
minority language. There is a common practice in Hungary of bilingual (or
multilingual) public signs.
Public services
“Paragraph 3:
With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting
on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which regional or minority languages
are used, in accordance with the situation of each language and as far as this is reasonably
possible:
“a.

to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request in these
languages.”

60.
Concerning public services maintained by local authorities, there seems to
exist a widespread practice – at least in the territories where the users of a specific
minority language live in significant numbers - to allow them to use their language in
submitting requests. No normative source was given by the Hungarian authorities
which would substantiate that there is a legal obligation for such public services to
deal with requests in the minority language. Concerning public services maintained
by the State or other bodies, such as certain hospitals not run by local authorities,
postal services, telecommunications or gas, water and electricity supplies, the lack of
any legislative obligation that formally allows the use of minority languages seems to
lead to the practical impossibility of any use of minority languages in relation to such
service providers. The obligation seems to be fulfilled in practice concerning public
services provided by local authorities, but not for public services provided by the
State or other bodies.
Implementation measures
“Paragraph 4:
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them,
the Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
a.

translation or interpretation as may be required:

b.

recruitment and, where necessary, training of the officials and other public
service employees required;

c.

compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees
having a knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed to the
territory in which that language is use.”

61.
From the whole range of information received by the Committee it is obvious
that the translation or interpretation referred to in subparagraph (a) is the main mode
of implementation used in Hungary for the obligations under Article 10 paragraphs 1,
2 and 3. But Section 54 of the 1993 Act on the Rights of National and Ethnic

28

Minorities aims to ensure also that at least the municipal administrations have
adequate staff to deal with applications in minority languages, by requiring that they
hire employees with knowledge of the relevant minority language. Concerning state
administration and public service providers, there is no indication that a comparable
statutory provision exists. This evidently leads to problems in the implementation of
Article10 with these institutions. The Hungarian authorities should thus take more
care to ensure that the relevant authorities of state administration dealing directly
with minority language speakers as well as the local branches of public service
providers acting in minority areas are staffed with sufficient employees having
knowledge of the respective minority languages. The Committee concludes that the
obligation is only partly fulfilled, with the need to enforce measures of implementation
in state administration and nation-wide public services.
Family names
“Paragraph 5:
The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or minority
languages, at the request of those concerned. ”

62.
The obligation is formally fulfilled, but there seem to exist some problems in
the practical implementation of the obligation. In general, Hungary has a rather rigid
system of an official closed list of names, fixed in a ´Hungarian Book of Given
Names´. Section 27, paragraph 4 of Law-Decree 17 of 1982 on Registration,
Marriage Procedures and Name Bearing, however, allows members of linguistic
minorities to use surnames and family names in the form appropriate to their
nationality. Since officials of the registers traditionally tend to be quite rigid, members
of linguistic minorities sometimes have difficulties in enforcing their statutory right.
Article 11 - Media
“Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in
which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent
that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this
field, and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
“a. iii.

to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission: to
make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer programmes in the
regional or minority languages.”

63.
Section 26 paragraph 1 in combination with Section 25 lit. c of Act I of 1996
on Radio and Television Broadcasting legally guarantees that the users of the
minority languages are served by public radio and television in their minority
language. It provides that public service broadcasters are obliged to assist in looking
after the minority culture and languages in Hungary and to provide regular
information in the respective language. Weekly and/or biweekly programmes are
broadcast on public television in all the six languages covered under Part III. In
addition, there are regular weekly radio programmes in all the six languages,
amounting to around 800 minutes per week for Slovak, Croatian, German and
Romanian, some 400 minutes a week for Serbian and some 60 minutes for
Slovenian. The programmes are largely determined by the users of the languages
themselves, who also have a decisive say in the composition of the editorial boards.
The editorial groups are sometimes rather small and underequipped, but in general
the system seems to work rather well. The time slots allotted to the various
programmes have given rise to complaints from the representatives of the minority
languages, but a recently concluded agreement between the public TV network and

29

the minority self-governments tries to solve these problems in a co-operative manner.
The Committee thus concludes that the obligation is formally fulfilled but needs
further efforts to come to functional arrangements in questions of detail.
“b.ii.

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis.”

64.
There seems to be difficulties with this obligation. The Hungarian State
subsidises radio programmes broadcast in minority languages through the Public
Foundation for Minorities. Minority self-governments easily receive licences for radio
programmes. The other applications for radio licences submitted by associations or
applicants planning a specific minority language programme have to compete on an
equal footing with other applications. Most of these minority language applications
have been rejected on account of problems linked to the format and content of the
applications. Bodies representing minority languages have difficulties in meeting the
same technical standards as commercial networks. A bonus system for such
applications would be in the spirit of Article 11.1.b.ii of the Charter. In some of the
commercial applications for radio licences, promises concerning the broadcasting of
radio programmes in minority languages are made; but later these promises are only
superficially monitored and sanctions are practically never imposed if the promises
are not fulfilled. Nevertheless, there are some community and commercial radio
stations transmitting programmes in minority languages. The Committee thus
concludes that the obligation is only partly fulfilled.
“c. ii.

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis.”

65.
A similar problem exists with the encouragement and facilitation of the
broadcasting of television programmes in minority languages outside the public
service network. For common minority language organisations, it is nearly impossible
to gain a broadcasting licence; only some local and regional broadcasters, mainly
community networks, transmit limited programmes in a minority language. In applying
for a licence, commercial broadcasters sometimes make promises concerning the
transmission of minority language programmes, but these promises are practically
not monitored and enforced. As a means of last resort, however, the 1996 Act on
Radio and Television Broadcasting provides in Section 95 paragraph 5 that a public
utility company owned by a minority self-government has a right to be licensed for at
least four and at most eight hours per week broadcasting time, if in the relevant
region there is no other opportunity to fulfil the demands for minority language
broadcasting. Another pressing difficulty seems to lie in the lack of retransmission of
programmes in minority languages broadcast from neighbouring States. In Budapest,
for example, such programmes of neighbouring States are not included in the limited
range of programmes transmitted through cable networks. Only German
programmes are distributed, but they are of commercial interest. The obligation is in
principle fulfilled.
The Committee invites the Hungarian authorities to investigate the possibility to include a
(restricted) “must carry” provision in its cable television licence schemes in order to ensure
the retransmission of minority language programmes also beyond the border regions.

30

“e. i.

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one
newspaper in the regional or minority languages.”

66.
For decades, weekly or biweekly newspapers in minority languages have
been published in Hungary. Since these papers are not commercially viable in
market terms, the Hungarian State subsidises these minority language newspapers
with considerable amounts of money. The Committee considers the undertaking
fulfilled.
“f. .i

to cover the additional costs of those media which use regional or minority
languages, wherever the law provides for financial assistance in general for the
media.”

67.
The obligation is fulfilled. As has been mentioned above, the Hungarian State
grants budgetary support to the production of radio programmes and the
maintenance of newspapers in minority languages. Furthermore, the production of
television programmes in minority languages is funded by the Public TV Fund.
Whether the amount of money allocated to the different purposes of minority
language media is really sufficient to cover the additional costs of such media is not
clear; but it is difficult anyway to quantify such additional costs, and it is beyond doubt
that the Hungarian State makes serious efforts to secure the financial basis of the
minority language media.
“g.

to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using regional or
minority languages.”

68.
There is no specific scheme for the professional training of minority language
journalists. The Hungarian State grants scholarships to minority language students,
both for studies at Hungarian universities and training institutions and for stays
abroad to undergo training in the mother country of the respective language. In some
cases there exist also bilateral arrangements with such countries devoted to the
professional training of journalists. The general lack of a specific scheme for the
training of minority language journalists leads, however, to a lack of qualified
journalists working in minority languages. The Committee must observe that there
are serious deficiencies in the professional training of those journalists who currently
work in this field. The obligation of Article 11.1.g of the Charter aims at such a
specific scheme and Hungary should undertake an effort to draw one up. The
Committee concludes that the obligation is partly fulfilled.
The Committee encourages the Hungarian authorities to establish a scheme for training of
minority language journalists.

“Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to ensure that the interests of the users of regional or minority languages
are represented or taken into account within such bodies as may be established in accordance
with the law with responsibility for guaranteeing the freedom and pluralism of the media.”

69.
The obligation is fulfilled. According to the Broadcasting Act of 1996, the
minorities are entitled to delegate one representative to the Hungarian Public
Television Foundation Board of Trustees, as well as to the Board of Trustees of the
Hungarian Public Radio Foundation. Both boards may be qualified as bodies with a
responsibility for guaranteeing the freedom and pluralism of the media. The main
body entrusted with such a task, however, the six-member national Radio and
Television Commission, works on purely political representation. In this case, at least
the Broadcasting Act undertakes to ensure that the interests of the minorities are

31

taken into account within the decision-making of the body, by providing minimum
requirements that have to be respected in order to meet the fundamental demands of
the minorities.
Article 12 Cultural activities and facilities
“Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural
centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film
production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries,
including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have
power or play a role in this field:
a.

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority
languages and foster the different means of access to works produced in these
languages.”

70.
The obligation is fulfilled. The Committee has been informed that a whole
range of different types of expression and initiatives specific to minority languages
are encouraged through a series of support schemes, financed through the Ministry
of Culture and the Office for National Minorities, but also through the general
budgetary support of the minority self-governments. Access to artistic works in
minority languages is fostered through financial support to festivals and art
exhibitions. Certain minority self-governments maintain their own cultural centres and
museums, but in general the State operates museums and theatres for the minority
languages too. The intended transfer of these institutions to the minority selfgovernments has proved to be more difficult than imagined originally. Hungary has
also established a system where many minority self-governments organise and
maintain minority language library services. In general the conclusion seems justified
that the innovative system of minority self-governments ensures that the
commitments under Article 12 paragraph 1, (a) of the Charter are implemented on a
high level. The only limiting factor is obviously the constant shortage of funds given to
the minority self-governments, a shortage that mirrors the general budgetary
problems of a country in transition like Hungary. The budgetary shortages have
created obstacles to the envisaged transfer of state-funded cultural institutions to the
minority self-governments. Without being given the necessary resources, the minority
self-governments have difficulties in taking over responsibility for such costly
institutions. The Hungarian authorities should intensify their efforts to solve these
budgetary problems, in order to develop fully the potential inherent in the system of
minority self-government.
“b.

to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in
regional or minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing,
post-synchronisation and subtitling activities.”

71.
The obligation seems to be fulfilled. The Public Foundation for Minorities
constantly provides funds for the translation of works produced in minority languages
into Hungarian. On a smaller scale, this seems to be true also for activities of
dubbing, synchronisation and subtitling of films produced in the minority languages.

32

“c.

to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other
languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation
and subtitling activities.”

72.
The obligation seems to be fulfilled. The Hungarian State under various
schemes subsidises translation of important pieces of Hungarian literature into
foreign languages – and the six minority languages covered under Part III are the
languages of the most important neighbouring countries of Hungary. Subsidies are
also given for the dubbing, synchronisation and subtitling of Hungarian films.
“f.

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given
regional or minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural
activities.”

73.
The undertaking is fulfilled. Cultural facilities are to a large degree provided
and cultural activities planned by the minority self-governments themselves. The
whole system of minority self-governments is a perfect embodiment of the content
and spirit of Article 12.1.f of the Charter. On the Board of the Public Foundation for
Minorities, the users of minority languages are represented. In general, the
Hungarian system is characterised by a high degree of participation of the users of
minority languages in the decision-making on issues relating to minority languages.
“g.

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for
collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in
the regional or minority languages.”

74.
All publications, including those in minority languages, are kept in Hungarian
Archives, and every publisher must in accordance with the law provide copies of
publications to the National Library. For some of the minority languages there also
exist central libraries maintained by the minority self-governments. The Committee
has received no information on audiovisual materials. The Committee concludes that
this obligation is fulfilled for written materials.
“Paragraph 2
In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are
traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority
language justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and
facilities in accordance with the preceding paragraph.”

75.
The obligation seems fulfilled, since the rather decentralised system allows
the minority self-governments to develop their cultural activities wherever they
consider it necessary. The Minorities Act applies on the whole national territory, and
it is obvious that an important part of the cultural life of the minorities is now
concentrated in Budapest, which for most minority languages is not a territory in
which the language was traditionally used. Also the state institutions seem to avoid
any distinction concerning territories of traditional use and territories of internal
migration in its decision on allocation of funds for cultural activities.
“Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for
regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.”

The undertaking is fulfilled.

33

Article 13 – Economic and social life
“Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole country:
a.

to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without
justifiable reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents
relating to economic or social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in
technical documents such as instructions for the use of products or
installations.”

76.
The initial periodical report states that there are no legal prohibitions that
would exclude or reduce the use of minority languages. The Committee concludes
that this obligation is fulfilled.
Article 14 – Transfrontier exchanges
“The Parties undertake :
a.

To apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the
States in which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if
necessary to seek to conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster
contacts between the users of the same language in the States concerned in the
fields of culture, education, information, vocational training and permanent
education;”

77.
The undertaking is fulfilled. Hungary has concluded bilateral treaties on
amicable co-operation and partnership with five of the six countries where one of the
Part III languages is the official language of the State (Croatia, Germany, Romania,
Slovakia and Slovenia). These treaties are supplemented by cultural agreements,
usually concluded for three years, which lay down the framework arrangements for
cultural exchange and educational programmes. Under the bilateral agreements, joint
commissions, with cultural sub-commissions, have been created which fix the details
of cultural exchange and educational programmes. The agreements have been used
to found cultural institutes, arrange exchange programmes of artists, art exhibitions,
theatres, and programmes of scientific and educational collaboration. Also the
recognition of academic qualifications has been considerably facilitated under the
bilateral treaties. Through this practice, Hungary has done much to foster contacts
between the minority language communities in Hungary and the countries in which
the respective languages are the official language of the State. The only exception in
the network of bilateral treaties up to now is the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The
political obstacles which hindered the conclusion of an agreement of the kind referred
to in Article 14.a of the Charter are obvious. It is to be hoped, however, that under the
new political conditions Hungary will manage to conclude a bilateral treaty on
partnership with Yugoslavia too.
“b.

For the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or promote cooperation across borders, in particular between regional or local authorities in
whose territory the same language is used in identical or similar form.”

79.
The Committee has been informed that cross-border co-operation between
local authorities is free and is carried out in accordance with the European Outline
Convention on Transfrontier Co-operation signed by the Republic of Hungary. The
bilateral treaties mentioned above all make reference to unhindered relations
between local and regional self-governments, encouraging them to expand and
strengthen their relations. The Committee concludes that this obligation is fulfilled.

34

Chapter 3

Findings

The Committee of Experts hereby presents its general findings on the application of
the Charter in Hungary.
A. Hungarian legislation on the protection of minorities has gone through an
exploratory phase during the last ten years. Hungary has experimented with
innovative concepts of minority protection, in order to ameliorate the legislative,
administrative and organisational framework in which the minorities have to live and
to develop their cultural identity. This development has had an important impact on
the status of minority languages and has created a basis for protecting and
promoting these languages.
B. The most original feature of Hungarian minority legislation is the system of
minority self-governments, which gives the minorities a decisive say in decisionmaking on the regulatory and administrative details of language policy. This
innovative scheme of functional autonomy through the institutional network of
minority self-governments has the potential of serving as a model and a frame of
reference for the future development of minority legislation in Europe. Hungary
deserves high credit for the development of this model.
C. The establishment of the model of minority self-governments does not mean,
however, that all difficulties in the protection and promotion of minority languages are
solved automatically. The model has not yet been implemented completely, as can
be seen in the slow pace of transfers of competences to the newly created minority
self-governments, a problem linked to delicate issues of allocation of resources.
There are fields of minority protection where the Hungarian record is excellent, like
the fostering of minority culture and the media. There are other fields where inherited
structural problems create difficulties for the practice of minority protection, such as
education and the use of minority languages before judicial and administrative
authorities. The record in implementing the Charter is thus mixed, although one
cannot doubt the good will of the Hungarian legislation and administration.
D. One of the main difficulties arising under Part II of the Charter is the situation of
Roma/Gypsies. The large majority of Roma/Gypsies speak only Hungarian. The
Charter, however, deals with minority languages. Accordingly, only the Romani and
Beas languages have to be dealt with under the Charter. Although the number of
users of these languages is still relatively high, there have been few efforts to
develop a systematic language policy in favour of these two languages. Admittedly, it
is not always easy to reconcile classical goals of anti-discrimination policy and
modern approaches directed towards the preservation of linguistic identity. Under
Part II of the Charter, however, there is a clear necessity to foster the maintenance
and further development of these two languages. Hungary thus should take more
resolute action to maintain and develop them as a part of Europe's cultural wealth
and tradition. In the case of Romani and Beas, such resolute action would require
some initial fundamental measures, directed towards the scientific recording and
systematic development of these languages. A second basic measure needed
urgently would be the creation of adequate capabilities of teacher training in the two
languages and in the cultures connected with them. At a later stage, after having
created the necessary preconditions, a comprehensive endeavour would become
possible directed towards the creation of bilingual education for the Roma/Gypsy
children.

35

E. As concerns Part III languages, the state of education looks much better than for
Romani and Beas. There exists a comprehensive legislative framework,
guaranteeing in principle that in all places where at least eight parents so demand,
the school authorities have to form a separate class or study group teaching in the
minority language or offering at the minimum supplementary courses in this
language. In practice, there is a series of technical difficulties, sometimes due to the
lack of necessary resources, sometimes due to the shortage of trained teachers,
sometimes due to organisational problems – but this is the case for many educational
systems. The situation in pre-school and primary education conforms to the
undertakings under Article 8 of the Charter. It is striking, however, how
underdeveloped forms of bilingual school education actually are. Most minority
language education is given in supplementary classes in the framework of
Hungarian-based education. This is even more striking in secondary and vocational
education, where the socio-linguistic limitations – most children at the beginning do
not speak their “minority”´ language well enough to receive education in it as a
medium of instruction – could be more easily overcome than in primary education. In
these two fields, there are general deficiencies in the implementation of Article 8.1(c)
and (d), although one must bear in mind that Hungary is in a process of
transformation of the educational sector. The Hungarian authorities are making
serious efforts to overcome these difficulties. The most pressing problem seems to
be teacher training, since the further development of minority language education
depends on the availability of sufficient numbers of teachers trained in the minority
languages. Hungary has to take resolute action in order to overcome the shortages in
minority language teacher training.
F. Concerning the use of minority languages in the judicial system and the
administration, the findings are rather mixed. As far as the legislative framework is
concerned, Hungary seems largely to conform to its undertakings, with the exception
of the Law on State Administration. The real problem lies more in the administrative
organisation and the social climate of relations between minority-language speakers
and state authorities. Since practically all speakers of minority languages are
bilingual, with a good command of the Hungarian language, they are inclined to use
Hungarian in their contacts with authorities as long as the administration does not
make clear that it is prepared to handle routinely applications and forms of direct
contact in the minority language. In order to “ensure” that users of minority languages
may communicate with the administration in their minority language, the courts and
the administration would have to take organisational measures in advance, such as
keeping a functional interpretation and translation service or recruiting even
administrative personnel with a knowledge of the minority languages. Such measures
are however only possible in limited areas where the number of speakers of a
minority language justifies the expenditure. If Hungary were to attempt to guarantee
the public use of these languages efficiently, it would have to limit its efforts to certain
geographical strongholds of the various minority languages. The situation in local
administration demonstrates that creating such administrative structures is possible;
in the historical settlement areas of the linguistic minorities, local authorities routinely
deal with documents and oral communications in minority languages. The state
administration, on the other hand, has not hitherto been prepared to do the same.
G. Concerning the media and the field of cultural activities, the picture is
encouraging. The status and use of minority languages in the electronic media is
rather well developed, although even here some difficulties occur, such as the
problems of minority language associations and entrepreneurs in getting a radio
licence. Concerning the printed media, Hungary has a long-established – and
exemplary – scheme of subsidising minority language newspapers. The most severe
deficiency in the media field lies in the lack of trained professional journalists in the

36

minority languages. Unfortunately, here Hungary has done little so far to implement
the undertaking of Article 11.1.g of the Charter. Concerning the cultural activities and
facilities covered under Article 12, there are only a few shortcomings. The Republic
of Hungary has a well functioning scheme of financing cultural activities in this field,
channelling the funds partly through the minority self-governments. The Hungarian
system is in full conformity with its undertakings under Article 12 of the Charter. If
there are any elements that could be improved in the future, it would be the
comprehensive development of the potential of the system of minority selfgovernments. To use the self-governments, as the main institutions in providing
facilities and planning cultural activities would secure the minorities an active role in
the future development of minority languages and the cultures they reflect.

The Hungarian government was invited to comment on the content of this report in
accordance with Article 16.3 of the Charter. The comments received are attached in
Appendix II.
On the basis of this report and its findings the Committee of Experts submitted its
proposals to the Committee of Ministers for recommendations to be addressed to
Hungary. At the same time it emphasised the need for the Hungarian authorities to
take into account, in addition to these general recommendations, the more detailed
observations contained in the body of the report.
At its 766th meeting on 4 October 2001, the Committee of Ministers adopted its
Recommendation addressed to Hungary, which is set out in Part B of this document.

37

APPENDIX I

INSTRUMENT OF RATIFICATION

Hungary :

Declarations contained in the instrument of ratification, deposited on 26 April 1995 - Or.
Engl. and completed by a Note verbale (1) from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
Hungary, dated 12 March 1999, registered at the Secretariat General on 16 March 1999 Or. Fr.
Hungary declares, according to Article 2, paragraph 2, and Article 3, that it applies to the
Croatian, German, Romanian, Serbian, Slovak and Slovene languages, the following
provisions of Part III of the Charter:
In Article 8 :
Paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a (iv), b (iv), c (iv), d (iv), e (iii), f (iii), g, h, i
Paragraph 2
In Article 9 :
Paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a (ii), a (iii), a (iv), b (ii), b (iii), c (ii), c (iii)
Paragraph 2, sub-paragraphs a, b, c
In Article 10 :
Paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a (v), c
Paragraph 2, sub-paragraphs b, e, f, g
Paragraph 3, sub-paragraph c
Paragraph 4, sub-paragraphs a, c
Paragraph 5
In Article 11 :
Paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a (iii), b (ii), c (ii), e (i), f (i), g
Paragraph 3
In Article 12 :
Paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a, b, c, f, g
Paragraph 2
Paragraph 3
In Article 13 :
Paragraph 1, sub-paragraph a
In Article 14 :
Paragraph a
Paragraph b.
[(1) Note from the Secretariat:
The Note verbale read as follows:

" The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Hungary presents its compliments to the
Secretariat General of the Council of Europe and has the honor to draw its attention to a
technical error contained in the instrument of ratification deposited by the Republic of
Hungary, namely that the languages enumerated in respect of which Hungary makes
undertakings concerning Part III of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages,
do not include the Serbian language.
Indeed, the Republic of Hungary, by Decision No. 35/1995 (IV.7) of the Parliament, of which
an official translation in French is appended, has ratified Part III of the Charter, accepting also
the Serbian language and with the same options as those enumerated in the instrument of
ratification of 19 April 1995. Hungary's obligations with regard to the Serbian language
become therefore operative from the date of entry into force of the European Charter for
Regional of Minority Languages in respect of Hungary.
Decision of the Parliament No. 35/1995 (IV.7)
On the ratification of the European Charter on Regional or Minority Languages
and on the undertakings taken by the Republic of Hungary
in conformity with its Article 2, litt. 2,
The Parliament, on a proposition from the Government:
1. Ratifies the European Charter on Regional or Minority Languages, elaborated on
5 November 1992, which text is reproduced in Appendix No. 1.
2. Agrees that the undertakings taken in conformity with Article 2, litt. 2, of the Charter
reproduced in Appendix No. 2 extend to the Croatian, German, Romanian, Serbian,
Slovakian, Slovenian languages.
3. Invites the President of the Republic to issue the instrument of ratification.
4. Invites the Minister of Foreign Affairs to deposit the instrument of ratification and the
inventory of the undertakings taken."]
Period covered: 01/03/98 The preceding statement concerns Article(s): 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 2, 3, 8, 9

40

APPENDIX II

European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

Comments of the Government of the Republic of Hungary
concerning the Report of the Committee of Experts
The Government of the Republic of Hungary fundamentally agrees with the findings
of the specialists' report on Hungary's implementation of the European Charter for
Regional or Minority Languages. We thank the Committee of Experts for its
appreciation of the accomplishments we have gained so far, the innovative measures
we have introduced - particularly the comments which bear on the model Hungary
has put into execution of minority self-governments. The words of appreciation
further strengthen our commitment to develop the system.
In the immensely thorough and objective report, the Committee does not merely list
our shortcomings but also points to the reasons for them, recognizing the efforts
made by Hungary to overcome these, and making proposals as to the future.
In the period that has elapsed since the submission of the Report, several
government decisions have been made which have brought progress in the field of
the protection of minority languages and the development of minority culture and
education. In our comments, we make only a brief mention of these positive changes,
since - as was indicated by the authors of the Report themselves - a fuller discussion
of these will be provided in the forthcoming report.
It is a piece of relevant new information that, in February of this year, a census was
carried out in Hungary. It is hoped that the data of the census will further strengthen
the well-founded nature of our minority policy, bringing us closer to obtaining
dependable statistics on the size of minority communities. The first data of the
census are expected to be published in the latter half of this year.
In what follows, we will make our comments in connection with the particular findings
of the evaluation of the Committee of Experts, referring to the relevant points of the
Report.
Points 13 and 21 of the Report:
The Romani/Lovari language, used by the Roma of Hungary, has several –
dialectally considerably divergent - variants present among the Roma population.
This is a considerable handicap where implementation of the linguistic rights of the
Roma population is concerned. The above points of the Report leave out of
consideration the fact that the predominant majority of Roma speak Hungarian as
their native language.
Point 20:
The Republic of Hungary ensures, in the Act on the Rights of National and Ethnic
minorities, the language rights of numerically small minorities living in areas hard to
delimit geographically. The Government itself endeavours to revive and strengthen

41

the demands of these minorities concerning use of their languages through funding
for successful applicants selected in a competitive bidding process. Good examples
of this are the regular funding furnished by the Ministry of Education to Sunday
Schools teaching minority languages and ethnic studies, and the funding provided for
the organization of language camps and for the publication of literary works of art in
minority languages by the Public Foundation for the National and Ethnic Minorities of
Hungary.
With reference to the phrase used by the authors of the Report in connection with the
Bulgarian, Greek, and Ruthenian languages – ,,...the practical impossibility to use
these languages in education..." -, we would like to state the following: Based on an
accord concluded in 1992, an establishment jointly maintained by the education
ministries of the two countries, the Hristo Botev Bulgarian-Hungarian Primary and
Secondary school operates in Budapest. We have had, for decades, Greek minority
language education in the Primary School of Beloiannisz and the Alfréd Hajós
Primary School of Budapest. And (in 1998) the teaching of Ruthenian started in
Múcsony, where Ruthenian is used to this day as a language of day-to-day local
communication.
Points 26 and 34
As regards the conclusions of the Report concerning the Romani and Beas
languages, we make the following comments. The teaching of Roma studies is a
compulsory element of the programme of Roma minority education, with language
training as a non-obligatory component. Where at least eight parents so demand,
here, too, there is a valid obligation to offer courses in the particular idiom spoken by
them (Romani or Beas). Naturally, over the last one-and-a-half` decades, school
textbooks, language primers and dictionaries have been made in both the Romani
and Beas languages (eg. works by József Choli Daróczi, Dr Ervin Karsai, György
Rostás Farkas, Imre Vajda, Melinda Rézmüves, Sándor Romano Rácz, Mihály
Máthé centering on the Romani language area, with others by Mrs Anna
Orsós -Pálmai, Ilona Varga, Mrs Erzsébet Orsos -Gida dealing with the Beas language
area). The works of the above authors are used in Romani and Beas language
training in, for instance, the Secondary School of the Ghandi Public Foundation, at
the Kalyi Jag Computer Science Vocational School for the Roma Nationality and in
the Hegedüs T. András Foundation Secondary School.
Based on the indications of local minority self-governments and research
experiences, it is safe to conclude that there is rising interest in school instruction for
both languages. Therefore – in the case of both the Romani and the Beas languages,
in the interests of creating the conditions that would allow tuition in these languages the Ministry of Education has commissioned a set of language skill requirements to
be drafted. The working material prepared will be a adopted after a wide-ranging
professional debate. Once the language skill requirements have been adopted, work
can start to draft the framework curricula. However, it must be taken into account
that, up until very recently, neither the Romani nor the Beas language have
possessed any writing systems; the standardization of these languages will be the
result of a fairly lengthy process.
In teacher training, would-be teachers have a wide choice as to the form in which
they can study Roma culture (department, department group, special courses, etc,).
The Romani or the Beas language is not compulsory in the Roma studies, since
instruction in the majority of the institutions is provided in Hungarian.
At present, Romani and Beas language training courses are on offer at the Vilmos
Apor Catholic Teacher Training College (Zsámbék), the Teacher Training Faculty of

42

the University of Kaposvár, the John Wesley Pastor Training College, and at the
University of Pécs. In addition, people showing an interest for the Romani language
(including teachers) can acquire Romani at training courses organized by the
National Roma Information and Educational Centre.
Point 39
The authors of the Report are of the opinion that the number of secondary schools
for teaching in and of the minority languages is low. While basically agreeing with
that comment, we would like to stress that the predominant majority of the existing
secondary schools serve a particular district or operate on a national enrolment
basis; they have dormitories or hostels of their own, enabling them to receive
students from any part of the country. In the past few years, none of the minorities
have indicated a desire to set up any additional minority secondary schools.
Points 45-46-47, and the recommendation formulated on the basis of these
The draft of the amendment of the Act on Criminal Procedure - currently in the
administrative consultation phase - will, once adopted, amply ensure the use of
regional and minority languages for all the parties involved in criminal proceedings,
both orally and in writing. A detailed outline of the relevant modification will be
provided, after its adoption, in the upcoming country report.
Point 51
We do not agree with the conclusion of the Committee that proceedings before
courts concerning administrative matters are exclusively in writing. The special rules
relating to proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters are
contained by Section 20 of Act No.III/1952 on Civil Procedure. Beyond this,
proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters are governed by the
general rules of Civil Procedure. Given that the Code of Civil Procedure, as amended
by Act No.CX/1999, applies to all legal proceedings, and, on the basis of the general
rules, the Committee has established the fulfilment of the obligation, we tend to
adhere to the view that compliance with the undertaking has been achieved also in
the case of proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters
Point 53
While accepting the opinion of the Committee, we would like to add here the remark
that it follows from the principle of freedom of contract that a contract or legal
document can by the mutual consent of the parties, also be drafted in a minority
language.
Points 54-60
Here again, to make the picture entirely clear, we wish to point out that - both in local
and in state administration - the Government has set itself the target of involving the
civil servant and public servant corps in an in-service training scheme designed to
ensure that, in areas inhabited by minorities, public institutions and authorities may
recruit their administrative personnel from a pool of civil and public servants having
command of the relevant minority language, thereby fulfilling the guiding principle of
the Language Charter.
Point 61
Section 19 of Act.No.XLI/1991 on Public Notaries provides that, in the case of
notarial seats with a heavy proportion of residents belonging to a national minority,
applicants acquainted with the language of the minority should be given preference.
In regard to the notarial procedure, it should be pointed out that instruments in a
language other than Hungarian can be drafted only by a notary-public empowered to
do so by the Ministry of Justice: [with a special language licence]. The procedure is

43

slightly different where it comes to the inheritance. Here the Code of Civil Procedure,
as a background regulation, permits the use of the services of an interpreter,
meaning that, in these matters, a notary-public who does not have a language
licence in the relevant language can also proceed. The costs of this - given that the
execution of wills has a set tariff to it - must be borne by the notary-public.
Points 64-65
To the statement of the Report that “The other applications for radio licences
submitted by associations or applicants planning a specific minority language
programme have to compete on an equal footing with other applications", we would
like to add the following: On the basis of the provisions of Act No.I/1996, cited in the
Country Report, the National Radic and Television Body (hereinafter: NRTB) may
stipulate preferential terms and conditions regarding application procedures or rules
deviating from those which normally exist, to facilitate the implementation of minority
rights. In this case, however, the applicants are not the national minority selfgovernments but public utility companies, as non-profit broadcasters, owned
exclusively by the national minority self-governments.
As an example, we mention the Slovenian Radio Public Utility Company, which has
already started broadcasting in the district inhabited by Slovenes, and the Radio C
Public Utility Company, which was awarded a frequency in the latest bid for
applications as a Roma minority radio network.
Contrary to the claims of the Report, the NRTB - as far as its human and financial
resources permit - regularly monitors compliance with the undertakings by the
broadcasters. Beyond the regular monitoring of programmes, it demands an annual
report from the national commercial radio and television broadcasters to check and
verify whether they live up to their undertakings concerning programming in the
minority languages. If appropriate, the NRTB can also impose sanctions.
In regard to cable television networks, the Report suggests the need for legislative
measures to be adopted to allow the possibility of obliging broadcasters to distribute
minority programmes. Under the present legal regulations, the NRTB does not
interfere in the contractual relationship between the cable television networks and the
broadcasters, meaning that this question can be solved only by modifying the Media
Law.
Summing up:
The Government of the Republic of Hungary fundamentally agrees with the contents
of the Report of the Committee of Experts of the European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages on Hungary's record on implementing the Charter. Our intention
above has been to correct and to add some details to some of the findings of the
Committee. In the few cases where we did not agree with the evaluation or
conclusion, we have tried to present and support our arguments.
As was indicated in the introduction, a detailed exposition of several new positive
measures that have been taken to advance our fulfilment of our undertakings relating
to the Charter will be provided in our next Periodic Report. Only where we believed
that a knowledge of the relevant new initiatives could help one form a more accurate
picture did we include any reference to these measures.
One of the major insights we have gained is that, while, in our Country Report, we
tended to concentrate mainly on those of our minorities concerning which we have
fulfilled our undertakings under Part III of the Charter, the Report of the Committee of

44

Experts has clearly enjoined upon us the need to accord, in our next Report, greater
emphasis to the general measures arising from Part II of the Charter and applying to
all the minorities living in the Republic of Hungary - the more especially since Act
No.LXXVII/1993 on the Rights of National and Ethnic Minorities also does not make
any difference between the minorities featuring in our undertakings concerning the
Charter and the rest of the minorities of Hungary.
We welcome the recommendations voiced by the Committee of Experts. Each and
every one of these accords with the goals of Hungary's consensual minority policy - a
policy commanding the support of all the relevant political forces - and the main
directions of the minority policy of all our successive governments.
Budapest, May 2, 2001

45

European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

B. Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers
of the Council of Europe on the application of the Charter
by Hungar y

(adopted on 4 October 2001 at the 766th meeting
of the Ministers’ Deputies)

COUNCIL OF EUROPE
COMMITTEE OF MINISTERS

Recommendation RecChL(2001)4
on the application of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
by Hungary
(Adopted by the Committee of Ministers
on 4 October 2001
at the 766th meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies)

The Committee of Ministers,
In accordance with Article 16 of the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages;
Bearing in mind the instrument of ratification submitted by the Republic of Hungary
on 26 April 1995;
Having taken note of the evaluation made by the Committee of Experts of the Charter
with respect to the application of the Charter by the Republic of Hungary;
Bearing in mind that this evaluation is based on information submitted by Hungary in
its initial periodical report, supplementary information provided by the Hungarian
Government, information submitted by bodies and associations legally established in
Hungary, and information obtained by the Committee of Experts during its “on the
spot visit”,
Recommends that the Republic of Hungary:
1.
establish a policy for developing the Romani and Beas languages, with the
aim of facilitating their use in public life, and respond to the needs of the users of
these languages, in particular in education;
2.
strengthen the institutional infrastructure for teaching in and of the minority
languages, and develop further the possibilities of bilingual education and provide
sufficient teacher training;
3.
strengthen the possibilities of speakers of minority languages to use their
language before the courts and in relations with the administration, by taking
organisational and other appropriate measures to ensure that the existing legal
mechanisms can be utilised in practice;
4.
continue to develop the potential of its newly established system of minority
self-governments in view of the valuable contribution it can make to the promotion of
the minority languages.

48

