Strasbourg, 11 September 2002

MIN-LANG/PR (2002) 6

EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR R EGIONAL OR M INORITY LANGUAGES

Second Periodical Report
presented to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe
in accordance with Article 15 of the Charter

HUNGARY

Second Periodical Report of the Government of the Republic of Hungary
on the Implementation of its Commitments Assumed by Ratifying the European
Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
of the Council of Europe

The Republic of Hungary was among the first signatories of the European Charter for
Regional or Minority Languages of the Council of Europe (hereafter referred to as the
Charter). Accordingly, after the entry into force of the Charter, it submitted its first report on
the implementation of the Charter to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe in
September 1999. Following some additional information and an “on-the-spot visit”, the
Committee of Ministers took note of the report last year.
The policy of the Republic of Hungary concerning regional or minority languages has not
changed over the recent period. Essentially, the fundamental laws guaranteeing the protection
of minority languages did not change, but (due exactly to the ratification of the European
Charter for Regional or Minority Languages of the Council of Europe and the obligations
Hungary assumed under the Charter) a number of amendments extending the possibilities for
the use of these languages were adopted and regulations further clarifying the understanding
of the rights related to the use of minority languages in certain areas of public life were also
issued.
I. Introduction
For centuries, numerous national communities have been coexisting on the territory of the
Republic of Hungary. In modern times, the ethnic and language composition of this part of
the Carpathian Basin was greatly marked by an extensive loss and restructuring of the
population during the Ottoman-Turkish occupation, and the subsequent large scale
spontaneous migrations and organised settlements during the 17th – 18th centuries.
A common feature of most national and ethnic minorities living on the territory of today’s
Hungary is that they have been living within the framework of the Hungarian state for
centuries. Except for the autochthonous Slovene inhabitants of the southwestern part of the
country around Szentgotthárd, minorities arrived to the current territory of Hungary in several
waves over the past centuries. A key component of their historic, social and ethnic character
is that they mostly left behind the original territory of their ethnic group prior to the birth of a
regulated standard language and for this reason their currently spoken languages and dialects
generally tend to be archaic language variants.
The integration and then the assimilation of the minorities settled on the current territory of
Hungary into the majority nation was sometimes fast and aggressive, sometimes slower and
less forcible over the passing centuries. The forced population transfers and voluntary
translocations after World War II strongly eroded minority communities. These processes
resulted in a weakened identity, cultural ties and educational base for almost all minorities in
Hungary, as well as the acceleration of their assimilation. Although minority policy prior to
the change of political system in 1989 recognised a few minority communities (all of which
currently fall under the force of the Charter) and supposedly supported the bequeath of
minority cultures and the establishment of the relevant educational bases yet, instead of pro2

active measures, the cultural assimilation, the decreasing role of minority languages and the
elimination of the identity of the minorities basically continued.
As a result, most of the minorities living within the territory of the Republic of Hungary have
dual or multiple cultural ties. Their ties to Hungarian language and culture are nearly as
strong as (sometimes even stronger than) their bonds with their original national minority
language and culture.
Nonetheless, the change of the political system brought about an increasing activity among
the minority language communities. Minorities that had been earlier officially regarded “nonexistent” (the Roma/Gypsies, the Bulgarians, the Greeks, the Polish, the Armenians, the
Ruthenians and the Ukrainians) created their organisations and associations and were soon
actively participating in the development of the principles of a democratic minority policy. It
is to a large extent due to the active role of the minorities that the Act on the Rights of
National and Ethnic Minorities was in place already by 1993. To date, this same law lays
down the minority policy of the Republic of Hungary. Considering the fact that its text
specially emphasises minorities’ linguistic rights, the Act can be regarded as the first
systematic wording of Hungary’s policy with regard to minority languages.
The recognition of the common history and the historic co-existence is an important element
of the definition given in the Act on the Rights of National and Ethnic Minorities, providing
the basis of Hungary’s minority policy. The law defines the notion of national or ethnic
minority by integrating the so-called Capotorti definition and the elements of the Council of
Europe’s minority concept. According to that, "a national or ethnic minority”, recognised in
Hungary as a constituent part of the state, "is an ethnic group with a history of at least one
century of living in the Republic of Hungary, which represents a numerical minority among
the citizens of the state, the members of which are Hungarian citizens, and are distinguished
from the rest of the citizens by their own language, culture and traditions, and at the same
time demonstrate a sense of belonging together, which is aimed at the preservation of all
these, and the expression and protection of the interests of their communities, which have
been formed in the course of history.”
It should be noted that this definition concerns minority communities and not individuals
belonging to a group, ma ny of whom speak hardly, if at all, the language.
* * *
The latest census in the Republic of Hungary was carried out in 2001. According to the data
gathered, the total population of the country was 10 198 000 at the turn of the millennium.
Within that, the portion of men was 47.6% and that of the women 52.4 %. The portion of
children (0–14 years) was 16.6 %, that of the middle-aged (15–59 years) was 63.0% and the
portion of senior citizens (above 60 years) was 20.4%. (At the time of the previous census in
1990 the portion of the population declaring themselves to be of Hungarian nationality was
98.5 %. The 2001 data are not yet available). The population of minority language
communities, as well as their portion within the total population is very low. When evaluating
the data, however, one could not ignore the fact that it was not compulsory to respond to the
questions about belonging to a minority and that negative historic experience of minorities
still casts a shadow over the willingness to confess one’s minority identity.
The age composition of Hungary’s national/ethnic minority population – with the exception
of the Roma/Gypsies – is generally unfavourable even compared to the country’s overall
3

ageing population. Taking the distribution by age group s we find a steady decrease of the
numbers towards the younger generations. The previously characteristic families with several
children have been replaced by ageing households.
According to the 1990 census data, the schooling indicators of the minority population are
less advantageous than those for the population as a whole. This might be explained first of
all by the high portion of older people, that is, of those who obtained only a lower level of
schooling over the past decades. This is further confirmed by the fact that schooling
indicators of the school-age groups of the national and ethnic minorities tend to be generally
better than those of the total population. A survey conducted by the Ministry of Education
shows that the schooling indicators of Roma pupils have now become close to the overall
country average, i.e. some 90% graduate from primary school and about 85% of them
continue in secondary school.
The economy of the Republic of Hungary has been growing dynamically in recent years.
Over the past three years the rate of growth exceeded the average rate of the EU member
states. The geographical distribution of economic growth, however, is uneven, as it is mainly
concentrated around the capital and the western part of the country. The government has
made serious efforts in recent years to include also the eastern part in the economic growth,
but the results so far are quite limited. Hungary’s economy is a functioning market economy
presenting all the relevant characteristics this implies. The main trading partners of the
Hungarian economy are the member states of the European Union.
The economic and social integration of the minorities in Hungary – with the exception of the
Roma minority – can be considered complete. Their schooling, employment and income
indicators generally do not differ from those of the majority population living within the same
region and under the same conditions.
Parliamentary democracy and the rule of law in the Republic of Hungary are supported by a
stable institutional framework, as the annual reports of the European Union equally ascertain.
The legislative, executive and judicial powers function independently from one another and
co-operate suitably.
The development of the public administration and the decentralisation of administrative tasks
are in progress. Over the recent years the Government has paid a special attention to the
development and strengthening of regional public administration, and to the evolution of
public services as well as civil servants’ career opportunities.

I.1. Definition of the term “user of a regional or minority language”

Besides the Constitution, an important political instrument of the Republic of Hungary
concerning minority languages is the amended Act LXXVII of 1993 on the Rights of
National and Ethnic Minorities (hereafter referred to as the Minorities Act), which, among
others, defines the language rights of the minority communities. In the preamble of the
Minorities Act, the following wording is used: “The mother tongue, the intellectual and
material culture, the historical traditions of the national and ethnic minorities who are
Hungarian citizens and live in Hungary, and other characteristic qualities, which support
their minority status are considered aspects of their identity as individuals and as a
community. All these are special values, the preservation, cultivation and augmentation of
4

which is not only a basic right of the national and ethnic minorities, but also in the interest of
the Hungarian nation, and ultimately in that of the community of states and nations.”
In Hungarian law, the subject of linguistic rights is not identified on the basis of the definition
of a “user of a regional or minority language” but on the fact of a person’s belonging to “a
national or ethnic minority.”
Thus, the subjects of the linguistic rights guaranteed by law are the persons and communities
belonging to the minorities living in Hungary and meeting the above definition.
According to Article 42 of the Minorities Act, the languages used by minorities living in
Hungary are the following: Bulgarian, Gypsy (Romani and Beas), Greek, Croatian,
Polish, German, Armenian, Romanian, Ruthenian, Serbian, Slovak, Slovene and
Ukrainian.
The national or ethnic minorities speaking the above-enumerated languages are scattered
throughout the country’s whole territory. In the majority of the cases they live at settlements
where they form a numerical minority of the local population. There is scarcely any demand
on the part of minorities living in Hungary in relatively small numbers (such as the
Bulgarians, the Greeks, the Polish, the Armenians, the Ruthenians and the Ukrainians)
related to the use of their languages and cultures, but even in their case the language rights
are guaranteed by the Minorities Act, even though their dispersion makes it impossible to
define a geographical area or region where their languages are used. The standardisation of
dialects spoken by the Roma/Gypsies of Hungary (the Romani and the Beas) has begun and
it is expected that when the process will be complete these languages shall appear in
Hungary’s public life.
As far as Part III of the Charter is concerned, the Republic of Hungary assumed commitments
only in connection with the languages of minorities living in more concentrated groups,
generally in well definable regions of the country (Romanians, Slovenians) or of those who,
due to their numbers, have established educational and cultural structures in their mother
tongue despite being scattered across several regions or counties (Croatians, Germans, Serbs
and Slovaks).
In view of the foregoing, when preparing for the signature of the Charter and relying on the
suggestion of the expert committee responsible for the preparation, the Government of the
Republic of Hungary decided that under the given conditions it shall commit itself to protect
the languages of six of the above enumerated thirteen minorities: the Croatian, the German,
the Romanian, the Serbian, the Slovak and the Slovene minority languages.
Naturally, this does not mean that the Government does not take actions to protect the rest of
the minority languages. It merely means that it shall implement such measures outside the
framework of the Charter. The Government is making constant efforts for the development of
the Romani and the Beas languages independently of the fact that it has not yet assumed
specific commitments in connection with these languages within the framework of the
Charter.
The six national minority languages mentioned have undergone various changes over the past
centuries. Their independent development followed only partially the mother nations’
language reform movements. As a result, the everyday language spoken by the minorities has
conserved archaic dialects that differ from the standard languages sometimes to a smaller,
5

sometimes to a larger extent. Today we are witnessing that since minority education is
administered in the standard languages already incorporating the results of language reforms,
the standard languages supplant local regional minority dialects.
* * *
As it was already mentioned above, it is difficult to define the exact geographical locations of
the minorities living in Hungary. In the next part those geographical regions are listed that
can be directly linked to a particular minority. However, relevant information will also be
provided for each minority as to the number of their minority self- governments in each
county, since that kind of information allows a more accurate understanding of the presence
of the minorities. (In the capital Budapest, the minorities can elect local self- governments in
each district and the members of such district level minority self- governments can create
capital level minority self- governments, too. In this way, each minority may elect a total of
24 minority self- governments within the capital.)
* * *
In Hungary, the legal framework provides much broader possibilities for the use of the
languages of the minorities than is actually utilised. At 64 settlements the local government is
in fact a minority self- government (a so-called transformed minority local government)
because most of the local representatives were elected as minority candidates. At such
settlements it is possible to pass local decrees (on the basis of national legislation) that ensure
a high level use of the minority languages in public administration and public life at a local
level. Still, the minorities utilise only part of the given possibilities.

I.2. Data concerning minority populations in Hungary based on the 1990
and 2001 year census data and according to minorities’ estimates
Minority

Croatian
German
Romanian
Serbian
Slovak
Slovene

Population (1990)
(according to mother
tongue)
1)
17,577
37,511
8,730
2,953
12,745
2,627

Population (1990)
Estimated population
(according to
belonging to a
minority)
1)
2)
13,570
80,000 – 90,000
30,824
200,000 – 220,000
10,740
25,000
2,905
5,000 – 10,000
10,459
100,000 – 110,000
1,930
5,000

Source: 1) Central Statistical Office
2) National minority self-governments

A great majority of the Croatians in Hungary (a total of almost 16 thousand people) live in
the southern and western counties of Baranya, Zala, Vas, Gyor-Moson-Sopron and BácsKiskun, and most of them reside at smaller settlements. The number of persons declaring
their Croatian cultural ties is a little more than that, while the number of those stating that
Croatian is their mother tongue or that they use it for communication within the family is
somewhat less.
6

At the 1998 minority elections (the next elections are due in October 2002) a total of 75
Croatian minority self- governments were formed in the country, 15 of those in Budapest, 10
in Bács-Kiskun County, 18 in Baranya County, 5 in Gyor-Moson-Sopron County, 3 in Pest
County, 5 in Somogy County, 10 in Vas County and in 9 Zala County. The number of the
transformed Croatian local governments is 18.
The greatest numbers of the population declaring themselves to be of German nationality (a
total of 62 thousand people) live in Baranya County, Pest County, in Budapest, in Tolna and
in Komárom-Esztergom Counties (in descending order), distributed more or less evenly
among the urban and rural populations. The same applies to people declaring their ties with
the cultural values and traditions of the German minority. The latter are more numerous (88
thousand) than those who declare their nationality. In the case of the declared mother tongue
(34 thousand) a 10% decrease has been registered since 1990, but significantly more people
(53 thousand) stated that they used the German language for communication within the
family and with friends.
The Germans living in Hungary created a total of 271 local minority self- governments in
1998 – 24 of them in Budapest, 17 in Bács-Kiskun County, 56 in Baranya County, 7 in Békés
County, 8 in Borsod-Abaúj-Zemplén County, 2 in Csongrád County, 15 in Fejér Count y, 10
in Gyor-Moson-Sopron County, 16 in Komárom-Esztergom County, 2 in Nógrád County, 33
in Pest County, 3 in Somogy County, 4 in Szabolcs-Szatmár-Bereg County, 26 in Tolna
County, 10 in Vas County, 36 in Veszprém County and 2 in Zala County. From this list it is
clear that the German minority is spread all across Hungary’s territory since from the total 19
counties there are only three without any local German minority self- government. The
elected local bodies were transformed into German minority local governments at 30
settlements.
The most significant population of the Romanian national minority in Hungary (of a total
population of 8000) live in Békés and Hajdú-Bihar Counties, close to the Romanian border,
as well as in Budapest an in Csongrád County. Compared to the previous census, their
number has reduced both in terms of declaring their nationality and their mother tongue.
At the time of the 1998 minority elections 31 so-called Romanian minority self- governments
were set up. 13 of those were formulated in Budapest, 8 in Békés County, 1 in Borsod-AbaújZemplén County, 2 in Csongrád County and 7 in Hajdú-Bihar County. At three settlements
the local bodies were transformed into minority local governments.
Half of the Serbs (nearly 4000 people) live in or around Budapest, while the other half lives
mainly in the cities of the southern part of the country, in Csongrád, Baranya, Békés and
Bács-Kiskun Counties. In their case the data again show that less of them declared Serbian as
their mother tongue, while more people use it with the family and also more declared cultural
ties.
The total number of Serbian minority self- governments following the 1998 elections is 36, of
which 15 are in Budapest, 2 in Bács-Kiskun County, 2 in Baranya County, 1 in Békés
County, 4 in Fejér County, 9 in Pest County and 1 was created in Tolna County.
The Slovaks living in Hungary (nearly 18 thousand people) are mostly concentrated in the
cities of Békés County and in the villages of Pest and Komárom- Esztergom Counties. In the
case of the Slovakian minority the number of people declaring their cultural ties is pleasingly
7

high (nearly 27 thousand people did so) and less than half of that (12 thousand people) speak
Slovak as their mother tongue. The number of those declaring the use of Slovak among
family and friends is about as many as the number of people declaring themselves to belong
to the Slovakian minority.
The Slovaks living in Hungary created minority self- governments in 11 of the 19 counties
and in the capital after the last minority elections. Of a total of 75 minority self- governments,
9 are in Budapest, 3 in Bács-Kiskun County, 13 in Békés County, 10 in Borsod-AbaújZemplén County, 2 in Csongrád County, 1 in Fejér County, 2 in Heves County, 8 in
Komárom- Esztergom County, 13 in Nógrád County, 12 in Pest County, 1 in SzabolcsSzatmár-Bereg County and 1 in Tolna County. These numbers show that the Slovaks
represent the second most scattered minority language community after the Germans. The
number of the transformed minority local governments is 8.
The number of people declaring themselves as belonging to the Slovene minority (3000
people) has significantly increased compared to the data of the previous census and the
numbers concerning the related criteria also tend to be similar. The major part of them live in
Vas County, while smaller communities live in Budapest and Pest County.
Slovene self- governments were set up in Budapest (1), in Gyor-Moson-Sopron County (1)
and in Vas County (8) after the 1998 elections.
* * *
At the time of the 2001 census an important consideration was given to reduce the gaps
between census and estimation data. For this reason the national self- governments of the
minorities were closely involved in the preparation of the census. As a result of several
rounds of consultations, the census data sheet (translated to all minority languages and
distributed by the Central Statistical Office to the census-takers) contained four questions (as
opposed to an earlier two in 1990) that specifically asked information about the identity, the
mother tongue, the cultural ties and the language used in the family and with friends of
interviewees belonging to minorities. The four questions that the interviewee could answer
optionally, in line with the stipulatio ns of the Act on the Protection of Personal Data, were as
follows:
-

To what nationality do you feel you belong?
Which nationality’s cultural values and traditions do you identify with?
What is your mother tongue?
What language do you use within the family and with friends in general?

At the suggestion of organisations and researchers dealing with minority issues, several
answers could be given, in view of the potentially existing multiple ties. Representatives of
the minorities had also been involved in wording the questions, agreed with their final
formulation and were also actively involved in the preparation of the census. Above all, they
tried to explain to members of their own respective communities the importance of the census
and also worked in order to achieve that the highest possible number of local minority people
are involved in the taking of the census.
Besides the above questions directly investigating minority affiliations, further indirect
information could be gained from the answers given to the question concerning the
interviewee’s religious ties. The data for this question, however, are not yet available.
8

The official summary report of the data concerning the minorities obtained in the 2001 census
is not yet available. According to preliminary unofficial summary data provided by the
experts of the Central Statistical Office, the figures derived from the answers concerning
people’s ties with minorities, languages and culture for the total population included in the
census (and not just for Hungarian citizens) are as follows:

Minority

Croatian
German
Romanian
Serbian
Slovak
Slovene

Number of people belonging to a particular minority according to answers
given to the question concerning
the langua ge
ties with national
belonging to
used in the family
cultural
the mother tongue
the minority
and with
values, traditions
friends
14,345
15,620
19,715
14,788
33,792
62,233
88,416
53,040
8,482
7,995
9,162
8,215
3,388
3,816
5,279
4,186
11,816
17,692
26,631
18,056
3,187
3,040
3,442
3,119

The questions of the 2001 census further refined the understanding of the Charter’s term for
“user of a regional or minority language” for Hungary. As opposed to the data so far obtained
on the basis of the free and voluntary declaration of belonging to a particular minority (which
is essentially in the spirit of the Minorities Act), it is now possible to obtain a much more
precise picture about the number and location of the people identifying themselves with the
language and cultural traditions of specific minorities. In the future, these figures and their
regional breakdown will allow us to see which regions should the government concentrate on
when formulating and developing its minority policy.

I.3. Minorities "speaking non-territorial languages" in the Republic of
Hungary
The Minorities Act recognises 13 native minorities living on the territory of the Republic of
Hungary. The individual minorities live rather scattered, and their communities are
essentially present across the whole country. However, these communities differ in terms of
numbers, language and cultural possibilities as well as their needs. Considering the traditions,
languages, cultural and identity situation of the minorities, when signing the European
Charter for Regional or Minority La nguages, as far as Article 3 was concerned, the Republic
of Hungary assumed commitments for the above discussed six minorities out of the thirteen.
Naturally, this does not mean that in the medium-term these commitments could not be
extended to the other national and ethnic minorities. The Government’s minority, educational
and cultural policies are all formulated in a manner so as to enable the minorities which are
not covered by the commitments related to the Charter to develop their languages, to
strengthen their cultural identity and to make it also possible for Hungary to extend its
commitments to the languages of these minorities.

9

In the light of the aforementioned, the minorities speaking a “non-territorial” language are the
Bulgarian, the Roma/Gypsy, the Greek, the Polish, the Armenian, the Ruthenian and the
Ukrainian minorities. Their numbers have been evaluating over the last two censuses (1990
and 2001) as follows:

Minority

Population (1990)
according to mother
tongue
1)

Roma/Gypsy
Bulgarian
Greek
Polish
Armenian
Ruthenian

48,072
1,370
1,640
3,788
37
674

Population (1990)
Population
according to
(estimation)
belonging to a
minority)
1)
2)
142,683
400,000 – 600,000
No data
3,000 – 3,500
No data
4,000 – 4,500
No data
10,000
No data
3,500 – 10,000
No data
6,000

together with the Ukrainians

Ukrainian

674

No data

2,000

together with the Ruthenians
Source: 1) Central Statistical Office, 1990 census
2) National minority self-governments

As indicated above, the official summary of the 2001 census minority figures has not yet
been published until the preparation of the present report. For this reason the data in the table
below are preliminary and unofficial.

Minority

Roma/Gypsy
Bulgarian
Greek
Polish
Armenian
Ruthenian
Ukrainian

Number of people belonging to a particular minority according to answers
given to the question concerning
the language
ties with national
belonging to
used in the family
the mother tongue
cultural
the minority
and with
values, traditions
friends
48,689
1,299
1,921
2,580
294
1,113
4,885

190,046
1,358
2,509
2,962
620
1,098
5,070

129,259
1,693
6,140
3,983
836
1,292
4,779

53,323
1,118
1,974
2,659
300
1,068
4,519

The largest minority living in Hungary continues to be the Roma/Gypsy community (190
thousand people, according to the 2001 declarations). The largest Roma/Gypsy community
lives in the less developed northeastern region, i.e. in Borsod-Abaúj-Zemplén County (45
thousand people) and in Szabolcs-Szatmár-Bereg County (26 thousand), but their numbers
exceed 10 thousand even in Budapest and in Heves, Jász-Nagykun-Szolnok, Pest and HajdúBihar Counties. Their communities also form a couple of thousand strong populations in all
other counties. Nearly 50 thousand declared to use Roma/Gypsy dialects (Beas and Romani),
both as a mother tongue and as the language used for communication within the family, while
a much higher number declared their affinity to the Roma/Gypsy culture (almost 130
thousand people).
10

According to the 1998 minority self- government election data, the geographical location of
the Roma/Gypsy minority practically covers the whole territory of Hungary. As a result of
the elections, a large number of Roma minority self- governments were created in all counties,
in total 766 local bodies were set up. By far the largest number of Roma minority selfgovernments was established in Borsod-Abaúj- Zemplén County (129) but at least 10 local
Roma minority self- governments were set up in almost every county.
The largest population of the Bulgarian minority (1400 people) lives in and around
Budapest. Bulgarian minority self- governments were set up in Budapest (9), one in each of
the following counties: Baranya, Borsod-Abaúj-Zemplén and Hajdú-Bihar, and two in Pest
County.
The population of the Greek minority (2500 people) also tend to concentrate in and around
Budapest, but there is also a community of a couple of hundred people living in Fejér County.
Greek minority self- governments were set up in Budapest (10) and one in each of eight
counties around the country.
Half of the population of the Polish minority (3000 people) live in the capital. This
community created a total of 33 minority self- governments, 10 of which are in Budapest, 11
in Borsod-Abaúj-Zemplén County, while the remaining twelve self- governments operate in
ten other counties.
Two-third of the total Armenian minority (620 people) live in Budapest and Pest County.
They have 25 self- governments, 16 of which in the capital, and the rest operate in eight
counties.
Some half of the total Ruthenian minority (1100 people) lives in Budapest and in Pest
County. A total of 10 Ruthenian minority self- governments were set up, six of which are in
Budapest, 3 in Borsod-Abaúj-Zemplén County and 1 in Pest County.
The largest communities of Ukrainians (5100 people) also live in Budapest and in Pest
County, but their groups are also present in Szabolcs-Szatmár-Bereg County. Only 5
Ukrainian minority self- governments came into being, three of that in Budapest, and the
remaining two in two rural cities.
It is true for the Bulgarians, the Greeks, the Polish and especially the Armenians that their
cultural affinity tends to be stronger than regarding themselves as belonging to a specific
minority, at the same time the knowledge and use of the minority language is less general
among them.
It is not a precondition for the creation of a minority self- government that either the voters or
the elected members should actually speak the particular minority language. For this reason,
there are a number of minority self- governments whose officials do not speak the given
minority language.
* * *
Since the submission of the previous report, Hungary’s intention of safeguarding regional or
minority languages has been integrated into several laws and law amendments, which have
been elaborated and published in the last three years. The Committee for Human Rights,
11

Minorities and Religious Affairs of the Hungarian Parliament set up an ad hoc committee
with a view to review the legislation on minority issues. Upon the ad hoc committee’s
suggestion, work has begun to modify the most important piece of legislation with a general
scope that is the Act on the Rights of National and Ethnic Minorities. In the course of this
work an important emphasis was given to further precise minority language rights, primarily
in the fields of education and public administration but also in the area of realising the
minorities’ cultural autonomy and providing the necessary conditions for minority
institutions. Minorities were invited several times to give their opinions on the draft
amendment, which was then submitted to Parliament by the Committee for Human Rights.
However, the draft could not be discussed in Parliament before the April 2002 general
elections.
Another draft law has been prepared on the election of members of minority selfgovernments, also as part of the review of the minority related legislation, and partly in the
light of experience gained during the previous minority elections. The objective of the bill
coincides with the wish to strengthen and improve minority self- governance and is in line
with Recommendation No. 4 of the Committee of Ministers. The draft law was elaborated by
experts of the Ministry of the Interior, and then submitted to Parliament by the Committee for
Human Rights. The discussion of the proposal was not yet started before the general
elections.
The amendment in 1999 of Act LXXIX of 1993 on Public Education (hereafter referred to
as the Public Education Act) had similar importance in the field of the teaching of minority
languages, since it further refined the conditions of minority education, the minority selfgovernments’ scope of authority in education as well as the legal framework of the teaching
of non-regional languages.
Act XCVI of 2001 on the Publication of Business Advertisements, Shop Signs and
Certain Announcements of Public Interest in the Hungarian language was passed in the
last year with an objective to protect the Hungarian language. According to the stipulations of
this law, all signs having an economic nature and/or being of public interest must be
published in the Hungarian language, which (as stated by paragraph (4) of Article 6 of the
Act) does not concern minority language economic promotions and signs published, in line
with the stipulations of Article 42 of the Minorities Act, at settlements where the minority
speaking the concerned language has its own minority self- government.

12

II. 1. Key acts and other regulations protecting the languages of minorities
The role played by the national and ethnic minorities within Hungarian society is clearly
defined in the Constitution of the Republic of Hungary (Act XX of 1949, hereafter referred
to as the Constitution). Paragraph (1) of Article 68 declares that “the national and ethnic
minorities living in the Republic of Hungary participate in the sovereign power of the people:
they represent a constituent part of the State.” The Constitut ion guarantees for the
minorities their collective participation in public affairs, their right to create local and
national self- governments, the fostering of their cultures, the use of their native languages,
education in their native languages and the use of names in their native languages.
The Minorities Act provides individual and collective rights (pertaining to personal autonomy
and the creation of self- governments) for the 13 native minorities. The Act devotes a separate
section to the minorities’ linguistic, educational and cultural rights, and ensures the right of
using names in their own languages. By defining the educational and cultural rights as
collective rights, it establishes the basis for all minorities to create their own systems of
education and cultural life.
In the section on the rights of minority self- government of the Minorities Act, a broad sphere
of authority is ensured for the minority self- governments in the field of education and culture.
Besides defining the minority language as a language of tuition, it also enables the minority
self-governments to participate in the definition of tasks for the local educational institutions,
in the appointment of the head of the educational institution and in the evaluation of the
tuition work.
By passing and later amending the Act on Public Education in 1996, the most important
steps were taken to harmonize the field with the Minorities Act. Referring to the relevant
section of the Minorities Act, the Act on Public Education declared that, besides Hungarian,
the language of the education in kindergarten and elementary school tuition, as well as in
boarding schools should be the language of the national and ethnic minorities. The relevant
sphere of authority defined by the Minorities Act for minority self- governments was similarly
adopted, thus allowing for them to make effective use of the possibility to influence the
development, contents and form of minority education. The same amendment created the
National Committee for Minorities that operates as the minister’s advisory board in the field
of minority education and consists of the delegates of all minorities.
The Act on Radio and Television Broadcasting (Act I of 1996, hereafter referred to as the
Act on Media) made it an obligation for public service media to produce programmes
presenting the life and culture of the minorities. Service providers performing public service
functions are obliged to provide regular information in the native languages of the minorities.
Act CXL of 1997 on the Protection of Cultural Goods, Museum Institutions, the Supply
of Public Libraries, and General Cultural and Educational Activities defines the
preservation of the national and ethnic minorities’ cultural traditions, their continuation in a
worthy manner, the improvement of personal, intellectual and economic conditions of
community and individual education, the promotion of activities which improve the quality
of life of citizens, and the operation of institutions and organisations established to realise all
of these points as common tasks of society as a whole.

13

Similarly, other acts include provisions regarding the rights of minorities and within this the
use of language, the Minorities Act’s provisions on the use of language being the same or
more favourable as these.

II. 2. New measures taken by the State to foster the use of regional or
minority languages
The primary objective of the planned amendment of the Minorities Act is to strengthen
cultural autonomy, to further develop the system of minority self- governments, to encourage
them to take over minority institutions and to provide the framework of state guarantees
necessary for the transfer. The draft amendment covers special rules pertaining to the transfer
of public educational and minority cultural institutions from state management into the hands
of minority self- governments. The mentioned state guarantees would primarily ensure that
financial resources required for the continuous operation of the minority institutions taken
over by the minority self- governments are always available.
Provisions defining the rules of preparing the minutes of minority self- government sessions
are intended to give a more precise understanding of the rights of minorities related to
language use. The draft amendment declares that "the minutes shall be either in the language
of the minority and in Hungarian or in Hungarian language. Of the minutes prepared in two
languages, the document in the minority language shall be considered authentic.”
The amendment wishes to stress the support for minority language education when, instead of
Article 43 of the Act currently in force, it proposes the following wording: ”the State
recognises the language of the minorities in Hungary to be a cohesive factor of communities.
The State encourages the use of the minority languages in the minority education and
instruction regardless of who is the maintainer of the educational institutions.”
The draft law on the election of members of minority self-governments aims to strengthen
minority self- governance as well as the foundations of cultural autonomy. Its main objective
is to refine the rules of local minority elections, the conditions of eligibility and the
conditions of creating national bodies, i.e. national minority self- governments.
A new element in this draft law is the possibility to create medium level minority selfgovernments. In terms of the draft law, the county minority self- government would operate as
the partner of the county government, within the scope of authority and responsibility
determined by the Act.
* * *
The Public Education Act was further amended in 1999. This amendment refined the scope
of authority of the National Committee for Minorities as the advisory body to the minister of
education concerning issues of minority education. The Committee has the right of consent
concerning all aspects of minority education in the course of developing legal regulations
such as ministerial decrees, decisions and orders and also assumes official authority tasks
concerning the publication of minority textbooks.

14

Also, the amendment refined the requirement criteria concerning the qualifications of
teachers employed in minority education and the contents of the educational programmes and
curricula, which provide the framework for minority institutions to implement their tasks.
According to the new provisions, the educational programmes of minority kindergartens must
include tasks related to minority education, just as schools and boarding schools providing
minority education have to integrate their relevant tasks in their documents.
The modified Act fulfils an old wish of teachers working in the field of minority education by
stipulating a 10 per cent raise of the time devoted to minority education. The extension of the
timeframe was needed because of the amount of the curriculum.
The amendment provided further details concerning the sphere of authority of the national
minority self- governments in the field of education, by stipulating that the consent of the
relevant minority self- governments must be obtained prior to the adoption of minority
educational curricula.
The possibility introduced by the amendment for organising complementary minority
education is a step forward primarily for those minorities of small population who are not
concerned by the present Hungarian commitments assumed under the Charter. According to
Paragraph (5) of Article 86 of the amended Act, ”If the number of pupils belonging to a given
national or ethnic minority is not sufficient for setting up minority education within the
settlement, the concerned national minority self-government may initiate that the capital city
or county level self-governments organise the education of the given minority language and
related minority nation studies subjects (hereafter referred to as complementary minority
education), linked to the requirements of elementary education providing the bases of general
knowledge. Complementary minority education may be organised by introducing a special
class within a school, by setting up a school providing minority language instruction or by
employing commuting teachers."
The detailed regulation of complementary minority education is laid down by Article 39 (B)
of the Decree No. 11/1994. (VI.8.) of the Minister of Culture and Public Education on the
Operation of Educational Institutions.
One of the most important documents for the teaching of minority languages is Decree No.
32/1997 (XI. 5.) of the Minister of Culture and Public Education on Issuing the “Guidelines
on pre-school instruction of national and ethnic minorities” and the “Guidelines on academic
education of national and ethnic minorities”.
Besides two types of pre-school education for national minorities, the decree defines the
“kindergarten providing Gypsy cultural education” form.
During the reporting period, the Decree No. 28/2000 (IX. 21.) of the Minister of Education
on Issuing, Introducing and Applying Framework Curricula came into force. The decree also
concerns the way of elaborating the minority education curricula. According to that, "The
framework curricula of the education of national and ethnic minorities – including the
framework curricula for mother tongue (minority language), literature and minority nation
studies, and the lesson plans – are included in Appendix 2 to this Decree. The framework
curricula for the education of national and ethnic minorities set forth the requirements of
mother tongue (minority language) and literature, and of minority nation studies for each
grade up to the end of the 12th grade. Framework curricula may depart from the provisions of
the Guidelines on the academic education of national and ethnic minorities issued in Decree
15

No. 32/1997 (XI. 5.) of the Minister of Culture and Public Education on Issuing, Introducing
and Applying the Guidelines on pre-school instruction of national and ethnic minorities and
the Guidelines on academic education of national and ethnic minorities, which define the
requirement criteria to be fulfilled at the end of the fourth, sixth, eighth and twelfth grades,
when breaking down these requirements for each year.”
Government Decree No. 1073/2001 (VII.13.) amending Government Decree No. 1047/1999
(V.5.) on the medium term package of measures to improve the social position and living
conditions of the Roma specifically deals with the Roma/Gypsy minority education, by
saying that in the amendments of the Minorities and Public Education Acts and other legal
measures special emphasis should be given ”to the development of the contents of Roma
minority education, the elaboration of framework curricula, the creation of proper conditions
for evaluation and quality assurance, the provision of school equipment and methodological
material needed for the education and, subject to confirmation with the National Roma SelfGovernment, the elaboration of a system of requirements for the teaching of the Gypsy
languages" .
Government Decree No. 72/1998 (IV.10.) on the funding of higher education on the basis
of training and maintenance normative assistance helped to ease financial problems
experienced by minority higher education by introducing a 15 per cent raise in the normative
funding for training and maintenance of minority language majors. The subsequent
Government Decree No. 120/2000 (VII.7.) mitigated the financing problems even further by
classifying nationality majors into a category of majors receiving more important funding.
The potential language difficulties of students with a minority mother tongue applying to
higher education institutions are to be bridged by Government Decree No. 269/2000 (XII.26.)
on the General Rules of Entrance Procedure to Institutions of Higher Education, which
stipulates in Article 9 Paragraph (11) that “students belonging to national minorities may
take the entrance examination in their mother language, provided that they are applying for
admission to a nationality major and that they indicated their wish in the admittance request
form.”
The higher education of minority languages is further promoted by the fact that, in line with
the stipulations of the Act on Higher Education, Government Decree No. 129/2001 (VII.13.)
published the qualification criteria for basic higher level education in Arts and certain
social sciences, including for nationality majors at the college and university level.
In connection with higher education, the already mentioned Government Decree No.
1073/2001 (VII.13.) deals with the promotion of Roma/Gypsy Studies (“romology”), as well
as with the support given to post- graduate courses organised for teachers working in
Roma/Gypsy education.
The adoption of Government Decree No. 71/1998 (IV.8.) on the new rules of language
examinations proved to be a serious problem for minority languages, since it stipulates that
language examination centres have to be accredited. Due to a determined intervention on
behalf of the Ministry of Education after the entry into force of the decree and the efforts of
the National Foreign Language Centre, however, it is once again possible to obtain state
language certificates in Bulgarian, Croatian, Polish, Roma/Gypsy (both Beas and Lovari),
German, Romanian, Serbian, Slovak and Slovene languages. The elaboration of requirement
criteria and the accreditation of examination centres for Modern Greek, Ruthenian and
Armenian languages are in progress. The majority of the examination centres are currently
16

located in the capital, but in recent months several towns (Pécs, Szeged, Békéscsaba) created
new facilities for organising language exams for the minorities living in the given region.
Parliament passed the Act CI of 2001 on Adult Education in December 2001. The Act
provides a legal framework for providing adult and continuing education in regional or
minority languages, should the need come up.
* * *
Act I of 2002 amending the Act XIX of 1998 on Criminal Procedure , which will come into
force on 1 January 2003, brings the criminal procedure into line with the stipulations of the
Charter. According to Article 9 paragraph (2) of the Act, “in criminal proceedings, everyone
may use, both in oral and in writing, their own mother tongue or a regional or minority
language specified by an international treaty enacted by Hungarian law and falling within
the scope defined by the said treaty or, in the lack of command of the Hungarian language,
another language specified by the person in question.”
The amendment also makes it clear that the translation of a decision to be delivered to the
interested parties and of other official documents shall be arranged by the court, the
prosecutor’s office or othe r investigating authority issuing the decision.
Article 114 of the new Act defines the obligation to provide interpretation as follows:
“During the proceedings, an interpreter shall be employed if the person whose mother tongue
is other than the Hungarian language wishes to use his/her own mother tongue or regional or
minority language specified by an international treaty enacted by Hungarian law and falling
within the scope defined by the said treaty.”
Similarly, Article 219 of the Act clearly stipulates the obligation of having the bill of
indictment translated: “If the accused does not have command of the Hungarian language,
those parts of the bill of indictment that directly concern him/her shall be translated into the
mother tongue, regional or minority language used by the accused or, on his/her request, into
a language he/she declares to have command of and which had previously been used in the
proceedings, and it shall then be submitted to the court in such form.”
Paragraph (6) of Article 262 stipulates the translation of that part of the court decision that
concerns an accused who does not have command of the Hungarian language into a language
specified by him/her: "For the accused not having command of the Hungarian language,
those parts of the verdict or final decision that concern him/her shall be translated (after the
announcement of the verdict) into his/her mother tongue, regional or minority language or,
upon request, into another language specified by the accused and which had previously been
used in the proceedings; and the resulting document shall be delivered to the accused."
The amendment clarifies the question of who has to bear the burden of financing the
implementation of the above-described linguistic rights. Paragraph (2) of Article 339
stipulates that “the State shall equally assume the costs arising from to the fact that the
accused (…) does not have command of the Hungarian language or that s/he had used
his/her regional or minority language in the proceedings."
* * *

17

In order to provide increased support for Roma/Gypsies and in the spirit of the
aforementioned Government Decree No. 1073/2001 (VII.13.), the National Radio and
Television Commission (ORTT) adopted its Decision No. 1064/2001 (VII.19.) concerning
the elaboration of a Roma/Gypsy media strategy. The project is supervised by the Service
Provider Fund.
By adopting Decision No. 337/2000 (IV.18.), the National Radio and Television Commission
launched a call for tenders via the Service Provider Fund for the production of public service
programmes. Among the tender criteria, programmes to the attention of minorities were given
priority.
In view of promoting Roma/Gypsy culture, Government Decree No. 1073/2001 (VII.13.)
amending Government Decree No. 1047/1999 (V.5.) stipulates that “services, books,
methodological handbooks and textbooks in the field of education, culture and general
information should be made available for the Roma/Gypsies also in their mother tongue, in
line with actual needs. Financial resources available for supporting the vernacular culture
and the means of further developing them should be assessed.”
* * *
In the field of economic life, Act XVI of 2002 modified Article 5 of Act XXII of 1992 on the
Labour Code concerning the prohibition of discrimination. The amendment extended the
prohibition of negative discrimination to regulations, measures, conditions and practices
preceding and facilitating the employment. In addition, the notion of indirect negative
discrimination was introduced into the text of the law. A measure is regarded as such if the
employees concerned form an overwhelmingly homogeneous group (on the basis of their
nationality, ethnicity, etc.) for whom the regulations, measures, conditions and practices
applied concerning a particular job, even though formally in a uniform manner or apparently
ensuring equal opportunities, turn out to be disproportionately disadvantageous.
* * *
The following section presents the agreements including stipulations concerning minority
protection signed within the framework of bilateral co-operation with the States whose
official languages are here concerned, as well as the planned agreements.
On the basis of the Treaty between the Republic of Hungary and the Slovak Republic on
Good-neighbourly Relations and Friendly Co-operation, a total of 12 joint committees were
created to provide the framework for the co-operation of the two countries in different areas
of economic and social life. As far as the implementation of the Charter is concerned, the
recommendations of the Joint Committees on Minorities, Culture and Education and the
concerning government decrees are of particular interest.
The Joint Committee on Minorities basically co-ordinates minority-related problems arising
in any of the other specialist joint committees. For this reason, the government decrees most
relevant from the present Report’s point of view are those adopted on the basis of the
recommendations of that committee.
Hence, Government Decree No. 2121/1999 (V.28.) drawn up according to the suggestions by
the Joint Committee on Minorities obliges the Ministry of Education “to make sure that the
appropriate conditions for teaching the Slovak language are in place in the minority schools
18

of Hungary.” Similarly, in order to foster the language skill development of the Slovaks
living in Hungary, the Committee suggested that the Parties “promote the reception of the
Slovakian public television broadcasts in those areas of Hungary where a significant number
of the Slovakian minority population lives." The recommendations made at the subsequent
second session were integrated into Decision No. 2112/2000 (V.31.), which declares that “the
scheme for providing regular post-graduate education to the teachers teaching in Slovak
language within the Republic of Hungary shall be elaborated and approved” and that “the
activities of the regional cultural centres of the Slovakian national minority of Hungary shall
be ensured.”
The following recommendations made at the third and insofar last session of the Committee
are significant for the purposes of the present Report: “the Hungarian Party shall ensure the
material, financial and professional conditions required for the efficient operation of the
schools of Slovak language tuition, the publication of the text-books and methodological
material (…)” and “the Hungarian Party shall modify in an appropriate manner the time
schedules of Slovakian programmes of the Hungarian public television and radio, ensure the
technical possibilities for reception all over the country and improve working conditions of
the Slovak editorial staff.”
The above- mentioned two recommendations are covered by Government Decree No.
2292/2001 (X.11.), which also indicates those responsible for the implementation and the
deadline to be respected.
On 23 April 2001 the Government of the Republic of Hungary and the Government of the
Slovak Republic signed in Budapest an Agreement on the Cross-border Co-operation of
Local Self-governments and Public Administration Organs. The agreement enables the
promotion of national minority language education, the nurturing of the minority cultures, the
support to the co-operation among twin-schools and the formulation of partnerships between
those local and regional municipalities in the territory of which a significant population of
Hungarian or Slovakian national minorities are established.
In terms of the agreement, a joint committee shall be set up to support cross-border regional
co-operation. As the twelfth in the line of similar bodies, the new joint committee shall be
part of the mechanism set up to promote the implementation of the Hungarian-Slovakian
Basic Treaty. The creation of the joint committee is underway.
As far as the relations with Romania are concerned, following a several years’ long break the
Committee on national minorities of the Hungarian-Romanian Intergovernmental Joint
Commission for Active Co-operation and Partnership held its 4th session on 19 October 2001.
The co-chairmen of the committee signed a Protocol and Recommendations concerning the
respective situation and unresolved problems of the Romanian minority in Hungary and the
Hungarian minority in Romania, and agreed to issue, as soon as possible, government decrees
ensuring the conditions indispensable for the implementation of their commitments.
According to paragraph II/2 of the Memorandum of Understanding between the Government
of the Republic of Hungary and the Government of Romania, the aforementioned
"recommendations made in the Protocol (…) will be approved by the two Governments, who
will take the necessary measures for implementation.” On 1 February 2002 the Hungarian
Government appointed in its Decree No. 2023/2002 (II.1.) those responsible for the
implementation of the recommendations and set a deadline for impleme ntation.

19

On 22 December 2001 the Government of the Republic of Hungary and the Government of
Romania signed in Budapest a Memorandum of Understanding on the Law on the
Hungarians Living in Neighbouring Countries and issues of bilateral co-operation.
In the Memorandum of Understanding the Parties, besides agreeing upon the still open issues
concerning the Act LXII of 2001 on the Hungarians Living in Neighbouring Countries
(hereafter referred to as the Act on Preferential Treatment), also agreed that they “shall start
the negotiations in the frame of the Committee on national minorities of the Hungarian–
Romanian Intergovernmental Joint Commission of an Agreement on the preferential
treatment of the Romanian minority living on the territory of the Republic of Hungary and of
the Hungarian minority on the territory of Romania, in order to preserve their cultural
identity (…).”
Government Decree No. 2305/2001 (X.26.), elaborated on the basis of the recommendations
of the Hungarian–Slovene Joint Committee on Mino rities, invites the concerned ministries to
"make increased efforts to effectively implement the (…) rights related to the use of
languages, with special regard to bilingual documents, according to the needs of the minority
communities.”
Similarly, the recommendations of the Hungarian–Croatian Joint Committee on Minorities
also refer to measures to be taken in order to protect the language of Croatians living in
Hungary. Government Decree No. 2179/2001 (VII. 13.), based on those recommendations,
for instance, invites government bodies “to strive to ensure that in regions where minorities
live in greater numbers, members of the minorities are employed in state administration
bodies as well as at state owned enterprises in higher numbers, reflecting the proportions
existing within the local population.”
The same decree invites the concerned bodies “to ensure, on the initiative of the minority,
that if there is a justified demand, the place and street names, as well as the inscriptions of
public offices and announcements concerning their activities should be indicated in both the
language of the given minority and the official language, in line with the legislation in force.”
The Hungarian–Ukrainian Joint Committee on Minorities also operates within a framework
similar to the above discussed. Following the sessions of the Committee the Hungarian party
integrates the recommendations made in a government decree. Likewise, based on the
recommendations accepted at the last session of the Joint Committee, Government Decree
No. 2292/2001 (X. 11.) specifically refers to the recording of the names of members of the
Ukrainian minority in the personal identification documents in their mother tongue, to the
support given to the culture of the Ukrainians living in Hungary and to the support for the
Ukrainian language newspaper published in Hungary.

20

II.3. Organisational framework of the protection of regional or minority
languages
As the result of the consistent and continuous minority policy of the Republic of Hungary, the
legal framework required for the protection of minorities and, within that, the protection of
minority languages is already established. Several public bodies (including the selfgovernments of the minorities) and NGOs exist, whose activities are devoted in great part to
the protection of the languages and minorities here concerned. The Committee on Human
Rights, Minorities and Religious Affairs of the Hungarian Parliament oversees at the highest,
legislative level that the principles of protecting the minorities and, within that, minorities’
languages are respected in the course of legislation. The Parliamentary Commissioner for
the Rights of Minorities reports solely to the Parliament; the Commissioner investigates the
complaints addressed to him/her concerning the violation of linguistic rights and makes
recommendations as to how to remedy the situation. Monitoring the respect of the language
rights of minorities is also part of the sphere of responsibility of the Office for National and
Ethnic Minorities.
On several occasions over the recent years the Parliamentary Commissioner for National and
Ethnic Minority Rights initiated investigations that specifically concentrated on the
enforcement of the minorities' rights to the use of their languages. The results of the
investigations, together with the relatively limited number of complaints concerning language
use that are filed every year have proved that the minorities hardly know their rights
concerning the use of their languages and that they rarely come forward with demands of that
nature. If, however, collective language rights are exercised at local level, the relevant laws
allow for their satisfaction. As far as individual rights to the use a language are concerned
(such as the selection of a surname, its registration and use in official documents), it has to be
said that despite of an increasing effort to inform the officials, they are still not aware of the
linguistic rights of the minorities. However, in the cases when members of minority
communities wish to exercise their individual language rights, it usually turns out that they
are much better informed than before or than concerning their collective rights.
A task assumed by the national and local self-government of minorities is the protection of
the interests of the given minorities. Within that, the self- governments are the main advocates
of enforcing the minority language rights at local, regional and national levels. Recently, the
issue of ensuring the collective exercise of language rights by minorities has been also
included in bilateral documents of the of the joint committees on minorities.

The following is a list of the organisations actively involved (also) in the field of protection
of minority languages:

-

Committee for Human Rights, Minorities and Religious Affairs of the Hungarian
Parliament
1054 Budapest, Széchenyi rakpart 19.
Chairperson: László Szászfalvi (MDF)
Tel: (361) 268-5031 Fax: (361) 268-5986
Internet: www.mkogy.hu/biz/index.htm

21

-

Office of the Parliamentary Commissioner for Minority Rights
1051 Budapest, Nádor u. 22.
Parliamentary Commissioner: Dr. Jeno Kaltenbach
Tel: (361) 475-7149, Fax: (361) 269-3542
Internet: www.obh.hu

-

Office for National and Ethnic Minorities
1133 Budapest, Pozsonyi út 56.
President: Antal Heizer
Tel: (361) 359-2120, Fax: (361) 239-0009
Internet: www.meh.hu./nekh

-

National Croatian Self-Government
1089 Budapest, Bíró Lajos u. 24.
President: Mihály Karagics
Tel: (361) 303-5630, Fax: (361) 303-5636

-

National Self-Government of Germans in Hungary
1026 Budapest, Júlia u. 9.
President: Ottó Heinek
Tel: (361) 212-9151, Fax: (361) 212-9153
Internet: www.ldu.hu

-

National Self-Government of Romanians in Hungary
5700 Gyula, Eminescu u. 1.
President: Traján Kreszta
Tel/Fax: (36 66) 463-951

-

Serbian National Self-Government
1055 Budapest, Falk Miksa u. 3.
President: Péró Lásztity
Tel/Fax: (361) 331-5345

-

National Slovak Self-Government
1114 Budapest, Fadrusz u. 11/a
President: János Fuzik
Tel/Fax: (361) 466-9463

-

National Slovene Self-Government
9985 Felsoszölnök, Fo u. 5.
President: Márton Ropos
Tel/Fax: (36 94) 434-032
Internet: www.slovenpages.hu

-

Bulgarian National Self-Government
1093 Budapest, Lónyay u. 41.
President: Dimiter Czuczumanov
Tel: (361)216-4210; Fax: (361) 215-5184

22

-

National Roma Self-Government
1076 Budapest, Dohány u. 76.
President: Flórián Farkas
Tel: (361) 322-8963; Fax: (361) 322-8501.

-

Greek National Self-Government
1054 Budapest, Vécsey u. 5.
President: Jorgosz Dzindzisz
Tel: (361) 302-7275; Fax: (361) 302-7277

-

National Polish Minority Self-Government
1102 Budapest, Állomás u. 10.
President: Konrad Sutarski
Tel/Fax: (361) 261-1798

-

National Armenian Self-Government
1052 Budapest, Deák F. u. 17.
President: Alex Avanesian
Tel: (361) 267-6203; Fax: (361) 267-3181

-

National Ruthenian Minority Self-Government
1147 Budapest, Gyarmat u. 85/B
President: Gábor Hattinger
Tel: (361) 468-2636; Fax: (361) 468-2637

-

National Ukrainian Self-Government
1066 Budapest, Zichy J. u. 10.
President: Jaroszlava Hartyányi
Tel/Fax: (361) 302-5842
Internet: www.ukrajinci.hu

II.4. Organisations involved in the preparation of the Report
The Office for National and Ethnic Minorities invited the national self-governments of the
concerned minorities, the competent departments of the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of
the Interior, the Ministry of Economic Affairs, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry
of Education and the Ministry of National Cultural Heritage to take part in the drawing up of
the present report. For the compilation of the final material, the Office also requested the
contributions of the county offices of public administration, the county courts as well as of
the Hungarian Central Statistical Office and of the National Radio and Television Board.
Within the framework of the central administration’s harmonisation procedure, the draft
report was sent for comments to all ministries, to the Hungarian Central Statistical Office and
to the Parliamentary Commissioner for National and Ethnic Minority Rights. The opinions of
the presidents of the national minority self- governments were equally solicited concerning
the draft report.

The Office for National and Ethnic Minorities provided for all of the above organisations the
full text of the recommendations of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe. At
23

an even earlier stage, at the time when these recommendations had been accepted, the Office
also submitted them to the Hungarian media, to the Hungarian News Agency, to the editors
of the minority information website Etnonet and to the Roma Press Centre.

II. 5. Information provided about the European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages
The Government of the Republic of Hungary and the Office for National and Ethnic
Minorities have made serious efforts over the period that elapsed since the submission of the
previous report to provide information about the commitments assumed by Hungary,
especially for the representatives of the minorities living in Hungary but also for the officials
of the central, regional and municipal public authorities and the judiciary. The primary
channel was the printed media, but the officials of the Office also gave presentations at
several minority events. In May 2000 the president of the Office held a presentation entitled
“Minority Languages in the Public Administration” at the Ministry of the Interior for the
heads of county offices of public administration. The text of the presentation was later
published in the Review of the Ministry of the Interior.
Counting on the fast spreading use of the Internet, the text of the European Charter for
Regional or Minority Languages, the full text of the first periodical report submitted by
Hungary, the opinion of the Expert Committee and the text of the recommendations of the
Committee of Ministers were made accessible on the website of the Office for National and
Ethnic Minorities, both in Hungarian and in English.
Some county offices of public administration published the full text of the Charter in their
respective information periodicals, highlighting the specific Hungarian commitments.
In June 2002, the Office for National and Ethnic Minorities organised a conference so as to
raise public awareness about the Charter. The presentations partly gave information about the
document itself, partly evaluated the implementation of Hungary’s obligations from the point
of view of a minority falling within and one falling outside of the force of the Charter, as well
as from the point of view of the Roma/Gypsy community.
At international level, the representative of the Office for National and Ethnic Minorities
gave an informative presentation at the European Centre for Minority Issues (ECMI) on the
implementation of Hungary’s commitments assumed in connection with the cultural and
media stipulations of the Charter.

24

II. 6. Measures related to the Recommendations of the Committee of
Ministers
Taking note of the suggestions of the Expert Committee, the Committee of Ministers
addressed four recommendations to the Republic of Hungary, which were as follows:
The Committee of the Ministers recommends that the Republic of Hungary
1.
establish a policy for developing the Romani and Beas languages, with the aim of
facilitating their use in public life, and respond to the needs of the users of these languages, in
particular in education;
2.
strengthen the institutional infrastructure for teaching in and of the minority
languages, and develop further the possibilities of bilingual education and provide sufficient
teacher training;
3.
strengthen the possibilities of speakers of minority languages to use their language
before the courts and in relations with the administration, by taking organisational and other
appropriate measures to ensure that the existing legal mechanisms can be utilised in practice;
4. continue to develop the potential of its newly established system of minority selfgovernments in view of the valuable contribution it can make to the promotion of the
minority languages.

(A brief summary is given here of the first measures taken in relation with the
recommendations adopted in October 2001, while a more detailed description is provided
below under the policy areas concerned.)

Recommendation No. 1: Developing the Romani and Beas languages
The Government does wish to develop both Roma/Gypsy languages, but at present does not
wish or, better say, cannot change its commitments under the Charter since it does not wish to
undertake obligations that it is not in a position to fulfil.
As a first step of development, the elaboration of language standards, equally suitable for use
in education, has been undertaken. Native speaker experts of the Romani and Beas languages
take part in this work. Curricula and language requirements based upon these standards are
expected to be ready by the second half of the year.

Recommendation No. 2: Strengthening the infrastructure of minority education
1. Primary and secondary schools
- The Government provides special financial support (for operational and
development expenses) for institutions playing a key role in the education of
particular minorities (Hercegszántó – Croatian; Szarvas, Békéscsaba – Slovak);

25

-

When defining the supplementary normative funding which is aimed at supporting
minority education, the Government expresses its preference for bilingual or
vernacular education. The different kinds of normative funding are continuously
differentiated.

2. Higher education
- The current teacher training capacity seems to be sufficient as far as the needs of
the schools, the interest of the students and the number of graduates are
concerned. The arising problems have to do with the contents, since in the current
minority teacher training system only minority language and literature teachers’
training is assured in the minority languages. For this reason, the Hungarian
Government aims to conclude bilateral agreements with the mother countries of
the minorities, allowing for students who are interested to pursue their studies
entirely or in part in the mother country.

Recommendation No. 3: Measures taken to promote the use of minority languages before
the courts and in relations with the administration
The use of language before the courts (as distinguished from its use in relation with the
administration) is not linked to the Minorities Act but to the right of the individual to the
administration of justice in his/her mother tongue. In the Hungarian justice system languages
other than Hungarian are used, and not just the languages of the minorities but also, for
instance, Chinese, Arabic, and so on. In asylum procedures several languages are used with
interpreters.
In the field of public administration, such use of languages is rather rare and is mostly limited
to oral communications. The preconditions of use of languages in the written form are in
place; only the citizens do not require it. No complaint has been recorded concerning this
particular issue.

Recommendation No. 4: Strengthening of the system of minority self-governments
The aim of Hungarian minority policy is to strengthen minority self- governance. In this
respect, the amendment of the Minorities Act refines the scope of authority and responsibility
of the minority self- governments, creates the insofar non-existent medium level minority selfgovernments and provides financial guarantees for the development of the minorities’
cultural autonomy, for the creation and operation of minority institutions.

26

III. 1. Minority policy measures taken by the Republic of Hungary
The role played by national and ethnic minorities in Hungarian society is laid down in the
Constitution of the Republic of Hungary. The supreme law declares that the national and
ethnic minorities living in Hungary share the sovereign power of the people: they are a
constituent part of the state. The Constitution guarantees minorities collective participation in
public life, the establishment of local and national self- governments, the nurturing of their
own cultures, the use of their native languages, education in their native languages, and the
right to use their names in their own languages.
The Minorities Act, accepted by Parliament with a 96% majority in 1993, gives individual
and collective minority rights (rights to a personal autonomy and to the establishment of selfgovernments) for the minorities native in Hungary.
Since the adoption of the Minorities Act, Hungary had two elections of minority selfgovernments. During the two election cycles it has been proven that the system of minority
self-governments is successful; nevertheless, it has become apparent that, unless the Act is
modified, certain inaccuracies in the provisions of the Act as it stands today, the lack of
certain guarantees and imprecise wording of the provisions effectively hinder the full
realisation of the system. Therefore, legislators began to work out an amendment of the
Minorities Act under the supervision of an ad hoc parliamentary committee. The proposal to
modify the Act has been drafted, yet it was not accepted before the end of the previous
parliamentary cycle.
Based upon the provisions of the Constitution, Parliament has elected in 1995, then re-elected
in 2001 the Parliamentary Commissioner for National and Ethnic Minority Rights (hereafter
referred to as the Minorities Ombudsman). The task of the Minorities Ombudsman is to
investigate (or have investigated) all reported problems related to minority rights, and to
initiate general or individual measures for their solution. The detailed tasks of the
Parliamentary Commissioner for National and Ethnic Minority Rights are defined in the Act
LIX of 1993 on the Parliamentary Commissioner for Civil Rights. Citizens may turn to the
Minorities Ombudsman in every case when, in their judgement, the procedures, the measures
or the failure to act of any authority or organ providing public services resulted in an
infringement upon their constitutional rights, or constitutes a danger to these rights. The
Minorities Ombudsman reports to Parliament on his/her work annually.
Among others, the process of exercising minority language rights can be traced by light of the
annual reports prepared by the Parliamentary Commissioner for National and Ethnic Minority
Rights. It is the minority self- governments that typically lodge the highest number of
complaints, in cases when the local self- government or the county office of public
administration fails to recognise the validity of documents drawn up in minority languages.
As it was indicated above, the proposals by the Ombudsman have been incorporated into the
draft amendment of the Minorities Act, with a view to define more accurately the minority
language rights, as well as the regulations in respect of the official status of documents drawn
up in minority languages.
Another frequent complaint is connected to the use of personal names in minority languages,
and the issuance of personal identity documents in minority languages. The concerning
legislation defines the rights of minorities and the responsibilities of the administration very
accurately, but it has proven difficult to enforce it at the local level. The Government strives
27

to provide information for both parties, that is, both at events organised for the attention of
public administration officials and at minority events, in oral as well as in written form, in
relation to all relevant legal and practical measures.
In line with the Constitution, Parliament adopted Act LXIII of 1992 on the Protection of
Personal Data and the Disclosure of Data of Public Interest, which ensures the protection of
personal data and contains the basic rules of promoting the exercise of the right to access to
information of public interest.
With the Act on Public Education and its modifications in 1996 and 1999, the basic steps
towards bringing the concerning legislation in line with the Minorities Act were taken. The
specific principles of minority education, information on minorities and the curriculum
requirements for those who take part in minority education appeared in the National Core
Curriculum, which was the first step towards the modernisation of public education, then in
the requirements for subjects of minority education, as well as in the framework curricula.
Within state support provided for public education, a special emphasis has been given to
guarantee supplementary normative funding for minority education. In recent years, the total
sum of these normative subsidies has been increasing at a rate which exceeded the rate of
inflation.
The Act on Media has made the production of programmes presenting the life and cultures of
minorities an obligatory task for public service media. Service providers who perform public
service tasks must ensure to provide regular information to the minorities in their own
languages.
Act CXXVII of 1996 on the National News Agency also contains provisions on ensuring
equal opportunities to national and ethnic minorities.
The system of minority self- governments, which has been gradually established in Hungary
on the basis of appropriate regulations, and which is today operational, fulfils an evergrowing role in the self-organisation of minorities.
If full equality before the law is guaranteed and objective disadvantages of minority existence
are appropriately counterbalanced, the responsibility of minority self- governments and other
civil organisations as regards the preservation of national identity will increase greatly within
the framework of a real autonomy of minorities which is to be achieved in the future.
It is the task of the Government to provide information on the natural and traditional forms of
centuries’ old coexistence of majority and minority populations in Hungary, as well as to
increase awareness of how various national and ethnic groups contribute to our shared
culture. In this respect, the Government does not view minorities as groups engaged in
fighting for their rights against the majority, but rather as a sum of individuals bearing joint
responsibility for common virtues and faults with the majority, with which they share the
same destiny.
The Government supports minorities in strengthening their identities, and it strives to raise
the awareness as to common values of the past and our joint responsibility for the future. The
Government wishes to further develop the minority self- government system and to extend the
cultural autonomy of minorities.
*

*
28

*

Conditions for minority education were further refined with the modification of the
“Guidelines on academic education of national and ethnic minorities”. The aim of the
modification was to put into words what is precisely meant by one or another specific form of
minority education, in a format understandable for everyone.
Native language education
The so-called native-language pre-school, or a school with native language tuition organises
pre-school instruction in the minority language, or, in the case of schools, all subjects apart
from Hungarian Language and Literature are taught in the minority language. There are
only few such institutions in the country.
Dual-language minority education
The “dual-language model” provides pre-school instruction in two languages, and, in the
case of schools, subjects other than the minority language are also taught in the minority
language. The Guidelines stipulate that 50% of the weekly obligatory classes shall be in the
native minority language.
Language teaching education
In the so-called “school providing minority language teaching” model education takes place
in Hungarian, but the minority language is studied by pupils in the frame of a minimum of
four classes per week. This is the form most prevalent in the Hungarian educational system,
since (due to historical and social reasons, and to the advanced stages of assimilation)
children entering school hardly know their minority’s language, or do not know it at all.
Since the introduction of the Guidelines, schools providing minority language teaching have
to provide at least four classes per week for minority language and literature classes, and
five classes in the case of German.
Roma minority education
In addition to cultural and, if desired, native language education, the so-called Roma
minority education aims to provide children belonging to the Roma minority equal
opportunities and talent development.
Within the framework of this programme, if parents wish so, it is possible to teach the
languages spoken by the Roma (Romani and Beás) in school. At present, these languages are
taught in one kindergarten, three secondary schools and one secondary boarding school
within the educational system.

With the purpose of developing minority education and further refining the general context of
education, the Ministry of Education issued Decree No. 28/2000 (IX. 21) on Issuing,
Introducing and Applying the Framework Curricula was issued. In connection with minority
education, the Decree says the following:

(5) "The framework curricula of the education of national and ethnic minorities – including
the framework curricula for mother tongue (minority language), literature and minority
29

nation studies, and the lesson plans – are included in Appendix 2 to this Decree. The
framework curricula for the education of national and ethnic minorities set forth the
requirements of mother tongue (minority language) and literature, and of minority nation
studies for each grade up to the end of the 12th grade. Framework curricula may depart from
the provisions of the Guidelines on the academic education of national and ethnic minorities
issued in Decree No. 32/1997 (XI. 5.) of the Minister of Culture and Public Education on
Issuing, Introducing and Applying the Guidelines on pre-school instruction of national and
ethnic minorities and the Guidelines on academic education of national and ethnic
minorities, which define the requirement criteria to be fulfilled at the end of the fourth, sixth,
eighth and twelfth grades, when breaking down these requirements for each year.”

One recommendation by the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe for the
Republic of Hungary was that it should establish a policy for developing the Romani and
Beas languages, with the aim of facilitating their use in public life, and respond to the needs
of the users of these languages, in particular in education. The Ministry of Education had
already started to work out the conditions for the instruction of Roma dialects at schools even
before that recommendation was formulated.
In the past decades, two major research projects examined the situation of the Roma/Gypsies
as regards the use of their languages, with over twenty years passed between the two surveys
(1971 and 1993). Already the first one found (and then the 1993 findings confirmed these
findings) that a decisive majority of Gypsies spoke Hungarian as their native language, while
only a very few of those polled said that either of the two Roma languages were his/her
native tongue.
Distribution of the Roma/Gypsies by native tongue in 1971 and 1993 (%)

1971
1993

Hungarian

Beas

71.0
89.5

7.6
5.5

Gypsy
(Romani)
21.2
4.4

Other

Total

0.2
0.6

100
100

Source: I. Kemény: “The structure of the Roma community of Hungary in the mirror of linguistic changes”.
In: Regio, 1999/1; p10

Distribution by language spoken in 1993 (%)
Hungarian
77.0

Beás
11.3

Gypsy (Romani)
11.1

Other
0.6

Source: I. Kemény: op. cit., p11

The two surveys also showed that Roma with either Beas or Romani mother tongue were
bilingual already in 1971, speaking their respective native language as well as Hungarian.
In accordance with the Minorities Act, the Act on Pubic Education states that pupils
belonging to minorities have the right to learn about their mother tongue, culture and
traditions, and to participate in education in and about their native language.
In accordance with the law, when regulating the contents of minority education, Decree No.
32/1997 (XI. 5) of the Ministry of Education and Culture, which contains the Guidelines on
pre-school instruction of national and ethnic minorities and the Guidelines on academic
30

education of national and ethnic minorities, includes the following provision:
„Roma minority education shall provide Roma students with knowledge about the cultural
values, history, literature, arts, musical and dance culture and traditions of the Roma.”
Learning the languages spoken by the Roma is not a mandatory element of such a
programme, however, upon the parents’ request, the instruction of the Roma language variant
they speak should be provided. The legal and financial conditions to satisfy these needs are
given.
The work endeavouring to create the professional and personal conditions of the school
teaching of the languages spoken by the Roma/Gypsies needs a considerable length of time.
The process aiming to lay the professional foundations of the basic documents required for
the teaching of Roma/Gypsy languages in school was started in 1999. In the initial
preparatory phase, the Ministry of Education called on experts, including those of the
Institute of Linguistics of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, to contribute, in the
framework of an opening conference, to the formulation of the most fundamental principles.
In phase one, for each language a working group was created, the members of which were the
most renowned experts of the given language. The groups collected and compiled the
information concerning Romani and Beas, which they deemed necessary for the teaching of
these languages. Both working documents were then analysed by further experts, but even
after several changes, there are still important questions that need to be agreed upon.
Standardising the languages spoken by the Roma/Gypsies is a long working process, the
length of which is impossible to predict, and can only bear fruit when all major professionals
come to a consensus as far as issues still unresolved are concerned. A set of requirements
accepted in this way can serve as a basis for elaborating the framework curricula for the
Romani and the Beas languages. Textbooks and teaching manuals based on these established
requirements might then be added to already existing teaching material.
But even until that is achieved, it is possible to support every kind of individual initiative
regarding the teaching of Roma/Gypsy languages. Institutions providing native language
education or dual- language minority education may only be established as a result of long
term professional efforts, depending upon the needs and the possibilities.
The Guidelines regulating the academic education of national and ethnic minorities spell out
the necessary conditions for organising the Roma minority education, while the Appendix to
the Guidelines contains the curriculum requirements of Roma minority education.
Roma minority education has a special educational programme to provide children belonging
to the Roma minority with equal opportunities, talent development, in addition to cultural
education and, if desired, native language education.
Roma minority education has been – and still is – raising many questions. Nevertheless, it is a
fact that roughly 250 kindergartens and roughly 650 primary schools offer Roma/Gypsy
minority education, with estimates putting the number of those instructed to 25 thousand for
children attending kindergarten and 55 thousand for pupils at school. It is also a fact that
today a significant majority of Roma/Gypsy children do complete primary school. It might
also be considered a success that a general change of attitudes can be observed in connection
with this form of education on the part of the maintainers of schools [NB: local governments]
and of school administration.

31

The Ministry of Education is of the opinion that educating disadvantaged Roma children
would require more teachers with adequate knowledge of the Roma culture. This is why it is
a pleasure to see that the past decade has seen institutions of higher education establish
departments for Roma/Gypsy Studies (“Ro mology”), and offer special courses in the subject.
It is to be hoped that, in addition to the Faculty of Sciences of Pécs, the Apor Vilmos Catholic
Teachers’ Training College at Zsámbék, the Faculty of Teachers’ Training College at the
University of Kaposvár, and the Wesley János School of Divinities, more and more
institutions of higher education will offer the possibility for students to study Romology, and
offer courses of the Roma languages.
With the establishment of the university- level studies in Roma/Gypsy Studies, and with the
definition of the requirements in a Government Decree, Bachelors of Arts are educated at the
University of Sciences of Pécs who can acquire comprehensive theoretical and practical
knowledge of the entire field of Roma/Gypsy Studies. They are familiar with the social,
political, legal, cultural, demographic, and labour market situation of Hungary’s Roma/Gypsy
population, as well as with the relevant international opinions and recommendations aimed at
helping to improve the condition of the Roma. With this knowledge in their possession, they
will be able to do research and analyse the history and culture of Roma/Gypsy communities,
to analyse their situation, and to perform Roma-related functions at local or minority selfgovernments, their institutions, and other relevant organisations.
Teaching of Roma/Gypsy Studies at university level started in September 2000.
Requirements of qualification are defined in the above-cited Government Decree No.
129/2001 (VII. 13).
There exists special further training in Roma society studies for teachers who graduated from
teacher training colleges, and the qualification requirements of which have been defined in
Government Decree No. 21/2000 (VIII. 3).
Those who participate in the training will be able to offer education and care of an integrating
nature for children coming from within a minority community and entering pre-school or
school education of a different culture, while preserving the children’s minority identity.
They will be prepared to help socially disadvantaged children who frequently have to cope
with language problems to catch up, just as they will be prepared to communicate with
families and parents effectively and to co-operate efficiently with child-care experts and the
representatives of civil organisations.
The training may be organised by teacher training colleges in their own competence. In
September 2002 courses will start at the following institutions: University of Kaposvár,
Kölcsey Ferenc Protestant Teacher Training College, Tessedik József College, Apor Vilmos
Catholic College and Eötvös József College. With the entry into force of Decree No. 20/2001
(VI. 30.) of the Ministry of Education, which modified Decree No. 41/1999 (X. 13) of the
same ministry, an increased time devoted for the training will allow for students to fulfil not
only the qualification requirements of their specialist education, but those of a specialist
examination for teachers as well.
The Eötvös Lóránt University of Sciences of Budapest [hereafter also referred to as ELTE]
and the University of Sciences of Szeged offer special courses in Roma/Gypsy Studies within
their teacher training faculties.

32

The teaching of the Roma/Gypsy languages (Lovari and Beas) is necessary partly for the
basic and specialised further training, and partly for the preservation of the Roma/Gypsy
identity. Such language courses are offered at the Department for Roma/Gypsy Studies at the
University of Sciences of Pécs, at Wesley János School of Divinities, at the Bárczi Gusztáv
Faculty of Special Education of ELTE, and at the Csokonai Vitéz Mihály Teacher Training
College of the University of Kaposvár.
It is undoubtedly an important step forward that it is already possible to take state language
examinations in either Lovari or Beas at the Centre of Foreign Language Graduate Training
and at the Language Examination Centre of the University of Sciences of Pécs.
Further training for teachers is regulated by Government Decree No. 277/1997 (XII. 22). In
terms of the Act on Public Education, holding certain functions, such as head of institution,
expert or senior lecturer, requires that, in addition to being graduated as a teacher, the person
has passed the specialist examination for teachers. This examination may be taken in the
frame of further training, and the requirements of qualification are defined in Government
Decree No. 41/1999 (X. 13) of the Ministry of Education. Institutions of higher education
publish their offers in specialist examination within the programme of further teacher training
in the National Bulletin of Education of March every year.

In March 2002 further training programmes related to Roma/Gypsy studies were offered by
the following institutions:
-

-

Illyés Gyula College of Education of the University of Sciences of Pécs:
“Knowledge necessary for pre-school teachers, and primary school teachers to
fulfil tasks related to the Roma/Gypsy ethnic minority”,
The Teacher Training Institute of the Faculty of Natural Sciences of the University
of Sciences of Pécs: “Roma/Gypsies ethnic studies and pedagogy for teachers”,
Tessedik Sámuel College: “Preparing to special tasks in the education of Roma
children”,
Eötvös Lóránt University of Sciences, Budapest: “Schooling in minority
environment”.

Institutions of higher education training Roma teachers:
Ø Department of Scientific Education, Faculty of Arts of ELTE – Budapest (Roma/Gypsy
Sub-Section)
Ø Department of Cultural Anthropology, Faculty of Arts of ELTE – Budapest (programme)
Ø Department of Roma/Gypsy Studies, Faculty of Arts of the University of Sciences of Pécs
- Pécs
Ø College of Nyíregyháza – Nyíregyháza (special seminar)
Ø University of Kaposvár – Kaposvár (postgraduate training in Roma/Gypsy Studies)
Ø Apor Vilmos Catholic College – Zsámbék (Roma/Gypsy Department)
Ø ELTE Faculty of Teacher Training – Budapest (special seminar)
Ø Comenius Teacher Training College of the University of Miskolc – Sárospatak (special
seminar)
Ø Department of Cultural Anthropology, Faculty of Arts of the University of Miskolc –
Miskolc (special seminar)
Ø Kölcsey Ferenc Protestant Teacher Training College – Debrecen (post- graduate training
in Roma/Gypsy Studies)
33

Ø Brunszvik Teréz Faculty of Pre-school Teacher Training, Tessedik Sámuel College –
Szarvas (special seminar)
Ø Eötvös József Teacher Training College – Baja (special seminar)
Ø Wargha István College of Education, University of Debrecen – Hajdúböszörmény
(special seminar).

IV.1. Fulfilment of the obligations assumed by the Republic of Hungary
during the past three years
The Republic of Hungary, by ratifying the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages has assumed obligations under Part III. of the Charter for six minority languages.
Considering that the Minorities Act, which was worked out and passed at the same time as
the country was acceding to the Charter, provides for the individual and collective rights of
minorities (among them the right to use one’s own language) for the entire territory of
Hungary, the Government decided to undertake its obligations under the Charter for the
territory of the entire country.
Defining the regions where communities using minority languages reside was rendered more
difficult by the fact that, in comparison to the estimated numbers reported by minority
organisations, the 1990 census data showed such a ol w number of persons belonging to
minorities that it proved insufficient for organising minority language education or satisfying
the demands for minority cultural activities. Not accepting fully either minority
organisations’ estimations, or the results of the census, the Government began to establish a
system for the protection of minorities, the most important element of which is the principle
of the self- governance of minorities.
The first elections of minority self- governments following the adoption of the Minorities Act
already proved what had been supposed: that minorities consider themselves to have
exclusive or partial minority affiliations. The number of persons with affiliations to minority
languages and cultures, however, exceeds the official data. As a result of the second elections
of minority self- governments, the number of minority self- governments almost doubled
compared to the previous term. The geographical location of local minority self- governments
shows (and confirms preliminary Government assumptions) that minorities live rather
scattered, covering almost the country’s full territory. In this respect, the role of the capital
city is paramount, since minorities settled in Budapest in various historical periods have
created their self- governments in very high numbers.
In the light of the results of the elections of minority self- governments, the process of the
weakening of minority identities reflected in the 1990 census data seems to be turning. This is
the very reason why, in close co-operation with and with the active participation of the
national minority self- governments, the 2001 census data sheet was drawn up in such a way
so that it might provide information concerning the present state of minority identities,
minority affiliations, double affiliations, and language use. It is precisely due the complex
interconnections among the questions and the answers given that processing the data is
difficult. The Government expects the census data to document the location of minorities
adequately, and allow for a possibly more precise identification of the areas where its
commitments assumed under the Charter must be observed.
The languages concerned are Croatian, German, Romanian, Serbian, Slovak, and Slovenian.
34

IV. 2.
Article 8 - Education
Article 8 Paragraph 1.a of the Charter
"With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such
languages are used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without
prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
(i) to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
(ii) to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant regional
or minority languages; or
(iii) to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those
pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient; or
(iv) if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school
education, to favour and/or encourage the application of the measures referred to
under i to iii above.”1

In accordance with the relevant provisions of the Minorities Act (Article 43), pre-school
minority education shall be organised if the parents of at least eight children initiate it. The
Act on Public Education has a similar wording in its Appendix 3 Chapter II section (2),
declaring that a national or ethnic minority pre-school group shall be organised if the parents
of at least eight children belonging to the given minority request it.
The legal framework of pre-school education is defined – in addition to the Act LXXIX of
1993 on Public Education – by Government Decree No. 137/1996 (VIII. 28.) on Issuing the
National Master Programme for Pre-school Instruction, and by Decree No. 32/1997 (XI. 5.)
of the Minister of Culture and Public Education on Issuing the “Guidelines on pre-school
instruction of national and ethnic minorities” and the “Guidelines on academic education of
national and ethnic minorities”. On the basis of the general context defined by the Decree on
the issuance of the core programme for pre-school education, the Guidelines on pre-school
instruction define the types of minority kindergartens and the contents of the education
provided by them.
These two decrees have not been modified since our previous report. In accordance with the
regulations in force, pre-school education for minorities in Hungary may be organised in two
types of institutions: native language pre-schools or dual- language pre-schools providing
minority education. In native language pre-schools, the language of education, and the
language of pre-school life in general is the minority language. In the education programmes
of dual- language pre-schools providing minority education, both Hungarian and the minority
language are used, however, emphasis is laid upon the development of the minority language.
The following tables show the number of pre-schools providing minority instruction and the
number of children receiving minority instruction in pre-schools in the academic year
1999/2000:

1

The paragraphs and sub-paragraphs in bold italics are the actual commitments undertaken by the Republic of
Hungary.

35

Number of pre-schools providing native language or bilingual education in
Croatian
37

German Romanian
263
14

Serbian
9

Slovak
73

Slovenian
5

Other
11

Total
412

Slovak
3 050

Slovenian
112

Other
373

Total
19 792

Number of children receiving instruction in
Croatian
1 388

German Romanian
14 141
547

Serbian
181

Source: Ministry of Education

(The National Self-Government of Germans living in Hungary indicated once again during
the preliminary administrative harmonisation of the present report that it did not agree with
the number of children’s groups instructed in the German language. The answer of the
Ministry of Education to the opinion of the self-government is that with the entry into force of
the Guidelines for minority education, it is now possible to tell precisely which type of
education is given in a given establishment. The reason for the inaccuracy of the data is that
not all minority pre-school establishments included the provisions of the Guidelines into their
founding charters and educational programmes.)

Article 8 Paragraph 1.b of the Charter
“(i) to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority languages;
or
(ii) to make available a substantial part of primary educatio n in the relevant regional or
minority languages; or
(iii) to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
(iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those
pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient.”

The Act on the Rights of National and Ethnic Minorities details the rights of minorities to
education in Hungary. It determines under what conditions and on whose initiative local selfgovernments are obliged to organise minority education, and accords a wide sphere of
competence to minority self- governments in respect of the organisation and the contents of
education, declaring that the provision of extra tasks appearing in minority education shall be
supported by supplementary normative funding.
The provisions of the Minorities Act were already included in the Act on Public Education
when it was amended in 1996, then the Act was further refined by a new amendment in 1999.
The 1996 amendment created the National Committee for Minorities, which is called to assist
the Ministry of Education and comprises delegates of the national minority self- governments.
The Committee is an advisory body to the Minister of Education. As such, it comments on all
draft laws submitted to Parliament in the field of education, and it has the right of consent
concerning all provisions and proposals directly concerning minorities. Since the
modification of 1999, the Committee also assumes official authority tasks concerning the
publication of minority textbooks.
The National Committee for Minorities holds its sessions as necessary. Sessions are
convened on the initiative of the Ministry of Education or the president of the Committee.
36

During the past three years, the Committee had 32 sessions, during which it assessed 22
(draft) regulations, and its consent was required in the case of 10 regulations.
Based upon the provisions of the Act on Public Education, Decree No. 32/1997 (XI. 5.) of the
Minister of Culture and Public Education was adopted concerning Issuing the “Guidelines of
pre-school instruction of national and ethnic minorities” and the “Guidelines of academic
education of national and ethnic minorities (hereinafter: the Guidelines), which set the aims,
organisational methods and types of minority education, as well as the nationality-specific
requirements of educational areas (native language, literature, minority nation studies)
concerning the given minority.
In terms of the Guidelines, minority education in Hungary, in addition to meeting the general
objectives and tasks of school education (as part of the public education), also ensures the
teaching of the minority language, instruction in the minority language, the dissemination of
knowledge on the history, intellectual and material culture of the minority, the preservation
and creation of traditions, the formation of self-awareness, and the presentation and exercise
of minority rights.
Taking into account the different linguistic and cultural characteristics of the national and
ethnic minorities living in Hungary, as well as the diversity of the minorities, minority
education may be organised in the following forms:
a) native language education,
b) dual- language minority education,
c) education with minority language teaching.
Native language education
The so-called native- language (…) school, or a school with native language tuition organises
(…) within school education (…) instruction in the minority language for all subjects, apart
from Hungarian Language and Literature. There are only few such educational institutions in
the country.
Dual- language minority education
The “dual- language model” provides (…) school instruction in two languages, and (…)
subjects other than the minority language are also taught in the minority language. The
Guidelines stipulate that 50% of the weekly obligatory classes shall be in the native minority
language.
Language teaching education
In the so-called “school providing minority language teaching” model education takes place
in Hungarian, but the minority language is studied by pupils in the frame of a minimum of
four classes per week. This is the form most prevalent in the Hungarian educational system,
since (due to demographic reasons, and to the advanced stages of assimilation) children
entering school hardly know their minority’s language, or do not know it at all. Since the
introduction of the Guidelines, schools providing minority language teaching have to provide
at least four classes per week for minority language and literature classes, and five classes in
the case of German.
37

The following table shows the numbers involved in minority language education in the
academic year 1999/2000:
Data or
indices per
German Romanian Serbian Croatian Slovak Slovenian
language
Number of
284
14
11
34
59
4
schools 1)
Number of
1130
67
20
88
136
10
teachers
Number of
language
3197
97
32
211
364
20
groups
Number of
46254
1198
275
2526 4424
116
pupils
% of the total
number of
4.8
0.1
0.0
0.3
0.5
0.0
pupils
Pupils in
native
758
427
164
319
92
language
education
Pupils in
dual4911
188
658
22
language
education
Pupils
studying the
40585
583
111
2207 3674
94
language
1) Schools may have pupils belonging to several different minorities.
Source: Ministry of Education

Greek

Other

Total

2

5

395

3

7

1461

9

11

3941

83

137

55013

0.0

0.0

5.7

-

-

1760

-

-

5779

83

137

47474

(The National Self-Government of Germans living in Hungary indicated once again during
the preliminary administrative harmonisation of the present report that it did not agree with
the number of children’s groups instructed in the German language. The answer of the
Ministry of Education to the opinion of the self-government is that with the entry into force of
the Guidelines for minority education, it is now possible to tell precisely which type of
education is given in a given establishment. The reason for the inaccuracy of the data is that
not all minority schools included the provisions of the Guidelines into their founding charters
and educational programmes.)

Article 48 (1) of the Minorities Act states that children who do not belong to a given minority
may indeed participate in minority (native) language education or in language teaching
education, provided that the given institution has free places after all the needs of the given
minority have been satisfied.
Decree No. 28/2000 (IX. 21) of the Minister of Education regulates the issuing, introducing
and applying of framework curricula. The curricula of national and ethnic minority academic
education are contained in the Appendix of the Decree and set the requirements in native
(minority) language and literature, as well as minority nation studies, for every grade up to
the end of the twelfth grade.
The elaboration of the curricula for minority language, literature and minority nation studies
posed a significant professional challenge. Working documents were prepared by experts
38

commissioned on the recommendation of the respective national minority self- governments,
under the co-ordination of the Committee of Minority Framework Curricula, which included
representatives of the national minority self- governments. After the publication of the
curricula on general knowledge, framework curricula for languages, literatures and minority
nation studies were reworked on the basis of the recommendations of experts commissioned
by the Ministry of Education, and are being published gradually, for professional capacity
differs from one minority to the other. First the framework curricula for Serbian language and
literature were issued, followed by the German, Croatian and Slovenian, then the Romanian
framework curricula. The framework curricula of Slovak minority education are due to be
published soon.
Minority education is supported by supplementary normative funding from the State budget.
Every year, the Act on Budget lists the legal titles of demanding this kind of normative
funding, as well as the amount due for every child. In recent years the amounts of minority
education normative funding have become differentiated according to the different forms of
minority education, with the highest amounts awarded to the education of children in their
native language and to dual- language instruction, while the native (minority) language
teaching educational form received somewhat lower amounts of supplementary funding.
A basic change in financing was brought about by the Act on the Budget for the Year 2000,
which, aside from increasing the amounts of normative funding given to minority education,
introduced the so-called “small settlement normative funding”. In 2001 and 2002, if a small
settlement organises education for national minorities, the local government may use as much
as up to eight times the basic normative funding. The increased funding has brought a
decisive step forward in respect of a field which matters highly from the point of view of the
future of minorities, that is, the maintenance of schools of small authentic minority
communities.
Another important modification in financing was brought by the establishment of the
Minority Intervention Fund, which is run by the Ministry of Education. This fund, amounting
to HUF 300 million in 2000, HUF 320 million in 2001, and HUF 340 million in 2002, is used
to ease the problems larger settlements experience in maintaining their educational
institutions – these larger settlements have naturally been omitted from the assistance given
to small settlements due to the number of their inhabitants, however, central assistance is
required for the maintenance of their minority institutions.
Article 8 Paragraph 1.c of the Charter
“(i) to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
(ii) to make available a substantial part of secondary education in the relevant regional
or minority languages; or
(iii) to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
(iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under (i) to (iii) above at least to those
pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered
sufficient.”

Similarly to the provisions regulating the organisation of minority pre-school and primary
school education, the Minorities Act and the Act on Public Education stipulates that upon the
request of eight parents, it is mandatory to establish the conditions for the teaching of a
39

minority language, or teaching in the minority language. Due to the scattered location of the
minority populations of Hungary, secondary schools, which were founded in the past decades
(mainly grammar schools with four grades offering general secondary education) recruit from
within whole regions or even from the whole territory of the country. In recent years,
minority language and literature, as well as minority nation studies requirements have been
defined and framework curricula for minority secondary schools have equally been
elaborated.
The above-mentioned documents ensure the quality of secondary minority education, at the
same time, since demands for secondary minority education have not increased substantially
(except for the German language), they do not contribute to the development of secondary
minority education. One of the possible further steps to take is spelt out by the provision of
the Act on Public Education quoted above, on the organisation of complementary minority
education, which allows the organisation (upon the initiative of the parents of 8 pupils) of a
minority study group consisting of pupils who live in the same settlement but go to different
Hungarian language secondary schools, in one of the institutions where they may continue to
study the minority’s language, literature and minority nation studies, even if they did not
decide to go to a minority secondary school.
Accessory regulations relating to minority secondary education are contained in Decree No.
24/1997 (VI. 5) of the Minister of Culture and Public Education on the Issuance of
Examination Regulations for Basic Education Examinations, and Government Decree No.
100/1997 (VI.13.) on the Issuance of the Examination Regulations for the Secondary School
Final Examination, which together define the requirements of organisation and contents of
minority secondary school final examinations. These Decrees have not changed during the
past years. The detailed requirements of the final examination in the subjects of minority
languages, knowledge of minority literature and minority nation studies are presently being
worked out.
The following table shows the number of secondary schools offering education in a
minority language or courses of a minority language in the academic year 1999/2000:
National or ethnic
group
Croatian
German

Romanian
Serb
Slovak
Slovenian
Roma/Gypsy
(Lovari and Beas)

Type of school
Grammar school
Grammar school
Vocational secondary
school
Grammar school
Grammar school
Grammar school
Grammar school
Grammar school

Source: Ministry of Education

40

Number of
institutions
2
11

Number of pupils
219
1821

3

279

3
1
2
1

257
126
118
9

1

118

Article 8 paragraph 1.d of the Charter
“(i) to make available technical and vocational education in the relevant regional or
minority languages; or
(ii) to make available a substantial part of technical and vocational education in the
relevant regional or minority languages; or
(iii) to provide, within technical and vocational education, for the teaching of the
relevant regional or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or
(iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under (i) to (iii) above at least to those
pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered
sufficient.”

The legal background is the same as the above for the training of skilled workers. It is
sufficient fo r the introduction of instruction in a minority language, or for the introduction of
teaching the minority language if parents of 8 pupils belonging to the same minority request
the creation or the maintenance of a group or class. Such demands, however, ha ve very rarely
been voiced. There are only a few skilled worker training schools in the country that provide
professional training also in a minority language. There exists one training school in
Budapest where Slovak is the language of tuition (the number of pupils is currently 13), and
three institutions offer technical training in German (in the localities of Bóly, Mohács and
Pilisvörösvár) for altogether 279 pupils.
Within secondary technical training based on the new National Training Register of 1998,
central programmes have been designed for several languages as obligatory subjects of
instruction in the case of qualifications requiring language proficiency, and as obligatory but
optional professional subjects in the case of qualifications not requiring language proficiency.
These central programmes offer specialised language courses linked to the given qualification
during the time of technical training.
Article 8 Paragraph 1.e of the Charter
„(i) to make available university and other higher education in regional or minority
languages; or
(ii) to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher
education subjects; or
(iii) if, by reason of the role of the State in relation to higher education institutions,
sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii) cannot be applied, to encourage and/or allow the provision
of university or other forms of higher education in regional or minority languages or
of facilities for the study of these languages as university or higher education
subjects.”

The Minorities Act enumerates among the collective rights of minorities their right to initiate
the establishment of the conditions of higher education in the language of the minority. The
Act also says that training native language teachers for the instruction of minorities is the
State’s responsibility (Article 46).
In areas where conditions of teacher training are not provided in Hungary, the provisions of
the Act state that the State shall, by international agreements, provide for persons belonging
to minorities to take part, either on a full-time or part-time basis or in the form of further or
scientific training, in courses in foreign institutions which nurture their culture and which
teach in the languages of the minorities.

41

The diplomas and other certificates earned in mother countries or countries where the native
language of the person is spoken shall be, in observance of the relevant regulations and
international conventions, recognised by the Republic of Hungary as equivalent to the
diplomas or certificates awarded by institutions of higher education in Hungary.
The Ministry of Education regards as its special task within providing normative funding to
support education/training at faculties or departments related to minorities. Therefore, when
working out the basic principles of supporting departments with small numbers, it helped
providing the tasks of education/training by classifying small minority departments into a
higher assistance category.
The regulation of the entrance examinations to the institutions of higher education has now
created the possibility for minority students to pass their entrance examinations in their own
language.
The qualification requirements for certain basic degrees at faculties of arts and letters and
social sciences have been published in accordance with the provisions of the Act on Higher
Education, and among them, the training requirements of minority studies at college or
university level (Government Decree No. 129/2001 (VII. 13)). The Decree is to ensure the
equivalence of the certificates received abroad and in Hungary.
The following table shows the number of students studying minority languages in
institutions of higher education in the academic year 1999/2000:
Language of national group
Croatian
German
Romanian
Serb
Slovak
Slovenian

Number of students in the
academic year 1999/2000
93
(4746)*
102
66
228
6

Source: Ministry of Education
*The number in parentheses includes the number of students studying German as a foreign language
(department of German Studies, language teacher training for students with a German major), in addition to
students belonging to the German minority.

Last year, the Parliamentary Commissioner for Minority Rights examined the realisation of
rights to minority education as regards higher education. When analysing the current
situation, the Commissioner arrived at the conclusion that the cultural autonomy and the
rights of minorities to education and culture failed to be fully validated in that area. For this
reason, the Commissioner initiated that the Minister of Education should modify the Act on
Higher Education so as to create a legally regulated framework to improve contacts and
exchanges of opinion between the minority self- governments and the Ministry. The
Commissioner has also initiated measures towards the development of general and specialist
minority teacher training. The Commissioner proposed that the Minister of Education, when
developing the qualification requirements of minority teacher training in line with the credit
system, should introduce a new regulation guaranteeing an appropriate amount of time for the
proper acquisition of a minority language, have the regulation on the support for minority
teacher training worked out and modify the method of recognition of degrees, diplomas and
42

certificates. The Ministry of Education agreed with most of the findings of the
Commissioner’s investigation.
Article 8 Paragraph 1.f of the Charter
“(iii) if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult education,
to favour and/or encourage the offering of such languages as subjects of adult and
continuing education.”

The Hungarian Parliament passed the Act on Adult Education on 18 December 2001 in order
that the legal opportunities of access to adult education and training could be realised for all
members of the society, and that the quality of life be improved by means of adult education
and training. The Act declares that “the State provides the right to participate in adult
education for all.” The Act regulates the system of institutions and assistance of adult
education.
In terms of the provisions of the Act, “adult education is defined as regular training or
education provided in addition to regular school education, the goals of which can be
general, language or professional training” or a service linked to adult education. The Act
provides an appropriate framework for the realisation of the above undertaking, and there are
no obstacles preventing that adult education or continuous training be conducted in a regional
or minority language if there is a demand to do so.
In terms of the Act, gathering statistical data on adult education will begin in January 2003. It
follows from the definition given in the Act that it will thus be possible to monitor the
teaching of minority languages outside of the school system as well as the linguistic aspect of
adult education, in the spirit of the Charter.
Due to the above-detailed special linguistic situation of those using minority languages (the
minorities), this field features mainly demands for the further training of teachers, and the
specialist and language further training of those working in the field of general cultural and
educational services. Further training is organised by institutions of teacher training. They
first need to have their programmes accredited in terms of the relevant provisions of the Act
on Public Education, then they can offer and advertise the programmes. All teachers
participating in minority education are obliged to participate in language and specialist
further training every seven years.
In March 2002 the following institutions offered in-service training courses relating to the
topic of national minorities in accordance with the above- mentioned provisions:
- Benedek Elek College of Education of the University of Western Hungary, under
the title “Professional development programme for child-care institutions and the
special tasks of institutions conducting minority education,” and another course
under the title “The latest theoretical and practical knowledge to be included
among the professional requirements of pre-school teachers and minority preschool teachers;"
- Faculty of Arts of the University of Sciences of Pécs, under the title “The latest
theoretical and practical knowledge to be included in the professional expertise of
German minority teachers”;
- Eötvös József College, under the title “The latest theoretical and practical
knowledge to be included among the professional requirements of the teachers of
minority (German) students.”
43

Some minority self- governments also organise further training for teachers of their respective
minority. For example, the National Slovak Self- Government has organised two regional
professional training courses for Slovak pre-school teachers. They also plan forms of training
with full accreditation, and have worked out a teaching programme based on drama, which
has been submitted for accreditation.
Article 8 Paragraph 1.g of the Charter
“to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is
reflected by the regional or minority language;”

In order to modernise the entire public education, the Government issued the National Master
Curriculum in Decree No. 130/1995 (X.26.) (hereinafter: the NMC). The NMC has broken
with the long-standing tradition of materials broken into subjects, and defined the
requirements towards pupils for the ends of the 4th , 6th , 8th and the 10th school years as various
“education areas.”
The “cultural area” of the Human and Social Culture module within NMC contains the
requirements of learning about the minorities living in Hungary. It defines in details – at the
respective levels appropriate to the pupil’s age – all the information that every pupil
participating in Hungarian public education should know.
The Framework Curricula, to be used in all schools across Hungary, have been worked out
based upon the NMC. The preamble of the decree on the framework curricula – similarly to
that of the decree upon the NMC – states that the goal of basic education is the development
of a consciousness of national identity, and the shaping of the need to know co-existing and
neighbouring cultures. Another important element mandated in the provisions of the
regulation on framework curricula is to cultivate awareness and respect for the traditions,
culture, customs and habits of other peoples.
The detailed guidelines issued for the elaboration of the framework curricula plans to teach
pupils, within the subject called “History and Citizen’s Education”, about the special values
of various cultures in detail, and aims to establish respect in the pupils towards co-existing
cultures. Graduation requires acquisition of knowledge on the minorities living in Hungary
and on their cultural values.
Article 8 Paragraph 1.h of the Charter
“to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those
of paragraphs (a) to (g) accepted by the Party.”

Within the teaching of minority languages in Hungary’s higher education institutions, the
training related to the faculties of arts and letters and well as teacher training have been
established. There are independent minority language and literature departments or
department units. The present structure already provides for the teaching of the language and
literature of a minority in institutions of higher education located in regions populated by the
given minority.
The recent years have seen the accreditation of the programmes of most independent
departments or department units of minority languages in various institutions of higher
44

education of Hungary. Based on bilateral agreements, the majority of these departments of
minority cultures engage a reader from the mother country to help the work of teachers.
Minority education is characterised by a low number of students (with the exception of the
German language, which is in a different situation), which results in higher-than-average per
unit costs – this in turn constantly imperils the quality of education as well as, in some cases,
the very existence of the department or department unit. These departments are also
characterised by a relatively small number of teachers. With the introduction of the normative
system of financial assistance to higher education, the operational conditions of minority
departments that employ fewer staff have deteriorated. Last year, though, saw a
reclassification of minority departments one assistance category higher. Although the
measure alleviates the operational problems of minority departments and department units
with small staff, it fails to provide a comprehensive solution. Further organisational and
financial development is needed for training minority teachers, especially thinking of the long
term.
The problems experienced recently with starting courses for Serbian pre-school and primary
school teachers (low enrolment, lack of professorial staff) forecast that in the future more
attention must be devoted to the training of minority teachers for smaller minorities, who
presently do not have their own institutions of public education.
In addition to training in Hungarian institutions, on the basis of bilateral agreements, several
minorities have the opportunity to apply for scholarships to take part in courses in their
mother country, either on a full- time or part-time basis. In the case of certain minorities
(Slovak, Serb, Croatian, Romanian) they may even rely upon scholarships from the mother
country. The statistics of students studying abroad with scholarships of the Republic of
Hungary for the school year 2000/2001 are as follows: 13 students in Slovakia (one for a PhD
degree), 15 students in Croatia, 28 students in Romania (6 of whom for PhD degree), one
student in Yugoslavia, and 5 in Slovenia.
The process of integrating institutions of higher education partly affected the institutions
providing minority education as well. Departments of certain universities that could qualify
(also) as minority studies also issue degrees for bachelors of arts without a teaching
certificate (e.g. the Department of Polish of the Pázmány Péter Catholic University).
The following institutions of higher education enrol students preparing to teach national or
ethnic minorities in Hungary:
Language teacher training for grammar schools:
Ø Eötvös Lóránt University of Sciences, Faculty of Arts – Budapest (German, Slovak,
Croatian, Serbian, Slovenian, Bulgarian, Polish, Greek)
Ø Pázmány Péter Catholic University – Piliscsaba (German, Slovak)
Ø University of Sciences of Szeged – Szeged (German, Serb, Bulgarian, Ukrainian)
Ø University of Sciences of Pécs, Faculty of Arts – Pécs (German, Croatian)

Teacher training:
Ø Juhász Gyula Teacher Training Faculty of the University of Sciences of Szeged – Szeged
(German, Slovak, Romanian)
Ø Berzsenyi Dániel Teacher Training College – Szombathely (German, Croatian,
Slovenian)
45

Ø College of Nyíregyháza – Nyíregyháza (Ukrainian)
Teacher training for primary schools:
Ø Teacher training faculty for primary schools of Eötvös Lóránt University of Sciences –
Budapest (Serbian, German)
Ø Eötvös József College of Education – Baja (German, Croatian)
Ø Illyés Gyula College of Education of the University of Sciences of Pécs – Szekszárd
(German)
Ø Apor Vilmos Catholic College – Zsámbék (German)
Ø Faculty of Education of Tessedik Sámuel College – Szarvas (Slovak, Romanian)
Ø Vitéz János Roman Catholic Teacher Training College – Esztergom (German, Slovak)
Teacher training for pre-schools:
Ø Eötvös József College of Education – Baja (German, Croatian)
Ø Illyés Gyula College of Education of the University of Sciences Pécs – Szekszárd
(German, Croatian)
Ø Benedek Elek College of Education of the University of Western Hungary – Sopron
(German, Croatian)
Ø Tessedik Sámuel College of Education – Szarvas (Slovak, Romanian)
In the past two years, the Ministry of Education has devoted special support to the further
training of minority teachers, especially training for the teaching of minority nation studies.
In the case of further training in language and methodology studies, the assistance of the
mother countries is solicited in every relation. This is of prime importance in the case of
minorities for whom no further training programme has been accredited, since Article 5.2.b
of Government Decree No. 277/1997 (XII. 22.) on the Further Education of Teachers states
that further education in the mother country will be taken into consideration with the
obligatory further training of educators.
Providing fully accredited further education is necessary for every minority. The Ministry of
Education is considering to initiate a programme for further education in accordance with
Article 9.6 of Government Decree No. 277/1997 (XII. 22.) on the Further Education of
Teachers.
Due to low enrolment, accredited further training programmes for teachers of minority nation
studies, minority languages and teachers dealing with Roma/Gypsy children need to receive
financial assistance. In 1999, due to a low number of accredited further education
programmes, the Ministry of Education provided support in the form of grants by application
for the organisation of professional conferences. In 2000, the Ministry only supported
accredited further education programmes designed for minority teachers. In the framework of
the same grant scheme, the Ministry of Education supported those further training
programmes which were designed for teachers of the German minority in Hungary and
realised in the framework of a bilateral agreement.

46

Article 8 Paragraph 1.i of the Charter
“to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken
and progress achieved in esta blishing or developing the teaching of regional or
minority languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be
made public."

The Government of the Republic of Hungary established the Office for National and Ethnic
Minorities (hereafter referred to as the Office) with its Decree No. 34/1990 (VIII. 30), for the
fulfilment of State tasks regarding national and ethnic minorities living in Hungary. The
Office is tasked with monitoring the enforcement of the rights of the minorities that derive
from the Minorities Act, participating in drafting the government programme for the
realisation of the Act, as well as co-ordinating the implementation of tasks related to
minorities included in the government programme. Besides these tasks, the Office takes part
(in line with the tasks prescribed for the Government by the Minorities Act) in drafting the
biannual report on the situation of the minorities to be submitted to Parliament.
The Office initiates measures in cases where minorities’ rights related to the use of language
or education have been infringed upon.
Minority national self-governments were established after the 1994 and 1998 self- minority
government elections. These bodies participated in the elaboration of the government
programme for developing minority education, assessed and, having reached agreement,
approved of master educational material. They equally express their views on proposed
legislation concerning the teaching of minority languages. The National Committee for
Minorities, an advisory body of the Ministry of Education, was established with the same
objective. It is formed of professionals delegated by the minorities. No regulation connected
to the teaching of minority languages may pass without the approval of the Committee.
Article 8.2 of the Charter
„With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the
regional or minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the
number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage or
provide teaching in or of the regional or minority language at all the appropriate
stages of education."

The articles of the Minorities Act as detailed above oblige institutions of public education to
create the opportunities for teaching the minority language, or provide instruction in the
minority language, if the parents of at least eight pupils request it. Initiatives of this sort have
typically been taken only in larger towns of Hungary. So far no problems were reported in
connection with the satisfaction of justified demands.
Complementary minority education, mentioned above several times and established by the
1999 modification of the Act on Public Education allows initiatives in settlements where
numbers are insufficient for the formation of an independent minority educational institution,
group or class, to prevail with the starting or maintenance of minority education. The Act
defines in details the conditions of starting these programmes, the financing and the rights
and responsibilities of those participating in that kind of education.

47

Article 9 - Judicial authorities
1. "The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of
residents using the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified
below, according to the situation of each of these languages and on condition that the
use of the facilities afforded by the present paragraph is not considered by the judge to
hamper the proper administration of justice:

a) in criminal proceedings:
(ii) to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or minority language”

Act I of 2002 which modifies Act XIX of 1998 on Criminal Procedure (hereafter referred to
as the New Act on Criminal Procedure) and enters into effect as of January 2003, modified
the legislation so far in force in accordance with the provisions of the Charter.
Section 9 of the New Act, directly referring to the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages, allows for everyone, including the accused, to use their native language in
criminal proceedings, in speech as well as in writing.
As an example of the practical realisation of that regulation, the President of the Court of
Bács-Kiskun County informed the Office for National and Ethnic Minorities that in a
criminal case the accused who belonged to the German minority wished to use his mother
tongue when testifying. During the proceedings, the court provided an interpreter to assist the
accused.
(iii) “to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not be
considered inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a regional or minority
language;”

Section 9 of the New Act on Criminal Procedure stipulates that those belonging to a minority
may use their language also in writing, thus it is possible for them to submit their request and
evidence in their native tongue.
(iv) “to produce, on request, documents connected with legal proceedings in the relevant
regional or minority language, if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations
involving no extra expense for the persons concerned.”

Since the last modification, Section 9 subsection 3 of the New Act on Criminal Procedure
makes it clear that decisions to be delivered, as well as other official documents, must be
translated by the court, state attorney, or investigative authority which has issued the decision
or the official document. This provision of the New Act on Criminal Procedure takes a strong
stand on issues which in practice have already raised questions, by saying that the obligation
to provide a translation is linked to the act of issuing the document (decision), rather than to
its delivery, and in this way solves earlier problems of legal interpretation.
The modification deals with the documents to be translated for defendants who speak a
minority language in several points. It provides that the part of the bill of indictment (Section
219 subsection 3) or of the final decision (Section 262 subsection 6) which concerns the
accused must be translated for him/her.

48

The New Act on Criminal Procedure modified the provision relating to interpretation, now
mandating the use of interpreters in case regional or minority languages are used. In
accordance with the provisions of the modified Act, the costs of translation and interpretation
are borne by the State, as long as the accused wishes to use his/her native minority tongue
during the proceedings (Section 339 subsection 2).
b) in civil proceedings:
(ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she
may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional
expense.”

The cited section of Act III of 1952 on Civil Procedure has been modified by Act CX of
1999. The provision relevant to minority or regional languages, in effect from 1 January
2000, can be found in Section 6 of the Act, subsections 1, 2 and 3. The objective of these
particular modifications was primarily so that the Act on Civil Procedure contain in expressis
verbis the right to use regional or minority languages.
Section 6 subsection 3 of Act CX of 1999 stipulates that the Court shall use an interpreter if it
is necessary for the realisation of the principles stated in subsections 1 and 2. In terms of the
subsection, and within the scope defined by an international treaty, courts shall call on
interpreters whenever a person with a native tongue other than Hungarian requests it, even if
the person can otherwise speak Hungarian.
The law says that the official language of proceedings is Hungarian. Courts shall, however, in
terms of the principle stated in the Act on Civil Procedure, allow the use of the native tongue
before the court. The use of interpreters allows for the court to have hearings of persons
whose mother tongue is other than the Hungarian language and cannot speak Hungarian.
Petitions and documents submitted in writing shall also be translated. The use of an
interpreter is not necessary if the council in session or the individual judge has adequate
command of the language used by the litigant or witness.
According to information received from the president of the Zala County Court, members of
his staff studying by correspondence at the Kaposvár College of Justice wish to take
examinations in the Romani (Lovari) language, which would later allow them to participate
in proceedings of public administration with that knowledge.
The southern part of Zala County has a sizeable portion of inhabitants with Croatian native
language. Therefore, the president of the County Court, in ordinance No. 1998. El. VI.A.
12/54/2, has ordered a judge of the Nagykanizsa City Court who belongs to the same
minority to use the Croatian language as a judge during proceedings in order to inform clients
of the court in Croatian.
(iii) “to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
language, if necessary by the use of interpreters.”

49

c) in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
(ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she
may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional
expense; and/or
(iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations.”

The background of legal rules remained unchanged since the previous report. Experts of the
Ministry of Justice have been working on the concept for the new Civil Code. The new
concept devotes a special attention to the realisation of the Constitution’s provisions, human
rights and freedoms, and to the legal harmonisation efforts undertaken by the European
Union, as well as the realisation of the recommendations of the Committee of Ministers of the
Council of Europe.
With the modifications of the legislation concerning the justice system, the obligations
assumed by Hungary under the Charter have been incorporated into the Hungarian justice
system at every level. The legal background can be therefore considered adequate in this field
as well. Neither the Minorities Ombudsman nor the Office for National and Ethnic Minorities
received complaints with regard to the exercise of their language rights during the past years.
The investigations of the Parliamentary Commissioner for National and Ethnic Minority
Rights did not reveal any infringement on linguistic rights on behalf of the judiciary.

2.“The Parties undertake
a) not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because
they are drafted in a regional or minority language; or
b) not to deny the validity, as between the parties, of legal documents drawn up within
the country solely because they are drafted in a regional or minority language, and to
provide that they can be invoked against interested third parties who are not users of
these languages on condition that the contents of the document are made known to
them by the person(s) who invoke(s) it; or
c) not to deny the validity, as between the parties, of legal documents drawn up within
the country solely because they are drafted in a regional or minority language.”

The provisions of the Act on Minorities allow for both local and national minority selfgovernments to establish relations with the settlements, institutions, government and
administrative organs, and civil organisations. During the building up of these relations,
various agreements of co-operation were concluded. Due to the nature of the issue, once the
local or national self- government promulgates such an agreement in a decree, it is regarded as
a legal document. Although the language of bilateral agreements is not Hungarian, since the
language of both parties is a language registered as a minority language in Hungary, the
validity of these instruments is never questioned by any authority in Hungary.
The recommendations of the Joint Committees on Minorities, created within the framework
of co-operation between the mother countries of the minorities and the Republic of Hungary,
and the minutes drawn up at the sessions are both in Hungarian and in the language of the
partner country, which is at the same time the language of a particular minority. In terms of
the final provisions of all minutes, both versions of the minutes are regarded official. The
work of the Joint Committees is co-ordinated in Hungary by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
50

Additionally, there are no clauses or provisions in the civil or criminal legislation of Hungary
which would preclude the validity of these documents.

Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services

1. “Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents
who are users of regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below
and according to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is
reasonably possible:
a.
v) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a
document in these languages.”

As it was already indicated in the introduction of the present Report, language assimilation of
the minorities living in Hungary is at an advanced stage. It should be also mentioned that,
apart from a few cases of exception, the minorities living in Hungary have never had public
administration in their mother tongue. The Hungarian Government is determined to halt this
process of assimilation as much as it can, and, if possible, to turn the entire process. At
present, the general level of language skills of minorities does not allow them to draw up
official documents in their own native tongues, especially, if they need references to specific
legal provisions or quotations. Therefore, Article 53 of the proposal to modify the Minorities
Act which has been submitted to Parliament, contains (in addition to other stipulations) the
following provision:
“At the justified request of the minority self- government operating on the territory under its
authority, the local self- government must ensure that (…) the forms used in administrative
procedures are also available in the language of the minority.” This provision can encourage
the creation of documents and petitions in minority languages.
When preparing the present Report, the Office for National and Ethnic Minorities requested
county offices of public administration to describe their specific experiences with the use of
minority languages. Reports from counties with large minority populations show that,
although the number of experts working at local organs of public administration and speaking
minority languages has been growing (especially in the Baranya, Bács-Kiskun and Csongrád
Counties), minorities seldom exercise their rights related to the use of their languages. On
several accounts, the Office received information that the local municipality had proclaimed
to the local minority self- government their minority language rights, signalling that it was
open to such initiatives, yet the even the minority self- governments did not take advantage of
the opportunities presented.
1. c)“to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in a regional or minority
language.”

Article 53 of the above-quoted draft amendment of the Minorities Act obliges local
governments to ensure, at the request of the local minority self- government, that “its decrees

51

are promulgated and its announcements published both in Hungaria n and the minority
language.”
According to the Baranya County Office of Public Administration, although the local
government of the city of Pécs notified all seven local minority self- governments of which
printed forms it suggested to have translated, none of the minority self- governments signalled
their demand for translation of the documents into their languages.
Several county offices of public administration actually sent the Office various documents in
various minority languages (for information). However, these are mainly press publications
disseminating local information, invitations, or posters advertising local events. Publication
of such materials seems to be quite widespread both in monolingual (minority tongues only),
and in bilingual (minority and Hungarian languages) version.
According to information given by the Bács-Kiskun County Office of Public Administration,
local information materials were published in the Croatian language at the village of Gara,
and in Békés County an information brochure in Romanian is distributed in the town of
Gyula and the neighbouring settlements with Romanian population (Körösszakál,
Körösszegapáti).

2. „In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of
residents who are users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the
measures specified below, the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
b. the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written
applications in these languages;”

The legal basis for the execution of the undertaking is provided by the Minorities Act,
Articles 51 and 53, and the total body of the above-mentioned regulations relevant to the
entire public administration in Hungary. On the basis of the reports prepared by the county
offices of public administration, it can be established that the local use of languages varies
considerably from county to county.
In Baranya County, according to information received from the county office of public
administration, verbal administration frequently goes on in German (that is, in the local
Schwabisch dialect of German) in settlements inhabited by the German minority. Conditions
for this type of administration as concerns the personnel are steadily improving everywhere.
Similar information was received from Bács-Kiskun County, where employees of public
administration who speak the language of the local Croatian minority do use Croatian quite
frequently in verbal administrative procedures. In Magyarcsanád (Csongrád County), the
verbal use of minority languages (Romanian and Serbian) is regular in relations with the
administration, as is in the village of Deszk (Serbian). Zala County boasts of several
settlements populated entirely by the Croatian minority (Semjénháza, Molnári, Petrivente,
Tótszerdahely, Tótszentmárton), where all verbal administration takes place in Croatian –
minutes, applications and resolutions, however, are drawn up in Hungarian.
Several count offices signalled that although printed forms for the issuing of documents (e.g.
birth, marriage or death certificates) in minority languages were available at all settlements
populated by minorities, they were rarely requested. Thus, the village of Pitvaros (Csongrád
52

County) had one case of a Slovak registry entry, while Deszk had two cases of marriage
certificates drawn up in the local minority language (Serbian). The city of Baja (Bács-Kiskun
County) has an annual 5 - 6 marriages registered in minority language.
2. e) “the use by regional authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in
their assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the
State;”

The working language of county assemblies is Hungarian but, with prior notification, the use
of minority languages is guaranteed and interpreters assist the sessions.
The working language of the assemblies and sessions of national minority self- governments
is usually the given minority language and, in the majority of cases, the minutes are drawn up
in the language of the given minority, only a summary is prepared in Hungarian.
2. f)“the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the
State;”

In accordance with the relevant provisions of the Minorities Act, minority self- governments
decide for themselves which language they choose for their official language. Members use
their language freely at assemblies of the minority self- governments, even though minutes are
drawn up in Hungarian, for practical reasons. All the same, there are more and more cases of
bilingual minutes as well.
2. g) “the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official
language(s), of traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or minority
languages.”

In terms of the provisions of the Minorities Act, local governments shall – on request of the
local minority self- government operating in their district of competency – provide signs
indicating the name of the settlement, streets, public offices, and the names of the organs
performing public services in the mother tongue of the minority (in addition to the Hungarian
wording and name variant, with identical contents and form).
These obligations are also contained in the list of competencies issued for local governments.
Hungary had already started posting signs of place-names in minority languages before the
adoption of the Minorities Act. First in 1980 some 180 settlements received bilingual signs,
which was then followed by the gradual appearance of more and more settlement names
indicated also in a minority language. From 1993 on, other bilingual signs also began to
appear in settlements populated by minorities.
In case doubts arise as to the correct variants of the minority names of settlements and other
geographical names, before any decision is brought, the expert opinion of the Committee of
Geographical Names operating within the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
may be consulted.
3. “With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other
persons acting on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which
regional or minority languages are used, in accordance with the situation of each
language and as far as this is reasonably possible:

53

c) to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request in these
languages.”

Article 8 of Act LXV of 1990 on Local Governments lists among the public services to be
fulfilled by local governments the enforcement of the rights of minorities, so that minority
languages would be used in all walks of life.
Regarding the public services to be performed by state organs, the provisions of the Civil
Code prevail. The Civil Code contains no bans concerning the language of civil contracts, it
only stipulates that in the case of a legal dispute, the Hungarian version of the agreement
shall prevail.
4. “With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3
accepted by them, the Parties undertake to take one or more of the following
measures:
a) translation or interpretation as may be required;
b) recruitment and, where necessary, training of the officials and other public service
employees required;
c) compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a
knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed to the territory in which
that language is used.”

Based upon the reports provided by the county offices of public administration, it can be
concluded that the use of minority languages is less and less realised by making use of
interpreters or translations, and it is more and more frequent that, in accordance with Article
54 of the Minorities Act, public officials speaking the local minority language are hired for
public administration jobs; and it is also more and more frequent that employees in the public
administration system take a language examination in the language of the minority of the
region (Baranya County Office of Public Administration, Bács-Kiskun County Office of
Public Administration).
To ensure the usage of the minority language in public life, in line with the needs of the local
minority self- government of a given settlement, the local government is to publish its
decrees, its decisions affecting the life of minorities, and the minutes of its sessions in the
language of the local minority(ies). The execution of this regulation is guaranteed by the
stipulations of the Minorities Act on the competencies of local minority self- governments.
Often, the documents are made public by broadcasting in the minority tongue in the local
cable television, or publication, generally in an abridged form, in the minority language in a
local newspaper.
Technical language training of public officials speaking a minority language, however, is an
issue only partially settled. That is why some national minority self- governments initiated the
compilation and publication of glossaries which contain the technical expressions used in
public administration in Hungarian and in the language of the given minority. The
Government extends assistance to the publication of such glossaries.
5. “The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional
or minority languages, at the request of those concerned.”

The legal background of the use of personal names has not changed. Article 12 of the
Minorities Act stipulates that a person belonging to a minority has the right to free choice
regarding his/her own given name, as well as those of his/her children, and to have their
54

family and first names entered into the official registers and displayed in official documents
in accordance with the rules of his/her native language. In the case of a non-Latin script, a
phonetic Latin transcription must also be provided along with the original. On request,
registry entries (certificate of birth, etc.) can also be in a dual- language form, as can other
personal documents.
The Government, at its session held on 28 January 1999, modified the Government Decree
No. 147/1993 (X. 26.) on the Regulation of the issuance and registration of personal identity
documents. Article 1 of the Decree was added a new paragraph 4, which says that on request
of a person belonging to a national or ethnic minority native to Hungary, his/her name shall,
on the basis of a dual- language birth certificate, be entered into his/her personal identity
document in both languages, in accordance with the provision above cited of the Minorities
Act.
Hungarian law allows individuals to change their given and family names, and to change
them back, the only thing required being that a simple application be submitted to the
Ministry of the Interior. Experience shows that such changes are approved easily.
The modification of the Act on Duties by Act LX of 1998 stipulates that registries shall
handle an application by a citizen of Hungary to change his/her name into a form in
accordance with his/her native minority tongue as a duty-free service.
Although information from the county offices of public administration confirm that slowly,
choices to opt for minority- language names are on the increase, these numbers are still not
significant. The necessary documents in the minority tongues are available, and given names
of a minority origin are entered into the official register of given names gradually.
Information on the practical aspects of choosing a minority language given name in Hungary
is available at the web site of the Ministry for the Interior.
Article 11 - Media
1. “The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within
the territories in which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each
language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent,
have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the
independence and autonomy of the media:
a) to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:
(iii) to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer programmes in the regional
or minority languages.”

The operation of native- language broadcasts of national and ethnic minorities in Hungary are
guaranteed and regulated by legal rules. The Minorities Act obliges the public service radio
and television to produce and broadcast minority programmes on a regular basis. The Act on
Radio and Television Broadcasting says that service providers performing public service
tasks shall assist in nurturing the culture and languages of minorities, as well as provide
regular information in their native tongues. The Act on the National News Agency also
contains a provision stipulating that the publication of information on the situation of
minorities is a task of public service.

55

The national self- governments of national and ethnic minorities may freely decide on the use
of the programme time available to them in the public service media. Public service
broadcasters are bound by law to take the decision of the minority self- governments into
consideration.
In addition to the public service stations Hungarian Television, Duna Television and
Hungarian Radio, which regularly report on the situation of minorities in Hungary, media
owned by local governments or other operators also broadcast programmes in native minority
languages. The Public Foundation for National and Ethnic Minorities in Hungary stimulates
the operation of local minority media, as well as the preparation and broadcasting of cable
television native- language minority programmes by ways of target grants. The aim of the
assistance is to promote the recognition of the native languages of the minorities in ever field
of public life.
The Office for National and Ethnic Minorities has initiated consultations with the national
self-governments of the minorities and the representatives of the National Radio and
Television Commission (ORTT) so that appropriate financing be available for the preparation
of non-profit radio and television programmes. ORTT has devoted special attention to that
issue in its competitive grants for public service programme production, in order that more
programmes would be created which present the life of minorities. ORTT thus decided to
support several minority radio and television programmes in the spring of 2000. Thanks to
that support, Hungarian Radio is now broadcasting the programme “In One Homeland,” and
the stations Fresh, Fortuna, Szentes Radio, Zemplén TV, as well as the local TV stations of
Debrecen, Miskolc, Nyíregyháza, Szarvas, and Ózd could also produce and broadcast
minority programmes.
b)
(ii) “to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis.”

The public service Hungarian Radio broadcasts native- language radio programmes for all
national and ethnic minorities of Hungary.
The average broadcasting time of minority programmes in the Hungarian Radio presently
surpasses 10 hours a day. The highest programming time is granted for the Slovak minority
(865 minutes weekly). The Croatian, German and the Romanian minorities have 840 minutes
per week. The Serbian minority has 780 minutes of broadcasting time weekly. Minority
programmes of national coverage are broadcast in the evening hours, between 18:30 and
22:30. Minority broadcasts can be received on the OIRT ultra short wave length, and at the
wavelengths of every regional station (middle wave and ultra short-wave CCIR). Regional
minority programmes are broadcast in both the morning and the afternoon periods.
Additionally, Hungarian Radio has a weekly 30- minute programme (in Hungarian) devoted
to the minorities of Hungary. In order to know minorities better, the public service radio
prepares a 3- hour programme on minorities every three months, with contributions from the
local stations.
Among the national minority self- governments of Hungary, the Slovene self- government was
the first one to create its own radio. „Radio Monoster”, broadcasting from Szentgotthárd, has
its own separate bandwidth and broadcasts in Slovenian. The national minority selfgovernment was awarded a broadcasting licence for eight hours per week in 1999, in
56

accordance with the rules of the Act on Media, without having to apply for tender. Regular
broadcasts started in June 2000. This radio station broadcasts one hour of native- language
programmes daily from Monday to Saturday, and two hours on Sunday. The national selfgovernment received significant support for the necessary equipment from the mother
country. The establishment of the station received further assistance from foundations and the
central budget. Fina ncing the regular broadcasting, though, is problematic for the selfgovernment. The state cannot undertake full financing of the preparation of programmes,
however, since the Hungarian Radio, due to its mandate of public service, also produces and
broadcasts regular Slovenian- language programmes anyway. For the record, it must be
admitted that the Act on Media, unfortunately, fails to provide for the budgetary questions of
operating bandwidths licensed to minorities.
c)
(ii) “to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;”

The public service Hungarian Television now produces native-language programmes for
every minority. The formerly biweekly radio magazine of the Serbian minority is now
broadcast weekly, while the Hungarian Television broadcasts the programme called
“Together” every second week, in 52 or 26 minutes, intended to disseminate information on
the situation of minorities in Hungary among as wide an audience as possible.
The public service television has weekly broadcasts in national coverage for the Croatian,
German, Romanian, Slovak and Serbian minorities, and programmes also in national
coverage for the Slovenian minority every second week. The producers of minority
programmes are located in three cities in the country: Pécs (Croatian, German) Szeged
(Romanian, Slovak, Serb) and Szombathely (Slovenian). The broadcasting time of weekly or
biweekly programmes is 26 minutes each. Minority programmes are broadcast in the groundbased M1 channel with national coverage, in the afternoon hours of various days of the week.
Broadcasts are then repeated Saturday morning of the same week on the satellite M2 channel.
In order to ensure the consultation rights of minority self- governments in accordance with the
Act on Radio and Television, the president of the Hungarian Television and the presidents of
the national minority self- governments signed a co-operation agreement on 3 April 2000. The
agreement sets out the relations between the two parties and the practical mechanisms of joint
decision- making. It should be stressed that the co-operation agreement gives regular
consultations between the Hungarian Television and the minority self- governments an
institutionalised form. The co-operation agreement specifies the broadcasting time accorded
to minority programmes, and guarantees permanent programme slots.
e)
(i) “to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least
one newspaper in the regional or minority languages;”
The Republic of Hungary has several decades long traditions of publishing newspapers in
minority languages. Since these cannot be published on a market-based principle, due to a
constant dwindling of their readership, the Budget must grant them continuous support. The
Public Foundation for National and Ethnic Minorities in Hungary thus provides funding for at
least one newspaper per minority distributed at national level. The amounts of budgetary
assistance for the year 2002 are as follows:
57

Minority, title of publication
(frequency of publication)
Croatian – Hrvatski Glasnik (weekly)
German – Neue Zeitung (weekly)
Romanian – Foaia Romaneasca (weekly)
Serb – Srpske Narodne Novine (weekly)
Slovak – Ludové noviny (weekly)
Slovenian – Porabje (biweekly)

Amount of assistance in 2002
HUF 31,092,304
HUF 33,165,099
HUF 24,854,783
HUF 31,092,304
HUF 31,092,304
HUF 14,770,489

Source: Public Foundation for National and Ethnic Minorities in Hungary

Newspapers of national distribution of minorities are owned by the national minority selfgovernments, or by their organs.
f)
(i) “to cover the additional costs of those media which use regional or minority
languages, wherever the law provides for financial assistance in general for the
media.”

The above shows that the Hungarian State gives continuous support to the production of
minority- language television and radio programmes, as well as the regular publication of
minority- language newspaper. The public service media finances the production of minoritylanguage broadcasts within their own budgets, while the financing of regional and local
programming is supported by the National Radio and Television Board, as well as the Public
Foundation for National and Ethnic Minorities in Hungary.
The material and financial conditions of minority television and radio broadcasts have greatly
deteriorated in recent years, though, due to the general financial hardships sustained by public
service television and radio. These problems have become especially grave and have come to
the attention of the general public in the year 2002: their solution is thus one of the tasks of
the future.
g) “to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using regional or
minority languages.”

The Public Foundation for National and Ethnic Minorities launches calls for minority
students studying at institutions of higher education to apply for scholarships. Among the
students who receive financial support on the basis of the Board of Trustees’ decision, there
are some that have already established their presence in the press, as well as some who are
preparing to pursue a journalist’s career.
The Ministry of Education of the Republic of Hungary offers scholarships annually to
support education of minority youth in their mother countries. Among those applying for the
scholarship, a very significant number wish to study journalism. The vast majority of
journalists who today work for minority- language publications are graduates of faculties of
journalism in the respective mother countries.
3. “The Parties undertake to ensure that the interests of the users of regional or
minority languages are represented or taken into account within such bodies as may
be established in accordance with the law with responsibility for guaranteeing the
freedom and pluralism of the media.”

58

Minorities may jointly delegate, in a rotational system, one member annually to the Board of
Trustees of the Public Foundation of Hungarian Television, in accordance with the Act on
Radio and Television Broadcasting. In the year 2000 a German minority delegate was a
member of the Board of Trustees of the Public Foundation of the Public Service Hungarian
Television, a Croatian minority delegate a member of the equivalent body of Duna
Television; while the Slovak minority delegated a member to the Board of Trustees of the
Hungarian Radio. The right to joint appointment to membership in the board of trustees of a
public service media foundation has been exercised in 2001 by the Croatian, German,
Armenian, Slovak and Serbian national minority self- governments.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
1. “With regard to cultural activities and facilities - especially libraries, video libraries,
cultural centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as
literary work and film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals
and the culture industries, including inter alia the use of new technologies - the
Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used and to the
extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this field:
a) to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority
languages and foster the different means of access to works produced in these
languages;”

The legal background of assisting cultural activities of minorities in Hungary is provided by
the Constitution, the Minorities Act, and Act CXL of 1997 on Protection of Cultural Goods,
Museum Institutions, the Supply of Public Libraries, and General Cultural and Educational
Activities, as well as bilateral intergovernmental treaties.
In terms of Article 49 of the Minorities Act, the organisations and national self- governments
of minorities are entitled to pursue activities of educating the public, to create and maintain
institutions. They may request budgetary support for these tasks.
Financial assets supporting cultural activities with minority objectives are set aside in the
budget chapters of the Ministry of Cultural Heritage and the Public Foundation for National
and Ethnic Minorities in Hungary. County and local governments may also support minority
cultural programmes from their own resources, mainly by grants.
These grants basically cover all walks of cultural life. Publication of minority- language
literature mainly operates out of central budgetary assistance, as do certain segments of the
religious life of minorities (e.g. pilgrimages to the mother country). National minority selfgovernments extend support to the publication of such cultural products and events connected
to minority religious life depending upon their own financial resources. Even though their
budgets are increased year by year, they prove insufficient to support every segment of the
cultural life of minorities.
Publication of minority- language works of literature are financed by the Ministry of Cultural
Heritage and the Public Foundation for National and Ethnic Minorities in Hungary.
Representatives of the respective minority participate in the preparation and the making of
the decisions, and they also have the right of proposal. In addition to the minority- language
publishing houses already mentioned in our previous report (Izdan, Noi), a new publishing
59

house of Croatian- language textbooks and other publications was established under the name
Croatica Public Service Company, owned by the National Croatian Self- government and the
Association of Croatians in Hungary.
The task of providing minorities with native- language library is a task mandated by law for
the public libraries of the local governments. The network of public libraries offers services
to the Croatian, German, Romanian, Serbian, Slovak and the Slovenian minorities at various
locations of the country, in several hundred settlements. Within the public library system 19
main libraries also contribute to the library supply of these minorities.
County libraries execute their minority-related tasks as an organic part of their services,
operating the system of provision for ethnic settlements. Despite hardships in financing, they
strive to maintain an up-to-date collection, taking care of the replacement and exchange of
items. As information centres, they make accessible national and local databases, assisting
local ethnic research and publishing.
The central place of collecting minority- language literature is the National Foreign- language
Library. This library performs the procurement of literary works from mother countries out of
the budget extended by the Ministry of National Cultural Heritage – depending upon the
demand by the individual minorities.
It is the museums maintained by county or local governments that engage in collecting
minority-related material relics, as well as the Hungarian Museum of Ethnography. The
museums maintained by the competent county self- governments also fulfil regional and
national tasks. Regional village museums and local museum collections are usually operated
by the local government.
Two national master museums also take part in the collection of minority-related relics and
objects. 16 smaller museums and 41 regional village museums are registered with the
Ministry of National Cultural Heritage. The Hungarian Orthodox Ecclesiastical Museum at
Miskolc, the Serbian Orthodox Museum of Ecclesiastical Arts and Sciences Collection at
Szentendre, and the Serbian Ecclesiastical Art Collection at Szentendre all have rich
materials portraying the religious life of minorities.
The two minority- language theatres of Hungary, the Deutsche Bühne in Szekszárd and the
Croatian Theatre in Pécs are maintained by the local and the county governments,
respectively. The local government of Pomáz and the Serbian Democratic Association jointly
founded the Joakim Vujity Serbian Theatre, now operating in the village of Lórév.
Autonomous systems of general culture and education of the minorities with larger numbers
are presently taking shape. Along with the House of Slovak Culture of Békéscsaba, the
Slovak Regional Centres at Bakonycsernye, Sátoraljaújhely and Szarvas, the Slovak Cultural
and Educational Centre of Bánk, and the Lenau House (Pécs) and other German minority
communal centres, the Slovenian Cultural and Information Centre, founded with budgetary
support, and the House of Germans in Hungary, renovated in 2000 with support from
Germany have to be highlighted. The Office of the Serbian National Self- Government
operates as a national cultural centre as well.
The Public Foundation for National and Ethnic Minorities in Hungary awards emphasised
support to national and regional minority programmes. Another decisive criterion of
supporting particular applications is the use of the minority tongue in the programmes.
60

b) “to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in
regional or minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, postsynchronisation and subtitling activities;”

The Public Foundation for National and Ethnic Minorities offers annual grants for the
publication of minority-language works of literature in Hungarian translation. Generally, it
can be said that most minority publications are published in two languages. Similarly,
television productions with minority themes are broadcast either in Hungarian with subtitles
in a minority language, or in a minority language with Hunga rian subtitles.
The Festival of Minority Films was held in December 2001 with support from the Public
Foundation for National and Ethnic Minorities, at a central cinema in Budapest (Muvész
Mozi). Within the framework of the festival, the public could see the most interesting pieces
by minority film studios, documentaries on the life of minorities, as well as productions
created by other minority artists and teams.
The muster of films of ethnic subjects, organised for the first time in 2002, where films by
minority filmmakers were also presented, saw the Award of the Association of Hungarian
Documentary Directors, worth HUF 100 thousand, won by József Szonyi, the Slovak mayor
of the village Pilisszántó, for his work titled “Pilis lime.” The film, recorded in the local
Slovak dialect, was screened with live sound dubbing in Hungarian.
c) “to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other
languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and
subtitling activities.”

Essentially, the above stand true in connection with this subject as well. Aside from the
Public Foundation for National and Ethnic Minorities, the Master Programme of National
Heritage also supports translation of Hungarian works to the languages of the minorities in
Hungary – which are, at the same time, languages of neighbouring countries to Hungary. The
same budgetary financing supports dubbing and subtitling of Hungarian films.
f) “to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given
regional or minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural
activities.”
Representatives of the national minority self- governments are involved in the preparation, the
making and the execution of every decision or ruling affecting the cultural life of the
minorities. Financial resources directly supporting minorities’ cultural life (Ministry of
National Cultural Heritage, Public Foundation for National and Ethnic Minorities) are
allocated by the decision-makers (boards of trustees) delegated by the minorities.
g) “to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for
collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the
regional or minority languages.”

The spectrum of collection of the National Archives extends to the documents of the national
minority self- governments. Continuous archiving of these is performed by the selfgovernments themselves, who then transport their documents to the National Archives in

61

times determined in their respective archival plans. Processing of documents at the Archives
is continuous, and access for research is guaranteed.
Collecting works of literature in minority languages and making them available to the public
is the task of the National Széchenyi Library. In accordance with Act CXL of 1997 on the
Protection of Cultural Goods, Museum Institutions, the Supply of Public Libraries, and
General Cultural and Educational Activities, 6 copies of all publications published in the
country shall be sent to the National Széchenyi Library.
Television programmes produced in minority languages are collected by the archives of the
regional studios of the Hungarian Television. Access to these is limited, mainly due to a lack
of financial resources.
The same is true for minority programmes created by the Hungarian Radio. Minority editors
attempted to process them in recent years, in part on in their entirety, by publishing them in
print.
Within the grants of the Public Foundation for National and Ethnic Minorities, it is possible
to apply for funding for archiving the materials prepared by minority studios – the
Foundation approved grant applications of this sort on several counts. Many minority radio
studios started to re-record their existing materials with contemporary technology, and certain
minority studios publish their best reportages in print.
2. “In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority
languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a
regional or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or provide
appropriate cultural activities and facilities in accordance with the preceding
paragraph.”

Native Croatians, Germans, Romanians, Serbs, Slovaks and Slovenes live scattered across
almost the entire territory of Hungary. That is the reason why the Republic of Hungary
decided to apply the obligations it assumed regarding the languages of the listed minorities
under the Charter to the entire territory of the country. Cultural initiatives are embraced partly
by civil minority associations, and partly by the minority self- governments. State support for
these purposes, as it was pointed out above, is provided continuously.
Supporting cultural life does not only mean the support of cultural initiatives, but also
assistance given to the cultural associations of minorities. These associations and clubs use
the state assistance to organise events and cultural programmes. Experience bears it out that
Budapest and other larger cities can boast of a concentrated number of minority events, even
though none of the listed minorities live there in significant proportions.
3. “The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural
policy abroad, for regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.”

The Republic of Hungary strives to establish Institutes of Hungarian Culture in the capitals of
all the mother countries of the minorities living in Hungary and, if possible, in other larger
cities. In accordance with Article 2 subsection (2) paragraph h) of Government Decree No.
101/1997 (VI. 13.) on the Institutes of Hungarian Culture in Foreign Countries, these
institutions also take part in presenting the results of education and culture of the national and
ethnic minorities in Hungary, as well as in promoting institutional relations supporting it.
62

The minutes of the sessions of the Joint Committees on Minorities which were created on the
basis of agreements between the Republic of Hungary and the mother countries of the
minorities include recommendations that the Institutes of Hungarian Culture assist the
presentation of the culture of the minority population living in Hungary in as wide a circle in
the mother country of the given minority as possible. Recent years’ experience proves that
the institutions of the mother countries are also interested in learning about the culture of the
minority concerned living in Hungary, and thus seek out the assistance of Institute of
Hungarian Culture operating in the given country.

Article 13 – Economic and social life
1. “With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the
whole country:
a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without
justifiable reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to
economic or social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical
documents such as instructions for the use of products or installations.”

Last year Parliament passed Act XCVI of 2001 on the Publication of Business
Advertisements, Shop Signs and Certain Announcements of Public Interest in the Hungarian
language, stipulating that Hungarian must be featured in all signs purporting economic
advertisement or indicating shops/businesses, as well as in all public service announcements.
In cases, this means that the advertisement or sign must appear, along with the foreign
language sign or content, in the same size and same wording in Hungarian as well.
The law recognises only one exception to that general obligation: Article 6, subsection (4) of
the Act says that "the requirements defined here will not prejudice the economic
advertisements and signs posted in the minority languages defined in Article 42 of Act
LXXVII of 1993 on the Rights of National and Ethnic Minorities, in settlements where the
minority using the language concerned has a minority self-government."
No other prohibitive or other regulation exists in Hungary relevant to the use of language of
economic actors. Actors decide for themselves which language they wish to use in their
activities and correspondence.
Article 14 – Transfrontier Exchanges
“The Parties undertake:
a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the
States in which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if necessary
to seek to conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster contacts between the
users of the same language in the States concerned in the fields of culture, education,
information, vocational training and permanent education;
b) for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or promote cooperation across borders, in particular between regional or local authorities in whose
territory the same language is used in identical or similar form.”

63

The Republic of Hungary maintains fair relations with all the mother countries of the
minorities living on its territory. Bilateral co-operation is characteristically reinforced by
agreements signed between the governments or ministries of the mother country of a given
minority and that of Hungary. In recent years, a whole system of Joint Committees on
Minorities has been evolving on the basis of bilateral agreements. The national selfgovernment of the given minority always delegates a representative to the sessions of these
committees as a member of the Hungarian delegation.
*

*

*

As we indicated in our previous Report, the first partner relationships were formed between
the Republic of Hungary and the Federal Republic of Germany. The Republic of Hungary
undertakes, in the documents which provide a basis for the co-operation, to take measures to
preserve the identity and language of the German minority living on the territory of Hungary.
The focus of German – Hungarian co-operation is the protection of the German language and
the development of its teaching, including not only the extension of the system of German
minority education, but also the development and support of the network of schools with dual
language instruction in German and Hungarian.
The agreement between the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany and the
Government of the Republic of Hungary regarding co-operation in the field of school
education was signed in December 2000. It aims to raise the awareness of the German
language and culture in Hungary more, to deepen the cultural contacts of the two states, in
order that each other’s history and culture be mutually known, and based upon co-ordinated
curricula, establish German-Hungarian sections in Hungarian schools. Pupils could study
technical subjects in German, and acquire the qualification needed for entering higher
education in Germany. The students of the German – Hungarian section would take a
combined examination, and if they succeed, receive a General Certificate in German as well
as the regular Hungarian Secondary School Final Certificate.
*

*

*

During the reporting period, the Slo venian – Hungarian Joint Committee on Minorities had
three sessions, resulting in an improvement in regional co-operation in the field of education,
the exchange of textbooks and student exchange programs, and the training of teachers in
their respective mother countries.
The Republic of Hungary and the Republic of Slovenia signed an Agreement of Cooperation in the field of Education, Culture and Sciences in 1999, for the period of time
between 2000-2003.
Both the Slovenian Cultural and Information Centre in Szentgotthárd and the Slovenian radio
station owned by the National Slovenian Self-Government are operating successfully, and
enjoying support from both countries.
*

*

*

The Croatian – Hungarian Joint Committee on Minorities held two sessions in the past
three years. The recommendations of the Joint Committee concentrated on assistance to the
64

education of the Croatians of Hungary, to cultural activities of speakers of the minority
language, and to the nurturing of traditions.
*

*

*

On the basis of the Treaty between the Republic of Hungary and the Slovak Republic on
Good-neighbourly Relations and Friendly Co-operation, a total of 12 joint committees were
created to provide the framework for the co-operation of the two countrie s in different areas
of life. Recently, a decision was taken to include representatives of the Slovak minority living
in Hungary in the work of all the joint committees as members of the Hungarian party.
The Hungarian-Slovakian Joint Committee on Minorities held its founding session in
February 1999, which was followed by two further sessions during the reporting period.
As a result of one recommendation of the Joint Committee on Minorities, the Joint
Committee of Slovakian and Hungarian Historians rene wed its activities. A Group of
Slovakian and Hungarian Teachers of history and social studies was set up in December
2000, with one of their chief tasks being the elaboration of a manual of methodology on the
common history of Slovaks and Hungarians, so that the understanding of history teaching in
the schools of the two countries could be harmonised. One of the tasks of the Joint
Committee of Hungarian and Slovakian Historians is to assist the work of that group.
The Joint Committee on Minorities devotes a special attention to the development and
support of minority education.
In 2001 an Agreement on the Cross-border Co-operation of Local Self- governments and
Public Administration Organs was signed in Budapest by the Government of the Republic of
Hungary and the Government of the Republic of Slovakia, with the objective to encourage
co-operation between those living in the border regions of the two countries.
*

*

*

After several years of inactivity, the Committee on national minorities of the HungarianRomanian Intergovernmental Joint Commission for Active Co-operation and Partnership
held its 4th session in October 2001. The co-chairmen of the Committee formulated
recommendations for the two governments concerning assistance to the cultural and
educational activities of the two minorities.
The Government of the Republic of Hungary and the Government of Romania signed a
Memorandum of Understanding on the Law on the Hungarians Living in Neighbouring
Countries and issues of bilateral co-operation in December 2001 in Budapest. The
Memorandum expressed the intent of the Parties to start negotiations on preferential
treatment of the Romanian and Hungarian minorities living on the territory of the two
countries.
In February 2002 the Government of Hungary set the deadlines for the execution of the
recommendations of the Memorandum of Understanding and named those responsible for it
by a Government Decree.
*

*
65

*

Another significant result of the past three years is that a bilateral agreement on the protection
of the rights of the Hungarian minority living in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and of
the Serbs living in the Republic of Hungary has been worked out.
The Agreement and the activities of the Joint Committee which is due to be established in
accordance with the Agreement would remedy the damages suffered by the Serbs of Hungary
due to the two countries bad political relations, which effectively hindered the conclusion of
bilateral agreements otherwise indispensable for the establishment and development of
appropriate minority education.
The Serbian National Self- Government argues that the language rights of Serbs of Hungary
were infringed upon when reception of Serbian radio broadcasts in the Serbian language from
the mother country (otherwise very popular with the Serbs of Hungary) became impossible
due to the damages suffered by Serbian radio stations during the 1999 NATO bombings in
Serbia.
*

*

*

The cultures and the languages of all the minorities living in the Republic of Hungary enjoy a
special attention on the part of state organs and organisations. Ensuring the rights of
minorities is based upon the international documents signed and ratified by Hungary and
upon Hungarian law. Realisation of minority rights is monitored especially by the Minorities
Ombudsman, the Office for National and Ethnic Minorities and the national and local
minority self- governments. The experiences of the past decade show that there are no social
groups or political forces in Hungary that would question the linguistic, cultural and political
rights of native minorities. Moreover, it might even be said that minority policy is among the
few areas of public life where the widest consensus is established due to the agreement of all
political forces.

66

