Strasbourg, 6 July 2011

ECRML (2011) 3

EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES

APPLICATION OF THE CHARTER IN LIECHTENSTEIN

5th monitoring cycle

Report of the Committee of Experts
presented to the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
in accordance with Article 16 of the Charter

2

The European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages provides for a control
mechanism to evaluate how the Charter is applied in a State Party with a view to, where
necessary, making Recommendations for improving its legislation, policy and practices.
The central element of this procedure is the Committee of Experts, set up under Article 17
of the Charter. Its principal purpose is to report to the Committee of Ministers on its
evaluation of compliance by a Party with its undertakings, to examine the real situation of
regional or minority languages in the State and, where appropriate, to encourage the Party
to gradually reach a higher level of commitment.
To facilitate this task, the Committee of Ministers adopted, in accordance with Article 15.1,
an outline for initial periodical reports that a Party is required to submit to the Secretary
General. The report should be made public by the State. This outline requires the State to
give an account of the concrete application of the Charter, the general policy for the
languages protected under Part II and, in more precise terms, all measures that have
been taken in application of the provisions chosen for each language protected under Part
III of the Charter. The Committee of Experts’ first task is therefore to examine the
information contained in the periodical report for all the relevant regional or minority
languages on the territory of the State concerned.
The Committee of Experts’ role is to evaluate the existing legal acts, regulations and real
practice applied in each State for its regional or minority languages. It has established its
working methods accordingly. The Committee of Experts gathers information from the
respective authorities and from independent sources within the State, so as to attempt to
obtain a fair and just overview of the real language situation. After a preliminary
examination of an initial periodical report, the Committee of Experts submits, if necessary,
a number of questions to each Party to obtain supplementary information from the
authorities on matters it considers insufficiently developed in the report itself. This written
procedure is usually followed up by an “on-the-spot visit” by a delegation of the Committee
of Experts to the State in question. During this visit the delegation meets bodies and
associations whose work is closely related to the use of the relevant languages, and
consults the authorities on matters that have been brought to its attention. This
information-gathering process is designed to enable the Committee of Experts to evaluate
more effectively the application of the Charter in the State concerned.

Having concluded this process, the Committee of Experts adopts its own report. This
report is submitted to the Committee of Ministers, together with suggestions for
recommendations that the latter may decide to address to one or more Parties, as may be
required.

3

Chapter 1. Background Information
1.
The Principality of Liechtenstein signed the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
(hereafter referred to as "the Charter") on 5 November 1992, and deposited its instrument of ratification on
18 November 1997. The instrument of ratification is attached as Appendix I of this report. The Charter
entered into force for Liechtenstein on 1 March 1998.
2.
In accordance with Article 15.1 of the Charter, Liechtenstein submitted its initial periodical report to
the Secretary General of the Council of Europe on 1 March 1999, and subsequent reports on 9 March 2002,
21 February 2005 and 5 February 2008. The previous four reports of the Committee of Experts on
Liechtenstein adopted on 9 February 2001, 24 March 2004, 8 April 2005 and 12 September 2008 respectively
(ECRML (2001) 5, ECRML (2004) 4), ECRML (2005) 2) and ECRML (2008) 7) contain identical findings. The
Committee of Experts took note of Liechtenstein’s particular situation of having no regional or minority
languages within the meaning of the Charter and concluded that no proposals for recommendations should
therefore be sent to the Committee of Ministers. The Committee of Ministers took note of these findings (on
19 September 2001, 9 June 2004, 29 June 2005 and 11 December 2008 respectively) and expressed its
appreciation of the contribution that Liechtenstein has made to the protection and promotion of regional or
minority languages in Europe by its ratification and active involvement in the Charter system.
3.

Liechtenstein submitted its fifth periodical report on 7 April 2011.

4.

The present report was adopted by the Committee of Experts on 5 May 2011.

1.1

The work of the Committee of Experts

5.
The Committee of Experts took note of the fifth periodical report of Liechtenstein, which affirms that
the declaration contained in the instrument of ratification, deposited on 18 November 1997, continues to
reflect the situation in Liechtenstein, that there are no regional or minority languages as defined in Article 1 of
the Charter in the territory of the Principality of Liechtenstein.
6.
The Committee of Experts has satisfied itself that there are no regional or minority languages
traditionally used in Liechtenstein.
1.2.

Particular issues arising in the evaluation of the application of the Charter in Liechtenstein

7.
German is the official language in Liechtenstein as stipulated in Article 6 of the Constitution of 1921.
In its instrument of ratification, Liechtenstein declared that no regional or minority languages in the sense of
the Charter exist on the territory of the State. Liechtenstein ratified the Charter in order to underline the
importance it attaches to the Charter as an essential tool for preserving and cultivating the cultural diversity of
Europe and to contribute to the entry into force of the Charter.
8.
As the Charter is not applicable to any regional or minority languages in Liechtenstein, the Committee
of Experts has not considered it necessary to perform its normal information gathering procedures to the
same extent as it has done in relation to other Parties.
Chapter 2. Findings of the Committee of Experts
9.
The Committee of Experts compliments Liechtenstein on the commitment and European solidarity it
has demonstrated by ratifying the Charter.
10.
The Committee of Experts has concluded that, in the light of the particular situation whereby in
Liechtenstein no regional or minority languages are spoken on its territory, it will not propose to the
Committee of Ministers to forward any recommendations to the Principality of Liechtenstein.
11.
In accordance with Articles 16 paragraphs 3 and 4 of the Charter, the Committee of Experts asks the
Committee of Ministers to take note of this report and to express to the Government of Liechtenstein its
appreciation of the valuable contribution it has made to the protection and promotion of regional or minority
languages in Europe by its ratification and active contribution to the promotion of the Charter.

4

Appendix I: Instrument of Ratification

Liechtenstein :

Declaration contained in the instrument of ratification deposited on 18 November 1997 - Or. Fr.
The Principality of Liechtenstein declares in accordance with Article 2, paragraph 2, and in accordance with
Article 3, paragraph 1, of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages of 5 November 1992, that
there are no regional or minority languages in the sense of the Charter in the territory of the Principality of
Liechtenstein at the time of ratification.
Period covered: 01/03/98 The preceding statement concerns Article(s): 2, 3

