Strasbourg, 20 September 2001

ECRML (2001) 5

European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

APPLICATION OF THE CHARTER IN LIECHTENSTEIN
Report of the Committee of Experts on the Charter
adopted on 9 February 2001 and
presented to the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
in conformity with Article 16 of the Charter

The European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages provides for a control
mechanism to evaluate how the Charter is applied in a State Party with a view to,
where necessary, making Recommendations for improvements in its legislation,
policy and practices. The central element of this procedure is the Committee of
Experts, established in accordance with Article 17 of the Charter. Its principal
purpose is to report to the Committee of Ministers on its evaluation of compliance
by a Party with its undertakings, to examine the real situation of the regional or
minority languages in the State and, where appropriate, to encourage the Party to
gradually reach a higher level of commitment.
To facilitate this task, the Committee of Ministers adopted, in accordance with
Article 15.1, an outline for the initial periodical report that a Party is required to
submit to the Secretary General. The report should be made public by the State.
This outline requires the State to give an account of the concrete application of the
Charter, the general policy for the languages protected under its Part II and in
more precise terms all measures that have been taken in application of the
provisions chosen for each language protected under Part III of the Charter. The
Committee’s first task is therefore to examine the information contained in the
initial periodical report for all the relevant regional or minority languages on the
territory of the State concerned.
The Committee’s role is to evaluate the existing legal acts, regulations and real
practice applied in each State for its regional or minority languages. It has
established its working methods accordingly. The Committee gathers information
from the respective authorities and from independent sources within the State, so
as to attempt to obtain a just and fair overview of the real language situation. After
a preliminary examination of an initial periodical report, the Committee submits, if
necessary, a number of questions to each Party to procure supplementary
information from the authorities on matters it considers insufficiently developed in
the report itself. This written procedure is usually followed up by an “on-the-spot
visit” of a delegation of the Committee to the respective State. During this visit the
delegation meets bodies and associations whose work is closely related to the
use of the relevant languages, and consults the authorities on matters that have
been brought to its attention. This information-gathering process is designed to
enable the Committee to better evaluate the application of the Charter in the State
concerned.
Having concluded this process, the Committee of Experts adopts its own report.
This report is submitted to the Committee of Ministers together with suggestions
for recommendations that the latter could decide to address to one or more
Parties as may be required.

2

CONTENTS

A.

Report of the Committee of Experts on the application of
the Charter Liechtenstein
Chapter I:

Background information …………………

5

1.1

The work of the Committee of Experts ...

1.2

Particular issues arising in the evaluation of
the application of the Charter in
Liechtenstein................................................

5

Chapter 2:

Findings .................................................

6

Appendix I:

Instrument of ratification ………….......…….

3

5

7

Chapter 1

Background information

1.
The Principality of Liechtenstein signed the European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages (hereafter referred to as the Charter) on 5 November 1992 and
deposited its instrument of ratification on 18 November 1997. The instrument of
ratification is attached as Appendix I of this report. The Charter entered into force for
Liechtenstein on 1 March 1998. The authorities of Liechtenstein published the text of
the Charter in the national law gazette, Landesgesetzblatt.
2.
In accordance with Article 15.1 of the Charter, Liechtenstein presented its
initial periodical report to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe on 1 March
1999. The report was adopted by the Parliament of Liechtenstein and the Private
Office of the Government as a public document.
3.

This report was adopted by the Committee of Experts on 7 February 2001.

1.1

The work of the Committee of Experts

4.
The Committee of Experts took note of the initial periodical report of
Liechtenstein, which reflects the Principality’s particular situation of having no
regional or minority languages within the meaning of the Charter.
5.
However, with a view of maintaining the consistent evaluation of the
Committee for all the Parties, the Committee enquired how the authorities had
published the text of the Charter and whether the initial periodical report itself had
also been made public. These two requirements are considered by the Committee as
fundamental, even if no regional or minority languages exist in a State Party. The
Committee has satisfied itself that there are no regional or minority languages
traditionally used in Liechtenstein.
1.2

Particular issues arising in the evaluation of the application of the
Charter in Liechtenstein

6.
German is the official language in Liechtenstein as stipulated in Article 6 of
the Constitution of 1921. At the time of ratification of the Charter by Liechtenstein it
was declared that no regional or minority languages in the sense of the Charter exist
on the territory of the State. Liechtenstein ratified the Charter in order to underline the
importance it attaches to the Charter as an instrument for the protection and
promotion of regional or minority languages as a threatened aspect of Europe’s
cultural heritage and to contribute to the entry into force of the Charter. In this way,
Liechtenstein has emphasised the need to preserve and cultivate the cultural
diversity of Europe.
7.
As the Charter is not applicable to any regional or minority languages in
Liechtenstein, the Committee has not considered it necessary to perform its normal
information gathering procedures to the same extent as it has done in relation to
other Parties.

Chapter 2

Findings of the Committee

The Committee compliments Liechtenstein on the commitment and European
solidarity it has demonstrated by ratifying the Charter.
The Committee has concluded that, in the light of the particular situation
whereby in Liechtenstein no regional or minority languages are spoken on its
territory, it will not propose to the Committee of Ministers to forward any
recommendations to the Principality of Liechtenstein.
The Committee would be glad if the Committee of Ministers would express to
the Government of Liechtenstein its appreciation of the valuable contribution it has
made to the protection and promotion of regional or minority languages in Europe by
its ratification and active contribution to the promotion of the Charter.

The government of Liechtenstein was invited to comment on the content of this report
in accordance with Article 16.3 of the Charter. No comments were sent to the Council
of Europe Secretariat.
The Committee of Experts did not submit any proposals to the Committee of
Ministers for recommendations to be addressed to Liechtenstein.
The Committee of Ministers examined the present report on 5 September 2001.

6

APPENDIX I

INSTRUMENT OF RATIFICATION

Liechtenstein :

Declaration contained in the instrument of ratification deposited on 18 November 1997
- Or. Fr.
The Principality of Liechtenstein declares in accordance with Article 2, paragraph 2, and in
accordance with Article 3, paragraph 1, of the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages of 5 November 1992, that there are no regional or minority languages in the sense
of the Charter in the territory of the Principality of Liechtenstein at the time of ratification.
Period covered: 01/03/98 The preceding statement concerns Article(s): 2, 3

7

