Strasbourg, 15 January 2014

ECRML (2014) 4

EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES

APPLICATION OF THE CHARTER IN LUXEMBOURG

Third Report of the Committee of Experts on the Charter
adopted on 21 June 2013
and presented to the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
at its 1188th meeting on 15 January 2014
in conformity with Article 16 of the Charter

The European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages provides for a control
mechanism to evaluate how the Charter is applied in a State Party with a view to, where
necessary, making recommendations for improving its legislation, policy and practices.
The central element of this procedure is the Committee of Experts, set up under Article
17 of the Charter. Its principal purpose is to report to the Committee of Ministers on its
evaluation of compliance by a Party with its undertakings, to examine the real situation of
regional or minority languages in the State and, where appropriate, to encourage the
Party to gradually reach a higher level of commitment.
To facilitate this task, the Committee of Ministers adopted, in accordance with Article 15,
paragraph 1, an outline for periodical reports that a Party is required to submit to the
Secretary General. The report should be made public by the State. This outline requires
the State to give an account of the concrete application of the Charter, the general policy
for the languages protected under Part II and, in more precise terms, all measures that
have been taken in application of the provisions chosen for each language protected
under Part III of the Charter. The Committee of Experts’ first task is therefore to examine
the information contained in the periodical report for all the relevant regional or minority
languages on the territory of the State concerned.
The Committee of Experts’ role is to evaluate the existing legal acts, regulations and real
practice applied in each State for its regional or minority languages. It has established its
working methods accordingly. The Committee of Experts gathers information from the
respective authorities and from independent sources within the State, so as to attempt to
obtain a fair and just overview of the real language situation. After a preliminary
examination of an initial periodical report, the Committee of Experts submits, if
necessary, a number of questions to each Party to obtain supplementary information
from the authorities on matters it considers insufficiently developed in the report itself.
This written procedure is usually followed up by an on-the-spot visit by a delegation of
the Committee of Experts to the State in question. During this visit the delegation meets
bodies and associations whose work is closely related to the use of the relevant
languages, and consults the authorities on matters that have been brought to its
attention. This information-gathering process is designed to enable the Committee of
Experts to evaluate more effectively the application of the Charter in the State
concerned.
Having concluded this process, the Committee of Experts adopts its own report. This
report is submitted to the Committee of Ministers, together with suggestions for
recommendations that the latter may decide to address to the State Party.

2

Chapter 1

Background information

1.
The Grand Duchy of Luxembourg signed the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
(hereafter referred to as “the Charter”) on 5 November 1992 and approved it by a law on 8 April 2005 which
was published in the Official Journal on 25 April 2005 (A - Nr 55). Luxembourg ratified the Charter on
22 June 2005. The Charter entered into force for Luxembourg on 1 October 2005.
2.
In accordance with Article 15.1 of the Charter, Luxembourg presented its third periodical report to the
Secretary General of the Council of Europe on 2 May 2013. The report has been made public.
3.

The present report was adopted by the Committee of Experts on 21 June 2013.

The work of the Committee of Experts
4.
The Committee of Experts took note of the third periodical report of Luxembourg, which confirms the
information provided in the initial report according to which there are no regional or minority languages used
in Luxembourg. Nevertheless, the Luxembourg authorities affirm their continued support to the principles and
objectives of the Charter. As the Charter is not applicable to any regional or minority language in
Luxembourg, the Committee of Experts has not considered it necessary to organise an on-the-spot visit as it
has done in relation to other States Parties.

Chapter 2

Findings of the Committee of Experts

A.
The Committee of Experts commends the authorities of Luxembourg for the commitment and
European solidarity they have demonstrated by ratifying the Charter.
B.
The Committee of Experts has concluded that, in light of the situation whereby in Luxembourg no
regional or minority languages are spoken on its territory, it will not propose to the Committee of Ministers to
forward any recommendations to the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg.

3

Appendix: Notification of Ratification

4

