Strasbourg, 4 April 2011

MIN-LANG/PR (2011) 2

EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES

Second periodical report
presented to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe
in accordance with Article 15 of the Charter

MONTENEGRO

Montenegro
GOVERNMENT OF MONTENEGRO
Ministry of Human and
Minority Rights

SECOND REPORT OF MONTENEGRO
ON IMPLEMENTATION OF EUROPEAN CHARTER
FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES

Podgorica, February 2011

Introduction
In the introduction we will give official information with which we
dispose based on the Census conducted in 2003, as well as based on some
other researches. Please note, however, that the new Census in Montenegro
will be conducted from 1 to 15 April 2011. We believe that until the visit of
the Expert Working Group to Montenegro we will have new information
which we will make available to the Committee of Experts.
According to the data of the Statistical Office of Montenegro
(MONSTAT) in Montenegro there are 620,145 citizens as follows:
Montenegrins 267,669 (43.16%), Serbs 198,414 (31,99%), Albanians 31,163
(%.5,03), Bosniaks 48,184 (7,77%), Muslims 24,625 (3,97%) and Roma
2,601 (0,42%).
According to the data of the Statistical Office of Montenegro
(MONSTAT) in Montenegro overall linguistic picture is as follows: Serbian
language speak 393,740 citizens or 63.49% of the population, the
Montenegrin language speak 136,208 citizens or 21.96% of the population,
the Albanian language speak 32,603 citizens or 5.26% of the population, the
Bosnian language speak the 14,172 citizens or 2.28% of the population, the
Bosniak language speak 19,906 citizens or 3.21% of the population, the
Romani language speak 2,602 citizens or 0.42% of the population and
Croatian language speak 2,791 citizens or 0.45% of the population.
The Statistical Office of Montenegro in cooperation with the National
Roma Council and the Coalition Roma Circle, with the goal to implement
the "Strategy for Improvement of the Situation of REA Population in
Montenegro", during October 2008 conducted a survey for the creation of
the database of RAE population in Montenegro.
This survey covers all persons who voluntarily came to the place
where the data were gathered and gave the information for themselves and
the members of their families and households. This means that the survey
covers also persons who do not currently live in Montenegro, but were
registered by members of their households who on their behalf gave the data.
Thus, the survey includes a total of 11,001 persons. Of these, 9,943 persons
are present in Montenegro, and the rest are in abroad.
According to this survey from a total of 9,943 persons the Romani
language speak 65% of the Roma, the Albanian language 5% of the Roma,
the Serbian language 2% of the Roma and other languages 1%.
National legislation does not define the concept of regional or
minority languages.

3

The new Constitution of Montenegro (“Official Gazette of
Montenegro” No. 01/07 of 25 October 2007) in Article 13, paragraph 1
stipulates that in Montenegro the official language is Montenegrin, while
paragraph 3 provides that the Serbian, Bosnian, Albanian and Croatian are in
official use.
The Government of Montenegro has a policy of protecting the rights
of minorities and other minority communities through the Ministry of
Human and Minority Rights, and through the Centre for Preservation and
Development of Minority Cultures.
On the proposal of the Government of Montenegro, in February 2008
the Montenegrin Parliament adopted the Decision on establishing the Fund
for Minorities (“Official Gazette of Montenegro”, No. 13/08). The Fund for
Minorities was established to support activities relevant to the preservation
and development of national or ethnic specificities of minorities and other
minority ethnic communities and their members in the area of national,
ethnical, cultural, linguistic and religious identity.
The Law on Minority Rights and Freedoms in Article 11 stipulates:
“Minorities and persons belonging to them shall have the right to use
their language and alphabet.
In the local self-government units in which persons belonging to
minorities make majority or considerable part of the population, pursuant to
results of the last census, the language of that minority shall be in official
use.
The official use of the language of minorities, for the purpose of
paragraph 2 of this article, shall particularly imply the following: use of
language in administrative and court proceedings and in conducting
administrative and court proceedings, issuance of public documents and
keeping official records, ballot papers and other electoral material as well as
in the work of representative bodies.
On the territory of the local self-government units as of paragraph 2 of
this Article the names of public bodies, name of the local self-government
unit, settlements, squares and streets, institutions, businesses and other
entities and the topographical indications shall also be written in the
language and alphabet of the minority.”
The Law on Minority Rights and Freedoms defines minority as a
group of citizens of Montenegro, numerically smaller than the rest of
predominant population, having common ethnic, religious or linguistic
characteristics, different from those of the rest of the population, being
historically tied to Montenegro and motivated by the wish to express
themselves and maintain their national, ethnic, cultural, linguistic and
4

religious identity. Minorities are considered to be: autochthones minority
peoples, national minorities and ethnic minorities.
In order to implement the Law on Minority Rights and Freedoms, the
Ministry of Human and Minority Rights adopted Rules for the first elections
of the minority councils and Guidelines on the unique forms for the election
of Council members (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Montenegro” No.
46/07). These Rules and Guidelines specify the composition and number of
members of a council of minorities, the manner of calling and work of
electoral assembly, the manner of election of council members, and give
clear guidance in this process. This legislation created the legal
preconditions for the election of the first minority councils. In addition, all
these documents are published on the official website of the Ministry, are
published as a supplement to the daily newspaper "Pobjeda" and also in the
Albanian language in the weekly newspaper "Koha javore", are made public
through public service RTCG, IN TV and local radio and television stations,
furthermore, are held the meetings with nongovernmental organizations of
all minority communities in what occasions was presented the process of
establishing minority councils. In accordance with the legal provisions, so
far the electoral assembly was held for the election of the following
councils: Croatian Council (21 December 2007), Bosniak Council (15
March 2008), Roma Council (22 March 2008), Muslim Council (29 March
2008), Albanian Council (19 April 2008) and the Serbian Council (27
September 2008). The Constitutive sessions of councils are held and
councils are registered with the Ministry of Human and Minority Rights.
The Council shall:
- represent and act on behalf the relevant minority;
- submit proposals to state bodies, local self-government bodies and
public services in charge of promotion and development of the rights of
minorities and persons belonging to them;
- lodge initiative towards the President of the Republic for refusal to
promulgate a legal act by which the rights of minorities and persons
belonging to them are violated;
- participate in planning and founding of educational and pedagogic
institutions;
- provide an opinion on curricula which reflect specificities of
minorities;
- suggest enrolment of certain number of students at the University of
Montenegro;
- launch initiative for amendment of legislation and other acts that
regulate rights of persons belonging to minorities
5

- also, perform other activities in accordance with the Law on
Minority Rights and Freedoms.
On issues falling within the competence of state bodies and public
services which relates to rights of minorities and persons belonging to them,
a necessary cooperation with the Council shall be established in order to
build mutual confidence.
Within 30 days from the day of launching the initiative or request
mentioned above, state and other competent bodies shall inform the Council
about undertaken measures.
Charter for Regional or Minority Languages defines minority
languages as the languages traditionally used within a given territory of a
state by nationals of that state who form a group numerically smaller than
the rest of the state’s population and are different from the official languages
of that state what does not include either dialects of the official languages or
of the state or the languages of migrants. In preparing the ratification of the
Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, starting from the current
practice of official use of language and script and use of language in culture,
education, judicial and administrative procedures, etc, it was specified that
the Albanian and Romani minority languages are languages for which the
Montenegro take on the obligations of the third part of the Charter.
The Constitution of Montenegro guarantees equal rights and
obligations for all citizens, regardless of any particularity or personal
feature, and prohibits any direct or indirect discrimination on any grounds.
Also, the Constitution defines affirmative action, and says that regulations
and introduction of special measures aimed at creating the conditions for the
exercise of national, gender and overall equality and protection of persons
who are in an unequal position on any grounds shall not be considered
discrimination. Guarantees given in the highest legal act of Montenegro are
developed in a series of laws that regulate labour relations, employment,
pension and disability insurance, education, health and social care, safety at
work, family relations, criminal acts, etc.
In addition, on the proposal of the Government of Montenegro, on 27
July 2010, the Parliament adopted a general Law on Prohibition of
Discrimination. The Law on Prohibition of Discrimination is a framework
law which provides the basis and mechanisms to combat discrimination on
any personal characteristic (race, colour, citizenship, nationality or ethnic
origin, religious or political beliefs, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation,
birth, genetic characteristics, health, disability, marital and family status,
age, membership in political, trade union and other organizations, and other
6

real or supposed personal characteristics). In this Law, the incitement to
discrimination is seen as discrimination. The Law also aims at protecting
every conscientious citizen who reports the case of discrimination or in any
capacity, testifies before a competent authority in proceedings which
examines the case of discrimination - protection from victimization.
The extent of the Law is defined, namely the Law applies to all
persons to whom the legislation of Montenegro applies (nationals,
foreigners, IDPs, asylum seekers, etc.). Also, norms of the Law relate to
legal persons if their attitude towards these subjects makes discrimination
on any of the defined grounds. It also defines the terms of harassment,
mobbing, segregation, and a severe form of discrimination is especially
accentuated, which should be guidance for the court in deciding on the
sanction or the compensation of damage. Qualification of illegal actions
immediately address all, and especially the courts and other bodies with the
task of protecting human rights, to a stricter legal response as a result of
unlawful behaviour. So, whether it is a civil law, criminal or other legal
protection from discrimination, the state authority is addressed to use more
severe sanctions for those forms of discrimination which the legislator is
qualifying as extremely serious.
Among many forms and cases of discrimination, the Law contains
those which from the standpoint of the legal system and moral standards
prove to be particularly severe violation of the principle of equality of
human beings, and those cases which are not treated separately in the set of
specific laws. The meaning of separation of certain forms of discrimination
is, above all, to mark and qualify those illegal acts that are considered
particularly dangerous for the community and to complement any case of
possible discrimination which is not contained in specific legislation. It is
particularly accentuated discrimination in proceedings before public
authorities, discrimination in the use of facilities and areas in public use,
discrimination based on health, discrimination based on age, discrimination
in the field of education and vocational training, discrimination in the field
of labour, discrimination on the basis of religion and belief, disability
discrimination, discrimination based on gender identity and sexual
orientation.
As a mechanism of prevention and protection from discrimination,
the law envisages the Protector of Human Rights and Freedoms. Procedures
before the Protector of Human Rights and Freedoms are regulated by the
Law and secondary legislation. Also, there is the obligation for the
Protector of Human Rights and Freedoms to in a separate part of its annual
report inform the Parliament of Montenegro on the observed phenomena of
7

discrimination and actions taken, as well as the possibility of filing a
separate report on noted cases of discrimination.
In order to complete and round the entire system of protection from
discrimination, in addition to the protection afforded by the institution of the
Protector of Human Rights and Freedoms, with its responsibilities and
appropriate measures, which are immanent to that institutional form of
protection of human rights and freedoms, is also regulated the area of
judicial protection from discrimination. Specifically, a developed and clearly
established area of judicial protection is a necessary tool in the fight against
discrimination.
It is important to emphasize that the burden of proof that there was no
discriminatory behaviour, is shifted to the defendant / respondent, which is
the standard of democratic societies in the fight against discriminatory
behaviour. The proceeding before the court is regulated, as well as the
complaint, the deadline for filing a complaint, filing a complaint by the third
person and notifying the Protector.
Inspection over the implementation of this Law in relation to
discrimination in various areas will be done by the inspection in charge of
that area (service providers, construction, health, education, labour and
employment, safety on work, transport, tourism, etc.). This way, the role of
the inspection in the protection against discrimination is clearly established.
This Law is obliging all authorities to keep separated records on
cases of discrimination and submit these to the Protector of human rights
and freedoms. Also, records are required to be taken by judicial authorities,
inspection authorities and misdemeanour authorities. It also prescribes the
obligation for the Ministry of Human and Minority Rights to design a form
and template for keeping records of all cases of discrimination within six
months from the entry into force. The Law clearly indicates violations
sanctioned by it, given that the violations in the exercise of certain rights
are defined by other laws, and criminal responsibility is defined in criminal
legislation.
Legal documents where the European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages is applied are the following: the Law on Minority
Rights and Freedoms, Article 11; the Law on Preschool Education, Article
24; the General Law on Education, Article 4, Article 11, Article 22 and
Article 46; the Law on Higher Education, Article 6 and Article 7; the Law
on Broadcasting, Article 95, items 3, 5, 6 and Article 100; the Law on
Media, Article 3 and Article 10; the Law on Public Broadcasting Services
“Radio of Montenegro” and “Television of Montenegro”, Article 4 and
Article 11 paragraph 2 and Article 15 item 8; the Law on Personal Name,
8

Article 2 paragraph 3; the Law on Publishing, the Law on Cinematography
and Law on Theatre; the Law on General Administrative Procedure, Article
15; the Law on Local Self-Government, Article 10 and Article 83; the Law
on Election of Councillors and MPs; the Law on Prohibition of
Discrimination; the Law on Protector of Human Rights and Freedoms; the
Statute of the Capital City; the Rules of Procedure of the Assembly of the
Capital City; the Statutory Decision of the City Municipality of Tuzi; the
Rules of Procedure of the City Municipality of Tuzi; the Statute of
Municipality of Ulcinj; the Statute of the Municipality of Plav; the Rules of
Procedure of the Assembly of the Municipality of Ulcinj; the Rules of
Procedure of the Assembly of the Municipality of Plav; Decision on
determining the polling stations for the election of five Members of the
Parliament of Montenegro.
P a r t I and II
In Montenegro, there is no special regulatory body that monitors the
implementation of the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages, but is being done by the relevant ministries according to their
field of work, within which there are departments or units dealing with
issues of promotion of minority rights and freedoms.
The Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe in its report of
September 2009 recommended to the authorities of Montenegro to specify
the territories where the Albanian and Romani languages are in official use
and to which the Part III of the Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
is applicable. In this sense, following the recommendations of the
Committee of Ministers, we hereby inform you the following:
1. clarify the territories where the Albanian and Romani languages are in
official use and where the Part III of the Charter on Minority or
Regional Languages applies;
Albanian language is in official use in Podgorica in the Municipalities of
Plav and Ulcinj, as well as in the City Municipality of Tuzi.
Romani language, by the ratification of the European Charter for
Regional or Minority Languages, has been recognized by the Government of
Montenegro as a distinct minority language, but was not included in the
system of education. Namely, the Romani language as a minority language
is not taught as a mother tongue in educational institutions due to the fact
9

that it is not standardized and there are no qualified teachers who could
perform teaching in the Romani language.
2. take the necessary steps to promote the codification and development of
written Romani language, in cooperation with the speakers;
The Ministry of Education and Sports supports projects that are
important for improving the situation of the Roma population, especially
those relating to the exercise of the right to education. In addition, the
Ministry supports the activities of the non-governmental sector aimed at
standardization and codification of the Romani language
In Montenegro, there is good regional cooperation with former Yugoslav
republics when it comes to issues related to education in minority and
regional languages, and particularly education in the Romani language.
Good experience in this area are monitored and applied to the extent
possible. The goal is to first standardize and codify the Romani language in
order to obtain a form of literary language and to train personnel required for
conducting teaching, after what the Romani language could be introduced in
the education system. The Ministry of Education and Sports will support the
achievements of codification and standardization of the Romani language
achieved in neighbouring countries if the relevant representatives of the
Roma population in Montenegro have a positive attitude in relation to these
achievements.
3. introduce teaching of Romani language at preschool, primary and
secondary levels;
In Montenegro there are still no conditions to perform teaching in
Romani language at the preschool institutions, elementary and secondary
schools. After the codification and standardization of the Romani language
and professional training of educational staff who can teach in Romani
language, the conditions will be met for implementation of education in the
Romani language on the level of preschool, primary and secondary
education.
Until fulfilling these conditions, which would lead to full inclusion of
Romani language in the education system, there is a possibility and the idea
that through implementation of optional teaching as well as organizing
summer schools, camps and other known forms of organising classes for
10

studying mother tongue, the Roma students will have the possibility to study
the Romani language, culture, history, as well as customs and traditions of
the Roma people.
4. strengthen teacher training in the Albanian language, especially for
lower and upper secondary level education (third cycle of elementary
school and secondary school).
In accordance with paragraph 2 of Article 2 of the Charter we set out
the standpoints and/or points that can be applied to selected minority or
regional languages.

Chapter II
Article 7
Paragraph 3
Promotion of mutual understanding and tolerance among all linguistic
groups in the country especially in relation to minority and regional
languages in the area of education is reflected in conceiving compulsory and
optional subjects.
Specifically, knowledge and skills in the field of human rights and
multiculturalism, students gain within the study of compulsory and optional
subjects. The compulsory subjects that have such content are: Civic
Education - VI and VII grade of the elementary school, History - in the
upper grades of elementary school and high school, Geography - in upper
grades of elementary schools and high schools, Sociology - in high school,
Mother tongue - in all grades of elementary and high schools.
Optional subjects within which are studied issues related to human
rights and multiculturalism are: Exploring Humanitarian Law in VIII or IX
grade of the elementary school, the European Union in the VIII or IX grade
of the elementary school, History of religion in the VIII grade of the
elementary school, Civic Education in high school, History of religion in
high school, European integration in high school.
Multiculturalism is, in addition, inherent part of the study of Musical
culture and foreign languages, compulsory and optional subjects: English
language, French language, Italian language, German language, Spanish
language, Russian language and Turkish language.
Law on Elementary Education stipulates that the same class can have
at most 30 students, and exceptionally, by the approval of the minister
responsible for education, at most 33 pupils. Also, the Law on Minority
11

Rights and Freedoms provides that the class with instruction in minority
languages and scripts can be organized for a smaller number of pupils then
set for such an institution, which can not be less than 50% of pupils provided
by law. The minimum number of pupils per class is established by the
regulation of the Ministry of Education and Sports, which provides that the
combined class (class with pupils of different grades) can have at least five
pupils. This provision also applies to classes with instruction in minority
languages and scripts.
Article 8- Education
a) chosen paragraphs or items are specified in bold
paragraph
item
“
“
“

1
a, i):
a, ii):
a, iii):
a, iv):

item
“
“
“

b, i):
b, ii):
b, iii):
b, iv):

item
“
“
“
item
“
“
“

c, i):
c, ii):
c, iii):
c, iv):
d, i):
d, ii):
d, iii):
d, iv):

item
“
“

e, i):
e, ii):
e, iii):

item
“
“

f, i):
f, ii):
f, iii):
12

item
item
item
paragraph

g:
h:
i:
2

Measures taken in order to apply every chosen paragraph or item
Article 8 of the Charter – Education
paragraph 1
Preschool Education
item a) iii
Preschool education in the Albanian language is achieved in
institutions where there is a need for that, or where the parents declared that
they want the preschool education to be realized in this language.
Preschool education in the Albanian language for the school year
2009/2010 was organized in Ulcinj - in seven groups (230 children) and in
Tuzi - one group (33 children), what makes a total of 263 children.
From September 2010, in preschool institutions, were organized nine
educational groups where the preschool education is realized in the Albanian
language. Specifically, at the Public Preschool Institution "Solidarity" in
Ulcinj, was organized eight education groups, while in the Educational unit
in Tuzi, which belongs to the Public Preschool Institution, “Đina Vrbica” Podgorica, was organized one educational group. In these educational
groups the preschool education is entirely realized in the Albanian language,
and educational work is carried out by the teachers who meet the
requirements regarding educational qualifications prescribed by law and
who have completed studies in Albanian.
At this moment there is teaching staff for the realization of preschool
education in the Albanian language.
Primary Education
item b) i
Improving the quality of textbooks in the Albanian language is a
permanent task and responsibility of relevant institutions in Montenegro, to
which is given full attention. For the area of the Albanian language and
literature, in 2010, were provided sets of textbooks for teaching in the
Albanian language for elementary and high school.
13

In the process of translation of textbooks in the Albanian language,
the Institute for textbooks and teaching material adhere to the language
standard of the Albanian language. In order to enhance and improve the
translation of textbooks into the Albanian language, in November 2010 was
held a meeting with the teachers from a number of elementary schools that
teach in the Albanian language for the purpose of cooperation in this field.
In accordance with the provisions of Article 18 paragraph 2 of the
Law on Minority Rights and Freedoms, the director of the school where
teaching is in the Albanian language, in addition to the requirements
prescribed by the General Law on Education, must have an active
knowledge of Albanian language i.e. an active knowledge of the Albanian
language and script.
Directors of all institutions where teaching is in the Albanian language
have an active knowledge of Albanian language. In institutions where
teaching is provided in both the Montenegrin language and the Albanian
language, the majority of directors have an active knowledge of Albanian
language, i.e. in a number of schools in which teaching is prevalent in the
Montenegrin language the directors were not required to have knowledge of
the Albanian language.
Please note that the election process of all directors of educational
institutions is in course and that the Ministry of Education and Sports will,
for the election of directors in all schools where teaching is held in the
Albanian language, seek the opinion of the Albanian Council of
Montenegro, in accordance with Article 18 of the Law on Minority Rights
and Freedoms.

Secundary Education
item c) ii
Secondary general education (grammar school) in the Albanian
language is realized in High School in Tuzi, Mixed High School “Beco'
Basic'” in Plav, and the Mixed High School “Bratstvo i jedinstvo” in Ulcinj,
which are public institutions, as well as private High School "Drita'', in
Ulcinj.
In high schools (grammar and vocational schools) education in the
Albanian language attend 1,347 pupils, of which 973 pupils in grammar
school and 374 in vocational schools.

14

Teaching in the Albanian language in grammar and vocational
schools, perform 159 teachers. In these schools, students study the subject
Albanian language and literature as a compulsory subject.
Technical and vocational education
item d) i
Vocational education is performed in the Albanian language in the
Public Institution Mixed High School “Beco Basic” in Plav (24 pupils) and
Public Institution Mixed High School “Bratstvo i jedinstvo” in Ulcinj (374
pupils). In these schools pupils study the subject Albanian language and
literature as a compulsory subject.
For teaching vocational theoretical subjects in vocational education
are used textbooks in the Albanian language that were released in the
neighbouring countries and whose content is compatible with the content of
our educational subjects, in accordance with the recommendation of the
Ministry of Education and Sports.
University and Higher Education
item e) ii
In particular we stress that in the First Report was incorrectly stated
that a Department for Albanian language and literature was opened. Namely,
on the University of Montenegro is opened a Study Program for Teacher’s
Education in the Albanian language. This is an academic degree study
program in duration of four years. It is implemented as an independent study
program in Podgorica.
The program started in academic year 2004/2005 when 49 students
enrolled.
In the past in this Program were enrolled:
in the academic year 2005/2006. - 31 student;
2006/2007. - 15 students;
2007/2008. - 13 students;
2008/2009. - 6 students;
2009/2010. - 17 students;
2010/2011. - 21 student.
So far, 35 students have graduated. In this Program 80% of teaching is
conducted in the Albanian and 20% in the Montenegrin language.
In conducting teaching, are engaged 25 professors, mostly part-time
employment, and seven associates.
15

In order to fully enjoy minority rights, certain number of students
belonging to minorities can be enrolled at the University of Montenegro on
the proposal of the Albanian Council of Montenegro, in accordance with the
University regulations.
Adults and Continuing Education
item f )
The adult education is a part of unified educational system in
Montenegro. The Ministry of Education and Sports, in accordance with the
General Law on Education is responsible for issuing licenses to institutions
which meet the requirements for the performance of accredited programs for
the education of adults. So far, the license for performing the programs for
education of adults received Public Institution Mixed High School
“Bratstvo-Jedinstvo”, from Ulcinj, where teaching is conducted in the
Albanian language, and in the process of obtaining licenses is the
Elementary School “Bosko Strugar”, also from Ulcinj.
Instruction in History and Culture
item g)
All textbooks for primary and secondary general education (grammar
school), by which teaching is conducted in the Montenegrin language, have
been translated into the Albanian language. The textbook for the subject
Albanian language and literature is a separate book which is intended for
this teaching subject.
Education program in institutions with instruction in the Montenegrin
language contains topics in mother tongue and literature, history, art and
culture of minorities and other topics that encourage mutual tolerance and
coexistence. For example, a book of literature (čitanka) in the Montenegrin
language contains the works of well known Albanian writers. Also in other
textbooks is used a similar principle.
Through the concept of autonomy of teachers, who have the
possibility to create and adapt to the needs and interests of pupils 20% of
teaching content of the subject, can be increased the number of teaching
units in culture and history of the Albanian people in relation to the number
of teaching units contained in translated textbook.
In the new, reformed curricula regarding minority education (mother
tongue, history, art, etc.) are already substantially integrated activities that
promote history and culture of minorities in Montenegro. Measures that
should provide teaching of history and culture have been already
16

implemented under new program for mother tongue, history and culture
taught in elementary and high schools.
By providing new teaching materials in the Albanian language,
Montenegro will seek to overcome this problem. This will be carried out in
one of the known and accepted methods, i.e. by printing of separate
textbooks in history and culture, or by printing the appendix to the existing
textbooks, or by importing foreign textbooks for which it is believed to be
consistent with our educational programs. In order to achieve these goals it
is necessary to analyze and modify existing educational programs.
Basic and Continuing training of teachers
item h)
In addition to the Institute for Education, professional development of
teachers in vocational education is organized by the Centre for Vocational
Education for Teachers of Vocationally Theoretical Subjects and Practical
Education. These institutions have sufficient number of professional staff
who is dedicated to professional development and training of teachers. Also,
the professional development of teachers in vocational education is carried
out within the framework of foreign projects.
Professional development and individual advancement of professional
and teaching staff, as well as improving quality and efficiency of the
education system, is the responsibility of the Department for continuing
professional development of the Institute for Education. Training programs
for professional development of employees in education system are
accredited by the Institute for Education and approved by the Ministry of
Education and Sports. Institute for Education selects programs through
public competition and puts it into the Catalogue of programs for
professional development of teachers. There are no special training
programs for education of teachers in the Albanian language, but is
implemented an identical training as a training for teachers who teach in
schools in the Montenegrin language.
2.2.2 ROMANI LANGUAGE
Article 8 - Education
Romany language, by ratification of the European Charter for
Regional or Minority Languages by the Government of Montenegro has
been recognized as a distinct minority language, but is not included in the
education system. Namely, the Romani language, as a minority language is
17

not taught as a mother tongue in education institutions, due to the fact that it
is not standardized and there is no qualified teaching staff that could perform
teaching in the Romani language. In addition, according to the Statistical
Office of Montenegro - MONSTAT, based on data from October 2008, the
Roma population makes 1.6% of the population of Montenegro.
Paragraph 1
Preeschool Education
item a) iv
Coverage of children of the RAE population with the preschool
education in the Montenegrin language in the school year 2008/2009 was
252 children, of whom 11 children in nursery schools and 241 children in
kindergarten.
Coverage of children of the RAE population is 13.81% (data of
MONSTAT). Data on coverage of boys and girls suggests that girls are
included in slightly greater number - 15.02% as compared to boys - 12,69%.
On the territory of Podgorica, in the settlement Vrela Ribnička, there is an
educational unit that is attended only by the children of RAE population
(domicile and displaced from Kosovo). Parents of children who attend these
educational units are exempted from paying the cost of meals. In the Konik
Camp at Vrela Ribnicka, where are placed the children of members of RAE
population displaced from Kosovo, the Red Cross organized two educational
groups where are conducted the programs of psychosocial support. There are
engaged two teachers and two Romani assistants (trained to work with
children).
According to the Law on Preschool Education, the cost of meals for
children from the most vulnerable population groups in the institution is on
the Centre for Social Work in whose territory is the residence of the child
i.e. parents. The children from the most vulnerable population groups are:
children with disabilities in development, children who have difficulties
caused by social, linguistic and cultural barriers.
Within the project "Integration of Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian in City
Schools" is envisaged the Program for preparation for elementary school and
preschool institutions, and the Program of psychosocial support for
preschoolers. Activities that will be implemented are as follows:
- developing a short program of preparation for primary school for the
children aged from 5 years to 6 years, which provides educational activities
in the year before starting primary school;
- training the staff for the application of a short program,
18

- implementation of program in Public Institution “Đina Vrbica”;
- development of program of psychosocial support and its implementation.
Primary Education
item b) iv
There are a number of projects in which were engaged or are still
engaged Roma assistants in primary schools.
The program “Roma Education Initiative in Montenegro” was
implemented in January 2006 - December 2008, and was supported by the
Roma Education Fund (REF).
“Support for the RAE population in Camps Konik” is implemented by
the Red Cross of Montenegro.
Roma Scholarship Foundation (FSR), through the programs of Roma
sustainable education "Integration and support of minority groups" organizes
remedial classes in order to improve school achievement, with the
engagement of Roma assistants.
UNHCR, the Roma Scholarship Foundation (FSR), the Roma
Education Circle and Public Institution Elementary School “Bozidar
Vukovic Podgoričanin” implement a program that includes the organization
of remedial courses in order to improve school achievement, with the
engagement of Roma assistants.
In the coming period will be implemented the following:
The project "Support for full social inclusion process" is proposed
through the IPA Program 2010. The overall objective of the project is to
enable the inclusion of vulnerable, socially excluded groups, through the
social welfare services and throughout the education system. One of the subobjectives of the project is the engagement of Roma assistants in
kindergartens and elementary schools;
Through the planned project "Integration of Roma, Ashkali and
Egyptian in City Schools, " which is going to be approved soon by the Roma
Education Fund (REF) will be carried out additional classes to overcome
language barriers, improve school achievement based on Individual
development and education program (IROP), with planned support of
assistants in teaching.
The Ministry of Education and Sports, in September of the current
school yearm, with support of the Commission for Monitoring and
Implementation of the Strategy for Improvement of the Position of RAE
Population in Montenegro (2008-2012) and through the Institute for
textbooks and teaching material, provided textbooks for first, second and
19

third grade of elementary school for pupils of RAE population in total
amount of 33,387.50 EUR.
In addition to this, on the beginning of school year 2010/2011, the
team of the Ministry visited the Camps Konik I and II and, with the
cooperation of the Red Cross of Montenegro, made identification of children
who do not attend school and the result of that was the inclusion of 55
children in city schools, with provision of textbooks, school material,
necessary clothing, in the amount of 3,600.00 EUR as well as transportation
for these pupils.
The number of Roma children in primary education is increasing from
year to year. In the school year 2007/08 there were 1,263 of these pupils, and
in school year 2008/09 were 1,461 pupils members of RAE population. Data
from previous years also show that this number is constantly growing and
that there is a positive trend when it comes to primary education of RAE
children. In fact, during school year 2001/2002 in primary schools were 536
pupils members of RAE population; in school year 2002/2003 there were
626 pupils, in the school year 2003/2004 were 1,006 pupils; in the school
year 2004/2005 were 1,169 pupils, in the school year 2005/2006 were 1,195
pupils, and in school year 2006/2007 were 1,236 pupils members of RAE
population.
The Ministry of Education and Sports in coordination with the
Institute for Education, through education of teaching staff creates a
favourable environment and conditions for the integration and socialization
of Roma children.
Secundary Education
item c) iv
There is still no possibility for organizing teaching in general high
schools in the Romani language, because of the fact that the Romani
language is not standardized and there is no qualified teaching staff that
could perform teaching in the Romani language.
Pupils of RAE population enrol in general high schools in which
classes are held in the Montenegrin or the Albanian language in most cases
using the principle of affirmative action. For enrolled pupils of the RAE
population in high schools the Ministry of Education and Sports in
cooperation with the Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare provides free
textbooks and scholarships are provided by the Roma Scholarship
Foundation.

20

Technical and vocational education
item d) iv
There is still no possibility for organizing teaching in specialized high
schools in the Romani language, because of the fact that the Romani
language is not standardized and there is no qualified teaching staff that
could perform teaching in the Romani language
Pupils of RAE population enrol in specialised high schools in which
classes are held in the Montenegrin or the Albanian language in most cases
using the principle of affirmative action. For enrolled pupils of the RAE
population in high schools the Ministry of Education and Sports in
cooperation with the Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare provides free
textbooks and scholarships are provided by the Roma Scholarship
Foundation.
University and Higher Education
item e) iv
There is still no possibility for organizing the Studies of the Romany
language as a subject within higher education, because of the fact that the
Romani language is not yet standardized.
At the Faculty of Philosophy in Niksic, Department of Preschool
Education, two students members of RAE population are currently studying.
They are students of the third-year of studies, and recently two other
students completed the same studies. All these students were and are funded
from public funds.
A total of eight students members of RAE population are studying at
the University of Montenegro.
Adults and Continuing Education
item f)
Adults can gain education within current public educational program
for primary and secondary education, suitable for educational level or part
thereof, as well as by the adult education programs in accordance with the
Law on Adult Education. Adult students are exempt of the costs for
obtaining primary education as well as for obtaining first qualification.
Program of functional literacy and Program for primary school for
adults are realized by the elementary schools and adult education providers
that have a working license issued by the Ministry of Education and Sports.

21

Also, the Employment Agency is organizing the implementation of
programs for obtaining key skills for adults Roma.
The project “Integration of Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian in City
Schools” provides for realization of workshops and focus groups with
parents in order to strengthen the motivation for continuation of their
education, as well as provides for organization of classes of the Montenegrin
language for parents.
Instruction in History and Culture
item g)
In accordance with the Law on Minority Rights and Freedoms, the
curriculum includes topics from the area of history, art, literature, traditions
and culture of minorities. Educational program in institutions and schools in
the Montenegrin language contains topics in mother tongue and literature,
history, art and culture of minorities and other content that encourage mutual
tolerance and coexistence.
The project ”Integration of Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian in City
Schools" provides for the establishment of a commission to develop 20% of
free curriculum for 5 subjects and development of the curriculum in which
there will be room for themes such as the Roma history, origins, traditions,
economic and social status, customs, religion, etc.
Basic and Continuing training of teachers
item h )
Professional development and individual advancement of professional
and teaching staff, as well as improving quality and efficiency of the
education system is the responsibility of the Department for continuing and
professional development of the Institute for Education. Training programs
for professional development of the employees in education system are
accredited by the Commission of the Institute for Education and approved by
the Ministry of Education and Sports. Institute for Education selects the
program through public competition and puts it into the Catalogue of
programs for professional development of teachers. The Catalogue of the
school year 2010/2011 offers the following programs: “The integration of
Roma children in primary school - support to inclusion” and “Kindergarten
as a Family Centre for Roma - support to inclusion”.
The project “Integration of Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian in City
Schools” will conduct the training for teachers in different modules,
22

respecting the rules of practical experience and concrete examples. The
focus is on inclusion of Roma, violence prevention and the like. The training
for teachers also will improve skills for conflict overcoming, development of
Individual Development and Education Program (IROP), collaboration with
parents etc. The training will also include topics such as: Roma history,
origins, traditions, economic and social status, customs, religion, and all this
with a goal of better cooperation and communication with parents.
Article 9 – Judicial Authorities
a) Chosen paragraphs or items are specified in bold:
paragraph
1:
item
a, i):
“
a,ii):
“
a,iii):
“
a,iv):
item
“
“
“

b,(i):
b,(ii):
b,(iii):
b,(iv):

item
“
“

c, (i):
c,(ii):
c,(iii):

item
paragraph
item
“
“

d:
2:
a:
b:
c:

paragraph

3:

Measures taken in order to apply every chosen paragraph or item
Having in mind the provisions of Article 9 paragraph 1 of the Charter,
which relate to the judicial powers and which, according to the Law on
Ratification, are applied on the Albanian and the Romani language, we note
the following:
23

The Basic Court in Ulcinj has four judges of which three judges are
familiar with the Albanian language, and in the area of this Court there are
six permanent court interpreters, who in the opinion of the Court President
and judges fully meet the needs of the Court, in terms of full use of Albanian
language in court proceedings.
In 2009 and 2010, at the Basic Court in Ulcinj, in the role of plaintiff
or the defendant were about 50% of persons, out of total number of cases,
where in each case the parties were informed about the legal rights regarding
the use of the Albanian language and other languages.
The Ministry of Justice of Montenegro has appointed a total of 30
persons as interpreters - translators for the Albanian language, what in the
opinion of the courts where Albanians make significant portion of the
population is enough for the full implementation of the Charter.
- In 2010 at the Basic Court in Plav were initiated criminal
proceedings against eight ethnic Albanians, out of which three persons were
using the Albanian language in the process with the engagement of an
interpreter, while in all other cases was used the official language.
The provisions of the Law on Civil Procedure are applied in the
proceedings before the Administrative Court regarding the right to use the
language. The Law on Administrative Disputes (“Official Gazette of the
Republic of Montenegro” No. 60/2003) in Article 55, stipulates that on the
issues of procedure in administrative proceedings, which are not regulated
by that law, shall be applied the provisions of the law governing the civil
procedure.
- Before the Administrative Court there was no case where as the
parties appeared Albanians and Roma who asked to use their language although in each individual case they were informed of this right, since there
were no obstacles to conduct the proceedings in their own language.
In the Criminal Procedure Code as well as in the Law of Civil
Procedure is prescribed that parties and other participants in proceedings
shall have the right to use their language or the language they understand
during the proceeding. In the case the proceeding is not conducted in the
language of one of the parties, than, shall be provided the translation by the
interpreter. On the right to interpretation shall be instructed the person who
is entitled to it, what together with the statement of the persons on the use of
this right will be recorded in the minutes. Translation costs incurred by
application of the provisions of the law on the right to use the proper
language will not be charged to those persons but will be settled by the
court. Abovementioned indicates that the Roma in the proceedings before
the courts can use their own language.
24

Article 10 – Administrative Authorities and Public Services
a) Chosen paragraphs or items are specified in bold:
paragraph
1:
item
a, i):
“
a,ii):
“
a,iii):
item
a,iv):
“
a,v)
item
item

b:
c:

paragraph
item
“
“
“
“
“
“

2:
a:
b:
c:
d:
e:
f:
g:

paragraph
item
“
“

3:
a:
b:
c:

paragraph
item
“
“

4:
a:
b:
c:

paragraph

5:

Measures taken in order to implement each paragraph or item chosen
ARTICLE 10 – ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITIES AND PUBLIC
SERVICES
25

Republic of Montenegro accepted liability to implement the following
paragraphs:
Paragraph 1:
item a: lines iv) and v);
item b; i
item c.
Paragraph 2:
item b, c, d and g;
Paragraph 3:
item c;
Paragraph 4:
item c;
Paragraph 5.
There are distinctly conspicuous indicators in Montenegro on
implementing the rights of the members of the Albanian nationality with
regard to official use of language and script.
In the administrative proceedings conducted in the official language,
members of the Albanian nationality are allowed to follow the course of the
proceeding through an interpreter and if they wish, to be delivered a copy of
decision, i.e. of conclusion in the Albanian language in those municipalities
where Albanians make majority or significant portion of the population. This
applies to the following municipalities: Ulcinj, Podgorica, Plav and City
Municipality of Tuzi. In addition, in administrative proceedings, it is
allowed to the members of the Albanian nationality in the proceedings to
send submissions to the competent authorities of local administration in their
own language, but they have not used that right so far. The documents issued
by the competent authorities of local administration are issued in the
Albanian language in the mentioned municipalities, if the party in question
so wishes.
It is allowed to use the Albanian language in the assemblies of local
communities while discussing the acts and other documents, as well as
within the working bodies of the assembly. The drafts of the acts adopted by
the Assembly are being published in the Albanian language as well, whereas
the publishing of official acts in the Albanian language is exercised in the
City Municipality of Tuzi and partly in Municipality of Ulcinj as well.
26

Since the Statute of the Municipality of Plav had been brought on 26
April 2007, transcription of toponyms in the Albanian language is in course.
The Statute of the Municipality of Ulcinj has not been brought yet, because
the provisions in the said acts, with regard to the use of language and script,
need to be conformed with the provisions of Article 11 of the Law on
Minorities Rights and Freedoms (“Official Gazette of the Republic of
Montenegro”, No.31/06).
In the electoral legislation procedure - in the electoral places specified
by the special decision of the Parliament of Montenegro, in electoral
material for the election of Councillors, Members of the Parliament,
Municipality Presidents and President of Montenegro, in use is the Albanian
language and script.
With regard to the mentioned areas, the following regulations have
been brought in Montenegro:
Article 11 of the Law on Minorities Rights and Freedoms (“Official
Gazette of the Republic of Montenegro”, No.31/06) provides for minorities
to have the right to use their language and script.
In the local self-government units where the minority members make
the majority or significant part of the population, according to the last
Census results, the language of that minority is in official use.
Official use of minority language, in terms of paragraph 2 of this
Article specifically means: use of such language in administrative and court
proceedings and in conducting administrative and court proceedings, use of
such language at issuing public documents and keeping official records, on
the ballot and other election material and in the work of representative
bodies.
In the territories of local self-government listed in paragraph 2 of this
Article, names of bodies in charge of public authorizations, name of local
self-administration unit, names of settlements, squares and streets,
institutions, commercial and other companies and toponyms shall be written
in both the language and script of the minority.
Article 15 of the Law on General Administrative Procedure
(“Official Gazette of the Republic of Montenegro”, No 60/03) provides the
following:
(1) The competent authority shall conduct the proceeding using the
language determined by the Constitution as the official language in
Montenegro, whereas both the Cyrillic and Latin script shall be equal.
In municipalities where the members of national and ethnic groups
form the majority or an important part, their languages and scripts

27

shall also be in official use, pursuant to the Constitution and special
law.
(2) If the procedure is not conducted in the language of the party or other
participants in the proceeding who are citizens of Montenegro or the
Republic of Serbia, shall be provided the translation of the procedure
into their language by an interpreter, as well as the summons and
other writings shall be delivered in their own language and script.
(1) Parties and other participants in the procedure, who are not citizens of
Montenegro or the Republic of Serbia, shall be entitled to follow the
course of the procedure with assistance of an interpreter, as well as to
use their own language in the procedure.
Article 10 of the Law on Local self-government (“Official Gazette of the
Republic of Montenegro”, No.42/03, 28/04, 75/05 and 13/06) provides that
the Municipality should provide conditions for protection and promotion of
minority rights, in accordance with the Constitution, international legal
instruments and special law. In addition, Article 83 provides that the laws on
administrative procedure should be applied before the municipal bodies and
public services that hold public powers.
Article 15 of the Statute of the Capital City (“Official Gazette of the
Republic of Montenegro - municipal regulations”, 28/06), prescribe that to
the councillor, member of the minority, in the Assembly of the Capital City
and the Assembly of the Municipality, in addition to the use of official
language, will be provided the use his own language in accordance with the
law. Article 16 of the Statute prescribes that the administrative authorities of
the Capital City shall provide for the member of a minority the use of his
own language and script in the administrative procedure, in the issuing of
public documents and keeping official records in accordance with the law,
and that in the City Municipality of Tuzi in official use is also the Albanian
language. Furthermore, Article 17 provides that the drafts of the acts are
presented for public discussion in the official language and the minority
language, in accordance with the law and that debate on the acts mentioned
above is conducted in the languages of minorities, in accordance with the
law. Furthermore, Article 18 of the Statute provides that general acts
adopted by local government authorities in the Capital City and the City
Municipality are written and published in the official language and the
minority language, in accordance with the law.

28

The Rules of Procedure of Municipal Assembly of Podgorica (“Official
gazette of the Republic of Montenegro – Municipal Regulations”, No. 9/07)
do not regulate the use of minority language and script
Article 9 of the Statutory Decision of City Municipality Tuzi (“Official
Gazette of the Republic of Montenegro – Municipal Regulations”, No.
50/06), provides that the Albanian language shall also be in official use in
local administrative bodies of the City Municipality of Tuzi; that the bodies
of the City Municipality are obliged to provide the use of the Albanian
language and script in administrative procedure, as well as in issuing public
documents and keeping official records, pursuant to the law (Article 10):
that in sessions of the Assembly of City Municipality Tuzi the Albanian
language is also in use and that drafts of the acts are presented for public
debate in both the official language and the Albanian language, as well as
that debate on those acts shall be conducted in the Albanian language
(Article 11). In addition, Article 12 provides that general acts adopted by the
bodies of the City Municipality shall be written and published in both the
official and the Albanian language.
Article 3 of the Rules of Procedure of City Municipality of Tuzi (“Official
Gazette of the Republic of Montenegro – Municipal Regulations”, No. 6/07)
provides the parallel use of Albanian language in the sessions of Assembly,
as well as that the drafts of the acts are presented for public discussion in
both the official language and the Albanian language; that the city
administration is obliged to provide interpreters for both languages and that
each councillor is entitled to the right to speak in his own language, and to
use his own script. Article 4 provides that general acts brought by the
Assembly shall be written and published in both the official and the
Albanian language.
Article 9 Paragraph 2 of the Statute of the Municipality of Ulcinj
(“Official Gazette of the Republic of Montenegro -Municipal Regulations”,
No. 4/96) provides that members of people, national and ethnic groups shall
be entitled on the free use of their own language and script, on education and
information on their own language, as well as on the right to display the
symbols and national flag as their national symbols to reflect their national,
ethnical and cultural belonging. In addition, Article 10 of the Statute
provides that the languages and scripts of all people, national and ethnic
groups of Montenegro are equal. In the Municipality of Ulcinj, the Serbian
language of the Iekavian dialect and the Albanian language are used
officially, whereas in the Serbian language the Cyrillic and Latin script are
equal, whereas the equality of the Serbian and the Albanian language and
script in public life shall be ensured in the proceedings before public state
29

bodies, public institutions, schools, companies, and all other entities that
exercise public powers in all segments of public life such as: citizens
meetings, gatherings, inscription, sign boards, promulgations, etc.
Article 155 of the Rules of Procedure of the Municipal Assembly of
Ulcinj (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Montenegro – Municipal
Regulations”, No. 4/98) provides that Assembly, its bodies and working
bodies shall use the language according to the Statute; that every councillor
is entitled to the right to speak in the language of the people he belongs to in
sessions of the Assembly and sessions of working bodies; that every
councillor is entitled to submit written proposals, amendments and
submissions in the language and script of the people he belongs to, that
submissions written in other languages and scripts, except for the Serbian
and the Albanian language, shall be translated to the Serbian and the
Albanian language and that every councillor is entitled to be delivered the
minutes and specific material in the Albanian language.
Article 7 of the Statute of the Municipality of Plav (“Official Gazette of
the Republic of Montenegro – Municipal Regulations”, No. 17/07) provides
that, besides the official language and script, the Bosniak and the Albanian
language and script are also in official use, and that in the Municipal
Assembly a councillor who is a member of national minority is entitled to
use his own language and script pursuant to the law. In municipal local
bodies, the Bosniak and the Albanian language and script are in official use,
whereas local administrative bodies, public institutions and companies are
obliged to ensure the use of the Bosniak and the Albanian language and
script in administrative procedure, at issuing public documents and keeping
official records, with regard to all acts connected to electoral law,
expressing, preserving, cultivating, developing and publicly expressing the
national and ethnic, cultural and religious specificities pursuant to the law.
The name of the Municipality, names of the settlements, names of the
squares, streets, public institutions, and toponyms are written both in the
Bosniak and the Albanian language and script. The drafts of acts are
presented for public debate in the official language, on the Bosniak and the
Albanian language and script, and the debates are conducted in the Bosniak
and the Albanian language and script (Article 9); General acts adopted by
municipal bodies are written and published in both the official and the
Albanian language.
Rules of Procedure of Municipal Assembly of Plav (“Official Gazette of
the Republic of Montenegro – Municipal Regulations”, No. 10/93) provide
that a councillor during the session of the Assembly shall be entitled to the
30

right to speak in the language of the people, i.e. the nation he belongs to and
that the speech delivered by a councillor shall be translated to the Serbian
language (Article 139): councillor is entitled to submit written proposals,
amendments and other submissions to the Assembly and its working bodies
in the language and script of the people, i.e. the nation he belongs to (Article
140), whereas the proposals to be decided on in the Assembly, documentary
and other material, as well as the documents to be submitted, i.e. issued to
the councillors, are written in the Serbian, and at the request of a councillor member of Albanian nationality and members of the clubs of that
nationality, in the language of Albanian nationality (Article 141).
Article 12 paragraph 3 of the Law on the Election of Councillors and
Members of the Parliament (“Official Gazette of the Republic of
Montenegro”, No. 4/98, 17/98, 14/06, 9/01, 41/02 and 48/06) provides that
in the Republic as a single electoral unit, out of the total number of Members
of the Parliament, 5 Members of the Parliament shall be elected at the
polling stations defined by the special resolution passed by the Parliament of
Montenegro.
Resolution on Designation of Polling Stations for the Election of Five
Members in the Parliament of Montenegro (“Official Gazette of the
Republic of Montenegro”, No.51/ 06), stipulates that 69 polling stations
where members of Albanian nationality can vote for the Members of the
Parliament are designated as follows: in the Municipality of Podgorica 23
polling stations, in the Municipality of Ulcinj 31 polling station, in the
Municipality of Bar 11 polling stations, in the Municipality of Plav 3 polling
stations, and in the Municipality of Rozaje 1 polling station.
Article 11 – The media
a) Chosen paragraphs or items are specified in bold:
Paragraph
item
“
“

1:
a, i):
a, ii):
a, iii):

item
“

b, i):
b, ii):

item

c, i)
31

“

c, ii):

item

d:

item
“

e, i):
e, ii):

item
“

f, i):
f, ii):

item
Paragraph

g:
2:

Paragraph

3:

Measures taken in order to implement each paragraph or item chosen
Article 11 – Means of Public Communication (The media)
From Article 11 of the Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
regarding the media, the State of Montenegro has accepted and is
implementing items: a (iii), b (ii), c (ii), d, e (i), f (ii) from the paragraph
1; paragraph 2 and paragraph 3.
Considering the fact that after the First periodic report on
implementation of the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages, as well as after the visit of the experts of the Committee of
Ministers of the Council of Europe, who were additionally informed about
this process, the process of harmonization with European media legislation
is furthered, we are pointing out the new information. We especially
underline the Law on Electronic Media of 30 July 2010 that in a different
way regulates the financing of commercial broadcasters.
The Law on Electronic Media regulates the rights, duties and
responsibilities of legal and natural persons engaged in production and
provision of audiovisual media services (hereinafter referred to as the AVM
services), services of electronic publications via electronic communication
networks, competence, status and sources of financing of the Agency for
Electronic Media; prevention of illegal media concentration, encourage of
media pluralism and other issues of importance from the area of rendering

32

AVM services, in accordance with international conventions and standards
(Article 1).
In accordance with Article 2 of this law, the regulation of relations in
the area of audiovisual media services is based on the principles of freedom,
professionalism and independence, ban of all forms of censorship; balanced
development of public and commercial services providers of AVM services;
free and equal access to all AVM services; development of competition and
pluralism; application of international standards, objectivity, nondiscrimination and transparency.
Broadcasting Agency is an independent regulatory authority for the
area of AVM services who exercises public authority in accordance with the
law and act in the public interest. The Agency is an independent legal
subject and shall be independent of any governmental body and of all legal
and natural persons engaged in the activity of producing and broadcasting
radio and television programs or providing other AVM services. Founder of
the Agency is the state, and the founder’s rights on behalf of the state are
performed by the Council of the Agency, in accordance with the law.
To promote media pluralism, production of commercial broadcasters
and preserve the diversity of electronic media in Montenegro, the portion of
revenues from lottery funds are provided in the amount and manner to be
determined by a separate law governing lottery business.
Funding will be used to stimulate the production of program content
of commercial broadcasters of the public interest, and they are especially
important for: members of minorities and other minority ethnic groups in
Montenegro, the promotion of prevention of all forms of discrimination,
encourage and promotion of social integration of people with disabilities,
encourage providers of AVM services to gradually make available its
services to people with impaired hearing or eyesight, promotion of the
protection of nature, environment and human health, encourage of the
culture of public dialogue, encourage of cultural creative work, development
of education, science and arts, preservation of Montenegrin national and
cultural identity , encourage and promotion of realization and protection of
human rights, encourage of awareness raising on gender equality.
The criteria for allocating funds are: the complexity of program
production (application of professional standards; author’s and editorial
creativity, fulfilment of technical standards, engaging human and technical
resources), the importance of programs in achievement of the stated

33

objectives of Article 138 of this law, efficiency and longevity of the
program.
The funds can not be awarded for: rebroadcasting the programs of
other stations, purchased programs, reran programs of own production;
programs from own productions for which broadcasters covered the costs
from their own resources, donations, sponsorships and grants from domestic
and foreign institutions; programs already co-financed on any ground from
the Budget of Montenegro or budgets of local self-government units.
Since the Report of Experts on the Charter often emphasize a financial
problems of commercial broadcasters, we note that the Government of
Montenegro, in the context of their sustainability in the period of economic
crisis, is trying to through the procedure of state aid, which is in progress,
intervene in the settlement of debts incurred for the rental of facilities for
transmission and broadcasting of radio and TV signals and usage of
frequencies.
Government also, through the continued support, make possible the
regular production of the weekly newspaper “Koha javore” - in the Albanian
language.
Pursuant to Article 10 of the Law on Public Broadcasting Services
“Radio of Montenegro” and “Television of Montenegro”, Montenegro
provides partial funds for co-financing of program content of Radio
Montenegro in the Albanian language and other national and ethnic groups
that are important for the development of science, culture and information of
persons with impaired hearing and eyesight. In 2006, Radio and Television
of Montenegro – Editorial office in the Albanian language - released in the
the informative programs Albanian language as follows: “Lajmet” (News) a total of 312 shows in duration of three minutes, “Ditari” (Daily news) - a
total of 240 shows in duration of 30 minutes, “Ne fund te javes” (On the end
of the week) 48 shows in duration of 30 minutes.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
a) Chosen paragraphs or items are specified in bold:
paragraph
item
“
“
“

1;
a:
b:
c:
d:
34

“
“
“
“

e:
f:
g:
h:

Paragraph

2:

Paragraph

3:

Measures taken in order to implement each paragraph or item chosen
Article 12 – Cultural facilities and activities
Support and encouragement for cultural activities, provided by the
Ministry of Culture are regulated by the Law on Culture (Official Gazette
49/2008), are related to all actors of Montenegrin cultural scene, and are
realised through an annual open public competition. By mentioned
competition are co-financed programs and projects in all areas of cultural
and artistic creative work: fine arts, literature, magazines in the area of
culture and art, musical and in connection with that scenic activities,
filmmaking, theatre productions, culture amateur activity, creative
industries, creativity of young opeople, creativity of persons with
disabilities, the preservation of old artistic crafts, festivals and events.
Programs and projects are evaluated according to publicly announced
criteria relating to: the artistic quality and importance to development of
Montenegrin culture, references of implementers, contribution to the
development of multinational and multicultural values, contribution to
promotion of international dialogue and encourage of the development of
partnerships, international recognition of Montenegrin culture, contribution
to the preservation of the tradition and Montenegro's cultural heritage
(Article 73 of the Law on culture).
In the field of creative work of literature one of the priorities is the
creative work in languages in official use in Montenegro, as well as
translations of literary works.
In this context, the Ministry of Culture in continuity is co-financing
the printing of the magazine in the Albanian language Lemba from Ulcinj,
printing of books in the Albanian language and translations of Montenegrin
literature into the Albanian language and Albanian literature into the
Montenegrin language which are published by Art Club from Ulcinj,
Montenegro Pen Centre and the publishing house Plima from Ulcinj.
35

Activities of the members of Albanian people are considerable also in
other areas of culture, and the Ministry of Culture supports programs of
presentation of creative work of the Association of Albanian artists from
Ulcinj, a Summer festival scene in Ulcinj in the organization and
implementation of the Cultural Centre, then the activities of cultural and
artistic societies Ramadan Šarkić from Tuzi, as well as folklore society Besa
from Zatrijebač and Koha from Dinosa.
Regarding the Roma population their cultural activities have so far
been scarce. In recent years, it is evident the tendency of improving the work
of some nongovernmental organizations dealing with the presentation of the
Roma culture and creative work, particularly the Democratic Roma Centre
whose projects are co-financed by the Ministry (printing books of Roma
poetry and organization of exhibitions of Roma artists).
Support to the publication and presentation of the creative work in
minority languages, and translation of that creative work is the primary form
of increased availability of creative work in minority languages, while
synchronization and subtitled translations are not sufficiently represented.
Procedure laid down by the Law on Culture to support and encourage
the development of culture includes all members of minority representatives
and their authors and artists, who under an equal and equitable terms are
providing means through the annual competitions of the Ministry of Culture
for better conditions for their creative work and for planning of cultural
activities.
The Law on Culture also establishes the obligation of the Ministry of
Culture to provide and create conditions for balanced development of culture
in the entire territory of Montenegro. In this context the Ministry of Culture
in 2009 and in 2010 implemented the Program of cultural development in
the north of Montenegro, which included 11 municipalities in northern
Montenegro (Kolasin, Mojkovac, Pljevlja, Zabljak, Bijelo Polje, Berane,
Plav, Andrijevica, Rozaje, Plužine , Savnik). The program consisted of
reconstruction and recovery of cultural facilities, purchase of new theatrical
techniques for implementation of programs and projects in culture and
production of cultural and artistic programs. The same procedure shall be
applied for the future preparation and implementation of programs also for
the other 10 municipalities in Montenegro, with what the conditions will be
fully provided and balance in the culture improved for all users and all actors
of Montenegrin cultural scene.
Article 13 – Economic and social life

36

a) Chosen paragraphs or items are specified in bold:
Paragraph
item
“
“
“

1:
a:
b:
c:
d:

Paragraph
item
“
“
“
“

2:
a:
b:
c:
d:
e:

Article 14 – Cross-border exchange
a) Chosen paragraphs or items are specified in bold:
Paragraph
“

a:
b:

37

