Strasbourg, 1 July 2014

MIN-LANG (2014) PR7

EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES

Sixth periodical report
presented to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe
in accordance with Article 15 of the Charter

NORWAY

THE EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL
OR MINORITY LANGUAGES
SIXTH PERIODICAL REPORT
NORWAY

Norwegian Ministry of Local Government and Modernisation
2014

1

Contents
Part I ........................................................................................................................................... 3
Foreword ................................................................................................................................ 3
Users of regional or minority languages ................................................................................ 5
Policy, legislation and practice – changes .............................................................................. 6
Recommendations of the Committee of Ministers – measures for following up the
recommendations ................................................................................................................... 9
Part II ........................................................................................................................................ 14
Part II of the Charter – Overview of measures taken to apply Article 7 of the Charter to the
regional or minority languages recognised by the State ...................................................... 14
Article 7 –Information on each language and measures to implement the Committee of
Experts’ recommendations ................................................................................................... 14
Part III ...................................................................................................................................... 36
The Charter, Part III – Implementation of the undertakings and initiatives to follow up the
Committee of Experts’ recommendations ............................................................................ 36
Article 8 – Education........................................................................................................ 36
Article 9 – Judicial authorities ......................................................................................... 38
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services ............................................ 40
Article 11 – Media............................................................................................................ 44
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities .................................................................... 45
Article 13 – Economic and social life .............................................................................. 47
Article 14 – Transnational contacts .................................................................................. 47

2

Part I
Foreword
The Council of Europe’s Committee of Ministers adopted the European Charter for Regional
or Minority Languages (the Charter) in 1992. Norway ratified the Charter in 1993, and it
entered into force in 1998. Under Article 15 of the Charter, the states must report every three
years. This is Norway’s sixth periodical report on the implementation of the Charter in
Norway.
Sami (North Sami, Lule Sami and South Sami), Kven, Romanes and Romani are recognised
as regional or minority languages in Norway and are thus ensured protection under the
Charter. To facilitate the involvement of the affected groups in the preparation of Norway’s
sixth periodical report, the draft report is prepared in Norwegian.
The national minority organisations, Sami organisations and Sámediggi (the Sami Parliament)
were informed about the reporting early on in the process. At the same time, the organisations
and Sámediggi were informed of their opportunity to submit “shadow reports” to the Council
of Europe.
Involving affected groups in work on matters that concern them is a fundamental principle of
the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities. Organisations with a
basis in a national minority were therefore naturally included in the process of preparing the
report. Relevant organisations have been given an opportunity to make oral contributions as
well as written ones. (A list of the national minority and Sami organisations that have been
briefed on the process and invited to the oral public hearing is provided in Appendix 7.)
The Ministry received a number of contributions from various organisations and bodies in
connection with the public hearing. Some of this input has been included in the report. The
consultative bodies have also raised a number of issues that do not directly concern measures
taken to implement the Charter. The Ministry will deal with these comments in connection
with other matters.
In Norway, the Ministry of Culture has general responsibility for adopting and implementing
a comprehensive language policy and thus general responsibility for indigenous and minority
languages. However, administrative responsibility for the Charter has been incorporated with
responsibility for Sami and minority policy. In connection with the change of government in
the autumn of 2013, this responsibility was transferred to the Ministry of Local Government
and Modernisation with effect from 1 January 2014. Consequently, the latter ministry now has
the main responsibility for implementing the Charter. None of the organisational changes
entail any substantive change for the policy area or for the implementation of the Charter in
Norway. The Ministry of Local Government and Modernisation has prepared the sixth
periodical report in collaboration with other ministries concerned. Norway’s sixth periodical
report on the Charter is available in Norwegian and English. Norway’s fifth periodical report,
the evaluation report from the Council of Europe’s Committee of Experts and the
recommendations from the Council of Europe’s Committee of Ministers have been translated
into Norwegian. Documents relating to the reports submitted by Norway in 2005, 2008 and
2011 are available in Norwegian and English. All documents relating to Norway’s periodical
reports on the Charter are available on the Ministry of Local Government and
Modernisation’s website:
3

http://www.regjeringen.no/nb/dep/kmd/tema/nasjonale_minoriteter/midtspalte/minoritetsspra
kpakta.html?id=86936
As far as possible, an attempt has been made in this report to avoid repeating information
provided to the Council of Europe in previous reports.
For further information on the work on implementing and reporting on the Charter, please
contact:
The Ministry of Local Government and Modernisation
The Department of Sami and Minority Affairs
Postboks 8004 Dep
N-0030 OSLO
Tel.: (+47) 22 24 71 75
Email: postmottak@kmd.dep.no

4

Users of regional or minority languages
The Council of Europe requests updated information on the number of users of regional or
minority languages, the geographic distribution of the users and the general demographic
situation.
No registers are currently kept in Norway based on ethnic background (with the exception of
Sámediggi’s electoral roll). For historical reasons, many members of the national minorities
themselves are highly sceptical of registration based on ethnic background. In the hearing,
some consultative bodies called for a study to map the situation of the minority languages. In
the authorities’ opinion, such a study would pose considerable challenges in terms of
methodology, and the likelihood of obtaining reliable data is small. We otherwise refer to the
information in Norway’s fifth periodical report, under Users of regional or minority
languages.
In the current school year, 822 primary and lower secondary school pupils are receiving
instruction in Sami, while 916 pupils receive instruction in Sami as a first language and 1210
pupils receive instruction in Sami as a second language. In upper secondary school, 243
pupils receive instruction in Sami as a first language and 209 pupils receive instruction in
Sami as a second language. A total of 594 pupils receive instruction in Finnish as a second
language in primary and lower secondary school. (Source: Grunnskolens informasjonssystem
(GSI) (the information system for primary and lower secondary education).
In 2012, the Nordland Research Institute was commissioned by Sámediggi to conduct a
survey of the use of Sami languages. The survey was financed by the then Ministry of
Government Administration, Reform and Church Affairs, the Ministry of Education and
Research and Sámediggi. According to the language survey, two out of five North Sami
persons think that they speak their language “very well”. This applies in particular to the older
and younger age groups. As regards Lule Sami and South Sami, the survey showed that more
young people understand these languages better than their parents’ generation. The survey
further showed that the efforts of dedicated individuals and organisations seem to have played
a crucial role in promoting and revitalising Sami languages. This is particularly the case in
areas outside the administrative area for Sami language. The efforts of the public authorities
to safeguard and develop Sami languages in different municipalities vary substantially, even
within the administrative area. The survey also showed that language promotion efforts have
had best potential where municipalities and a relatively unified Sami community have worked
together towards a common goal. According to the survey, schools are now one of the most
important arenas for use of Sami languages. However, one third of the parents state that
children are not receiving the instruction to which they are entitled, in part due to the lack of
courses offered by the schools.
In 2012, on commission for the then Ministry of Government Administration, Reform and
Church Affairs, NORUT Alta-Áltá, a social science research institute, prepared a report on
the Sami perspective in the municipal sector (Kartlegging av samisk perspektiv i
kommunesektoren). According to the report, a number of municipalities have broadly
identified the following challenges: costs associated with being a bilingual municipality, a
shortage of personnel with knowledge of the Sami language and culture, lack of clarity as
regards funding responsibility, negative attitudes and poor knowledge, and a lack of
procedures that take Sami needs into account. The report reveals major differences between
municipalities in the administrative area for Sami language. In municipalities where local
5

politicians have a positive attitude towards Sami languages, there is usually a more proactive,
practical approach. Collaboration between the municipality’s political and administrative
staffs on the one hand and Sami interest groups on the other appears to be a key factor in
every municipality. The report also points out that in several municipalities, schools are the
only place where Sami is spoken. Kindergartens and schools therefore play an extremely
important role in preserving Sami languages.
With financial support from the Ministry of Culture, the Kvenland Federation conducted a
project to provide training in reading and writing Kven/Finnish, and to build networks
between Kvens and Norwegian Finns. The project findings indicate that there has been a
significant decline in the last 20–30 years in the number of language users who speak
Kven/Finnish well enough to be able to take part in an ordinary conversation. An overall
report was presented in the spring of 2014. The Ministry of Culture will now consider the
findings in the report more closely.

Policy, legislation and practice – changes
In connection with Norway’s sixth periodical report, the Council of Europe requests that
Norwegian authorities explain changes in general policies, legislation or practices in relation
to regional or minority languages. The Council of Europe requests that the Norwegian
authorities identify developments expected in the next monitoring period, such as changes in
policy or budget, policy plans or other factors that may have direct or indirect effects on the
situation for regional or minority languages in Norway.
Language Council of Norway – expanded sphere of activity and responsibility
The framework for a comprehensive language policy in Norway was discussed by the Storting
(The Norwegian parliament) in 2009 based on a white paper on national language policies
(St.meld. nr. 35 (2007–2008)); see further details in Norway’s fifth periodical report. As
announced in the white paper, the Language Council’s sphere of activity and responsibility
has been expanded to include responsibility for languages other than Norwegian. The
Language Council is the consultative body for the Norwegian Government on language
issues.
The Language Council’s expanded sphere of activity and responsibility includes the national
minority languages Kven, Romani and Romanes, as well as, in principle, all the more recent
immigrant languages in Norway. One of the Language Council’s main tasks is to promote
increased use of national minority languages and to strengthen their status.
The work of the Language Council has initially been concentrated on Kven, as stipulated in
the commissioning letter from the Ministry of Culture. It is further stipulated that the
Language Council is to maintain contact with the Kven Institute in order to obtain up-to-date
information on the results of standardisation activities and to discuss future allocation of
responsibility and possible collaboration. The Kven Institute is discussed in greater detail later
in this report; see the response to the Committee of Ministers’ second recommendation and
paragraph 13 of the Committee of Experts’ evaluation report. It is emphasised that the work
of the Language Council in this field must be founded on as well informed a basis as possible
and on documented studies.

6

In 2013, the Language Council appointed a special advisor on minority language issues and is
now making good progress in building up an advisory service in this field and drawing up a
work plan with priority tasks. Contact and dialogue have been established with several
partners, and efforts are now being made to enter into closer collaboration and dialogue with
minority language organisations and institutions. It is essential that the Language Council’s
work in the minority language field be conducted in close contact with the user organisations
for the various languages.
Sámediggi has a statutory responsibility to seek to safeguard and develop Sami languages in
Norway. At the same time, the Language Council can serve as a partner to Sámediggi and
other actors in efforts to promote Sami languages. The initial foundation for collaboration
between the Language Council and Sámediggi was laid at several meetings held in 2012 and
2013.
Norwegian Language Year 2013
2013 was the Norwegian Language Year, which was organised as a separate project under the
auspices of the Centre for Norwegian Language and Literature. In the period 2010–2013, the
Ministry of Culture provided a total of almost NOK 7.8 million in direct funding for the
Language Year, in the form of development grants and basic financing. In addition, the Centre
for Norwegian Language and Literature’s ordinary budget was increased. The purpose of the
Language Year was to create an inclusive and unifying celebration of linguistic diversity in
Norway, thereby fostering greater appreciation of the value of such diversity.
A variety of participants organised special projects in the course of the year. In October 2013,
a special Minority Language Day was arranged jointly with the Language Council of Norway
to promote cooperation and exchanges of experience between national minorities. Several
organisations with both Kven and Romani affiliations were represented. The need for such a
forum was thus confirmed, and the Language Council will continue this work, thereby
ensuring that this becomes an annual event. The Language Council otherwise celebrated the
year by hosting, initiating and collaborating on a number of conferences, seminars, lectures
and exhibitions all over the country, and by disseminating various types of information
material.
In connection with the Norwegian Language Year 2013, Sámediggi launched the Snakk
samisk te mæ (Speak Sami to me) language campaign, an inspirational attitude-shaping
campaign targeting Sami youth. The aim of the campaign was to increase the use of Sami in
more and new arenas, encourage young people to receive instruction in Sami and highlight
Sami languages. Active use is made of social media in the campaign, and 24 adolescents have
been engaged as language ambassadors. The campaign will continue in 2014.
The Centre for Sami Language in Education started a monthly writing contest aimed at
improving the Sami reading and writing skills of Sami youth. In East Finnmark, a Sami
literature festival was organised for the first time in a joint effort by the Isak Saaba Centre in
Nesseby municipality, Nesseby public library, the Book Bus in Tana and Nesseby and the
Varanger Sami museum. The purpose of the festival was to focus attention on Sami literature.
Kven language communities have taken active advantage of the Norwegian Language Year to
develop several projects, many of which have received funding from the Norwegian
Language Year budget. The Halti Kven IKS cultural centre produced the Muisto ja toivo
(Memory and Hope) show with Norwegian Language Year 2013 project funding. The purpose
7

of the show was to relate the history of the development of the Kven language through
narrative, song and music. The performers included children and young people from local
Nord-Troms communities, the Kven song group ihana! and musicians Jan Johansson and
Evgeny Kabeshov.
In the course of the Norwegian Language Year development project, no contact was made
with the Romani or Romanes communities. In the spring of 2013, the Secretariat therefore
began work on a survey, and eventually established contact with the Romani people/Tater
organisations Romany National Association Norway (Romanifolkets Riksforbund), Taternes
Landsforening, Landsorganisasjonen for romanifolket and Romanifolkets Kystkultur.
Action Plan for Sami Languages
The Action Plan for Sami Languages was presented in the spring of 2009 and spans a period
of five years. The objective of the action plan is to lay the foundation for stronger efforts to
promote the Sami languages – North Sami, Lule Sami and South Sami – in various sectors of
society. The plan focuses on training and education, public services and care, and on
highlighting Sami languages in the public sphere.
A status report on the Action Plan was presented in 2011 and 2013. The 2013 report was
jointly submitted by the Government and Sámediggi. The Action Plan will run until the end of
2014. The Government and Sámediggi will jointly prepare a final report on the plan.
Norwegian Directorate for Children, Youth and Family Affairs
The Norwegian Directorate for Children, Youth and Family Affairs develops expertise to
combat discrimination based on ethnic origin and belief. This is a new field for the
Directorate in 2014, and includes expertise on immigrants and their children, Sami people and
national minorities. As a result of the expansion of the Directorate’s sphere of responsibility,
regional and minority languages will now feature on its agenda more often.
The language and culture of Sami children in the Child Welfare Service
The Ministry of Children, Equality and Social Inclusion has sought to strengthen efforts to
ensure that the language and culture of Sami children are safeguarded in the Child Welfare
Service. With effect from 1 May 2012, the Ministry has adopted amendments to the
Regulations of 18 December 2003 No. 1659 on foster homes and to the Regulations of 11
December 2003 No. 1564 on the supervision of children in child welfare institutions for care
and treatment. These amendments were made to highlight the need to ensure that the right of
Sami children to preserve their language and culture is observed in foster homes and child
welfare institutions.
The child’s spokesperson in cases to be dealt with by the County Social Welfare Board
On 18 February 2013, the Ministry of Children, Equality and Social Inclusion adopted new
regulations concerning the child’s spokesperson in cases to be dealt with by the County Social
Welfare Board. Under these regulations, when a spokesperson is appointed for a Sami child in
the administrative area for Sami language, the child must be offered a spokesperson who
speaks Sami and who understands the culture. In other areas, an attempt must be made to
provide Sami children with such a spokesperson. This is also emphasised in the guidelines to
the regulations. The guidelines further state that great importance must be attached to Sami
children’s request for a Sami spokesperson.

8

Public committee to examine the use of interpreters
In the autumn of 2013, the Ministry of Children, Equality and Social Inclusion appointed a
committee tasked with presenting proposals for the coordinated, quality-assured and effective
organisation of interpretation services in the public sector, including interpretation to and
from Sami languages.
Action plan for improvement of the living conditions of Roma in Oslo
The Institute for Applied Social Science (Fafo) has been commissioned by the Ministry of
Local Government and Modernisation to conduct an evaluation of the Action Plan for
improvement of the living conditions for Roma in Oslo. For more information on the Action
Plan, see Policy, legislation and practice – changes in Norway’s fifth periodical report. The
evaluation report is expected to be completed in the autumn of 2014.
Norwegian Directorate of Labour and Welfare
Objectives related to the Sami perspective in the Norwegian Labour and Welfare
Administration (NAV) are, as before, discussed and specified in the letter of allocation of
funding to the Directorate of Labour and Welfare.
Sami translation service
A Sami translation service was established in the Norwegian Government Security and
Service Organisation (GSSO) in 2010. The GSSO is responsible for translating news, press
releases and information on specific topics published on the Norwegian government website
regjeringen.no into the three Sami languages. The number of Sami translations on the website
has increased since the service was established. In 2009, there were around 50 translations per
year, while in 2012 the number of translations rose to 400. The number declined in 2013. The
translation service is currently being evaluated. In the evaluation, the GSSO will also consider
ways of increasing government ministries’ use of the service.

Recommendations of the Committee of Ministers – measures for following
up the recommendations
Measures for following up the recommendations of the Committee of Ministers:
1.
Ensure that social and health care institutions within the Sámi Administrative
District, particularly in relation to elderly people, offer services in North Sámi.
The three-year Sami portion of the dementia programme has been concluded, and a report was
published in April 2013 (IS-2052 version 2). One of the most important results of the subprogramme is the increased awareness among personnel in the participating municipalities,
especially of the significance of cultural factors for the activities and care services provided.
A good deal of documentation has been collected, and in 2013 the Centre for Care Research
Northern Norway was assigned two tasks:
1. Produce a booklet containing concentrated knowledge of eight different specialised
nursing and care issues that have been identified as needs for Sami users (including
palliative treatment)
2. Produce a booklet in Sami for use in teaching programmes for health and care
personnel. The last section of the booklet will cover the following topics:
9





The legal and historical basis for Sami policy in general and for health and care
services in particular
Cultural knowledge, local knowledge, identity and customised services
Local services, programmes for specific groups and individuals

The Sami National Centre for Mental Health (SANKS) translates the following documents
into North Sami:





The letters sent to patients explaining their rights
Various assessment tools
A drawing and discussion booklet for children aged 4–10 with close family members
in hospital
An information folder on all the SANKS units

In 2013, SANKS also offered the Finnmark Hospital Trust a training programme in language
and culture for its employees.
The Northern Norway Regional Health Authority has completed a two-year language
interpretation project at Hammerfest Hospital that yielded positive results. In 2014, the
Regional Health Authority has been assigned the task of funding the continuation of a Sami
interpretation project.
With regard to incentives for recruiting health and care personnel to small municipalities,
certain initiatives have been taken to encourage persons with a Sami background to apply,
including wage compensation for Sami language skills.
The Sámi University College has previously offered courses on Sami language and culture for
health and care personnel. Due to a lack of participants, this course has been discontinued.
More generally, universities and university colleges, and other institutions responsible for
Sami language and culture, offer postgraduate training and continuing education for different
sectors. Employers may order such courses as needed.
2.
Adopt a comprehensive structured policy for Kven, combined with an action plan, in
cooperation with Kven speakers.
Norwegian authorities have established programmes and implemented measures in various
areas in which Kven is spoken. Efforts to revitalise the Kven language are supported by the
Norwegian Government, for instance through the provision of operational funding for the
Kven Institute (Kainun institutti). The Kven Institute works to strengthen use of the Kven
language and to develop, document and disseminate knowledge of and information on the
Kven language and culture. The operating grant from the Ministry of Culture also covers
efforts related to prescription and further standardisation of the Kven language.
The Kven Institute has received the following operating grants from the Ministry of Culture in
the period 2011–2014:
2011
NOK 4,823,000

2012
NOK 4,973,000

2013
NOK 5,137,000

2014
NOK 5,317,000

10

The Ministry of Culture and the Ministry of Local Government and Modernisation provide
operational funding for the Kven newspaper Ruijan Kaiku, which is published about once a
month.
In 2011, the Ministry of Culture granted funding for an adult education course in Kven run by
Norske Kveners forbund, a Norwegian Kven organisation, and in 2013 the same organisation
received a grant for a project aimed at encouraging Kven children to read, based on the first
dual-language children’s books in Kven and Norwegian.
Arts Council Norway, which administers the Norwegian Cultural Fund, has granted financial
support for a number of projects related to Kven language and culture; see more detailed
information in Appendix 5 to this report.
We also refer to the information on the Language Council of Norway’s special advisory and
information service for minority languages. This service is an important part of the overall
efforts to strengthen the status of the Kven language in Norway. As stated in the detailed
discussion on the Language Council under Policy, legislation and practice – changes above,
the Kven language has been a priority area since the service was launched in early 2013. A
great deal of the Ministry of Culture’s financial support has otherwise been concentrated on
the Norwegian Language Year 2013. In this connection, too, measures to strengthen and
provide information on the Kven language have been an important aspect; see further
information under Policy, legislation and practice – changes.
An additional appropriation of NOK 1 million was provided from the Ministry of Local
Government and Modernisation’s budget for 2014 towards strengthening Kven language and
culture. This appropriation supplemented the regular grant from the budget item for national
minorities. Funding is also provided to the Kven Institute from this budget item (see
Appendix 6).
3.
Clarify the status of the Lule and South Sami languages in relation to Parts II and
III of the Charter.
The Ministry of Local Government and Modernisation has reviewed the language provisions
of the Sami Act, among other things assessing them in the light of Norway’s international
obligations. One of the questions considered was which language(s) is (are) covered by Part
III of the Language Charter. After examining the source documents, the Ministry finds that at
present only North Sami falls within the scope of Part III, while Lule and South Sami falls
within the scope of part II. However, it is clear that, in practice, a number of the provisions
applicable to North Sami are also implemented for South Sami and Lule Sami. Should it
become relevant to accept the undertakings arising from Part III for more languages, this will
be done in accordance with the procedures set out in the Charter; see Article 3 (2).
4.
Continue their efforts to provide teaching in/of Lule and South Sami, including the
development of teaching materials and teacher training.
The Norwegian Directorate for Education and Training has had a number of guides and
thematic pamphlets on kindergarten issues translated into South and Lule Sami. Guidelines
have been drawn up for the subject curricula for Sami as a first language and Sami as a
second language in all three Sami languages and published on
http://www.udir.no/Lareplaner/Finn-lareplan/Kunnskapsloftet-samisk/ (in Sami only).
11

The guidance material has not been revised since the curriculum revision in 2013. In
connection with the revision, sample examination papers and examination guidance material
were prepared for written examinations at lower secondary level and upper secondary level 3
(Vg3). The material for Sami as a first language is available in South, Lule and North Sami,
while information on Sami as a second language is available in Norwegian. Previous
examination papers in all the Sami languages have been published on www.udir.no.
The conferences on the use of South Sami in kindergartens and schools have been successful;
see the response to paragraph 100 of the Committee of Experts’ evaluation report. The
conferences are well attended and provide opportunities for networking and sharing of
experiences. They also provide Sámediggi and the education authorities with important input
on where the greatest challenges lie, including the need to develop South Sami teaching
materials and aids. The Norwegian Directorate of Education and Training has initiated several
translations in response to needs reported at the conference.
The Ministry of Education and Research has received a draft of a general strategic plan for
Sami distance education from the Directorate of Education and Training. The South Sami
communities have been actively involved in formulating the proposals in the report.
The Nordland County Governor focuses on providing information and guidance to school
owners to ensure that the rights of Sami pupils who request instruction in South and Lule
Sami are fulfilled. The information is provided at conferences and meetings and by posting
notices on special websites and in the media.
The Directorate of Education and Training also informs school owners, administrators and
teachers about current research on bilingualism, explaining that this does not constitute any
disadvantage for pupils. In the Directorate’s opinion, this could help ensure that teachers and
school administrators do not view Sami language instruction as a burden on pupils or society.
If the Directorate learns that a pupil’s choice to receive instruction in Sami has been
questioned by a teacher or school administrator, or that a pupil has been denied such
instruction, the Directorate has immediately ensured that the pupil receives such instruction.
The general impression is that the vast majority of schools now have effective procedures for
dealing with this issue, but it is nonetheless still important to maintain focus on ensuring that
the rights of Sami pupils to instruction in Sami are observed.
The national recruitment strategy for Sami higher education (Nasjonal rekrutteringsstrategi
for samisk høyere utdanning) covers the period 2011–2014. The Ministry of Education and
Research has granted a total of NOK 4.4 million towards implementing the strategy. These
efforts are being continued in 2014. South and Lule Sami languages will also have special
priority in the final year of the strategy period.
The University of Nordland offers bachelor’s programmes in Lule Sami. The University of
Tromsø now has a permanent associate professorship in South Sami literature.
The Nord-Trøndelag University College offers study programmes in South Sami Levels 1 and
2. In the 2011/12 academic year, the college collaborated with the University of Tromsø
(UiT) on a bachelor’s programme in South Sami (South Sami Level 3). UiT had academic
responsibility, but the course was held at the college. The college also offers entry-level
courses in South Sami.
12

The Aajege Sami language and competence centre (Aajege – samisk språk- og
kompetansesenter) in Røros offers entry-level instruction in South Sami in cooperation with
the Sámi University College. The Giellatekno Centre for Sami Language Technology at UiT
has collaborated with Aajege on producing material for entry-level and advanced level (a oneterm course) instruction in South Sami. Giellatekno and the Divvun group1 have also
produced a language learning program, a language learning app and a digital dictionary.
The Centre for Sami Language in Education has established a unit at Elgå in the municipality
of Engerdal in the South Sami area. The Centre will focus on further developing South Sami
teaching materials and terminology.
Every year, the Nordland County Governor organises both a South Sami and a Lule Sami
conference for kindergarten and school staff, school owners, education authorities, education
institutions, etc. The purpose of the conferences is to highlight special challenges to and
possibilities for instruction in/of South and Lule Sami from kindergarten to college/university
level, and to create a constructive dialogue for exploring ways in which instruction in/of
South and Lule Sami can be strengthened and developed. Various networks have also been
established for kindergarten and school employees.
The Divvun group at UiT and Sámediggi have jointly published a Lule Sami dictionary.
5.
Strengthen the efforts to develop positive attitudes towards the Romani and
Romanes languages.
This objective has been one of the aims of the Norwegian Language Year 2013, and we refer
to more detailed information provided under Policy, legislation and practice – changes above.
The establishment of the advisory and information service for minority languages in the
Language Council of Norway will also significantly strengthen the efforts to create positive
attitudes towards these two languages, which are the smallest of the three national minority
languages in Norway; see further information above, under the section on the Language
Council of Norway.

1

The Divvun group is affiliated with the Centre for Sami Language Technology at the University of Tromsø.
The group works on developing grammar-based language technology, such as text processing programs,
language learning programs, digital dictionaries and synthetic speech, for Sami and other northern languages.

13

Part II
Part II of the Charter – Overview of measures taken to apply Article 7 of the
Charter to the regional or minority languages recognised by the State
The Council of Europe requests information be provided in this part of the report on
measures that the State has taken to apply Article 7 of the Charter to the regional or minority
languages recognised by the State (Regional or minority languages are defined in Article 1 a
of the Charter).
The Council of Europe further requests that it be informed of new measures taken since the
previous report and that it be provided with a detailed account of legal and practical
measures taken by the State to implement the encouragements and box recommendations
given by the Committee of Experts in the previous evaluation report(s).
In this part of the report, we will provide information on measures taken by the State and an
account of the follow-up of the encouragements given and box recommendations made by the
Committee of Experts in the fifth evaluation report for each of the relevant languages. The
numbering of the questions from the Committee of Experts is identical to that in the fifth
evaluation report.

Article 7 –
Information on each language and measures to implement the Committee of
Experts’ recommendations
In the evaluation report, the Committee of Experts requests an update on the regional or
minority language situation.
Presentation of the regional or minority language situation in Norway – an update
8. In the fifth periodical report, the Norwegian authorities mention that there has been a
demand from the Finnish speakers to have Finnish protected under part II of the Charter.
According to the authorities, the matter is being considered by the Ministry of Government
Administration, Reform and Church Affairs. The Committee of Experts looks forward to
information on this aspect in the next periodical report.
The Norwegian-Finnish Association has put forward demands that Finnish be recognised as a
minority language under Part II of the Charter, in the same way as Finnish and Meänkeli are
recognised in Sweden. The Ministry has informed the Norwegian-Finnish Association of its
conclusion in a letter, which states, inter alia:
“In the Ministry’s view, the most obvious conclusion is that Kven is the language that
has traditionally been used by the national Kven/Norwegian Finnish minority. This
conclusion has been reached after attaching weight to the wording of Article 1 (a) of
the Charter (‘traditionally used’), in addition to statements in the Explanatory Report
to the Charter regarding ‘languages which have been spoken’ (our emphasis).
Moreover, since Norway has defined Kven as a language in its own right, it is most
natural to say that Kven is the language that has traditionally been used by
14

Kvens/Norwegian Finns, and that modern Finnish does not fall within the scope of the
definition in the Charter.
[…]
The Ministry has reached the conclusion that the demarcation in Article 1 of the
Charter is appropriate, and that expanding the obligations to include modern Finnish is
not on the agenda. There are, however, national measures and programmes targeting
the Finnish language, including instruction in schools, which benefit the entire
Kven/Norwegian Finnish minority. The Charter places no limitations on the State as
regards measures to promote languages other than those covered by the Charter.”
12. The Committee of Experts encourages the Norwegian authorities to continue their work to
produce more reliable data on language use, especially in regard to Kven speakers, in cooperation with the speakers.
See the information on the survey of Sami languages under Users of regional or minority
languages. See also the description of the Kvenland Federation’s project in the same section.
Particular issues arising from the evaluation of Norway’s fifth report
13.
[…] The Committee of Experts has been informed that despite the measures taken by
the authorities since the last monitoring round, the Kven language remains in a very
precarious situation. The Committee of Experts notes that the process of standardisation is
ongoing and encourages the authorities to continue their efforts. However, measures are
needed to promote the language in the meantime, such as providing for Kven in education,
including adult education, and strengthening its position in broadcasting and literature.
Particular attention should be paid to develop its positions in education.
There is no doubt that the situation for Kven as a living language in Norway is difficult. Data
obtained by the Kvenland Federation in connection with a language project funded by the
Ministry of Culture seem to confirm this.
On the other hand, significant progress has been made in terms of prescription and
standardisation of a written form of the Kven language. The standardisation work is organised
and funded through the Kven Institute and is covered by the Ministry of Culture’s operational
grant to the institute. A special body, the Kven Language Assembly, has been appointed to
conduct the standardisation process. This was originally a decision-making body for the Kven
Language Council, and functioned up until 2010. For the time being, the Kven Language
Assembly’s term of office has been extended until the end of 2015.
A Kven grammar has been developed and is currently in the proofreading stage. The grammar
is now being translated from Kven into Norwegian. This grammar has created an important
tool for revitalising Kven as a spoken and written language. The plan is to produce and
publish a special grammar for schools in the course of 2014.
In 2013, the Kven Language Assembly began planning work on word formation and
vocabulary. In this connection, meetings were held with South Sami, North Sami and
Norwegian language communities and with representatives of users of Meänkieli. The Kven
Institute has been given a special grant to fund a position tasked with collecting and
coordinating language material from both the Institute itself and from other language
15

communities, including private individuals. The project team member will also assist the
Kven Language Assembly to produce source material for a digital dictionary. Work on the
dictionary will be carried out in collaboration between the Institute and Giellatekno – the
Centre for Sami Language Technology at the University of Tromsø. As part of this process,
work has begun on developing an automatic morphological analysis program.
For further details on the situation of the language in broadcasting and literature, reference is
made to the information provided below.
Later in this report, attention is drawn to the importance of learning minority languages and of
providing information on the rights of pupils and the responsibilities of school
administrators/school owners. The request for accurate, reliable statistics on the number of
pupils who receive instruction about or in their mother tongue/minority language is difficult to
meet as no statistics are kept of ethnic background, only of the language(s) in which pupils
receive instruction; see the information under Users of regional or minority languages.
Reference is made to the responses to paragraphs 140, 155 and 156 of the Committee of
Experts’ evaluation report.
In cooperation with the Kven Institute, Giellatekno is working on the production of an
interactive learning program for Kven.
16. [...] This question arose during the fourth monitoring cycle and has not been solved during
the fifth monitoring round. The Committee of Experts recalls the fourth cycle
recommendation of the Committee of Ministers on the matter and reiterates its
encouragements to the Norwegian authorities to “[c]larify the status of the Lule and South
Sámi languages in relation to Part III of the Charter” and to notify the Council of Europe in
the appropriate manner.
Reference is made to the information provided under the Committee of Ministers’ third
recommendation.
Sami languages
Sami language centres
There are currently 12 Sami language centres. Sámediggi allocates funds every year to Sami
language centres. The efforts of the language centres to revitalise Sami languages have
produced positive results.
Spellchecking for Sami languages
The Divvun group develops grammar-based language technology for Sami and other northern
languages, such as word processing programs, language learning programs, digital
dictionaries and synthetic speech. A new website, Sátni.org, was launched on 6 February
2014, on which all online dictionaries are gathered in one place.
Election-related measures
The following material is translated into Sami languages in connection with elections:
 Announcements (North Sami) – four in 2013
 Texts on the Ministry of Local Government and Modernisation’s election portal:
www.valg.no (North Sami)
16




Information brochures on elections (North Sami, Lule Sami, South Sami)
Posters for display in polling stations (North Sami, Lule Sami and South Sami)

The www.valglokaler.no website is available in North Sami. This is a mobile-friendly website
where voters can locate the nearest polling station, check opening hours and access a map
function. The Act of 12 June 1987 No. 56 concerning Sámediggi (the Sami Parliament) and
other Sami legal matters (the Sami Act) and the Regulations of 19 December 2008 No. 1480
relating to elections to Sámediggi have been translated into North Sami. In 2013, certain
amendments were made to the current regulations. The Ministry will ensure that the
translation is updated to include these amendments.
Sámediggi is responsible for informing voters about the elections to Sámediggi.
Sami language prize – Gollegiella
Gollegiella, the Nordic Sami Language Prize, was established in 2004 by the ministers
responsible for Sami matters and Sámediggi presidents in Norway, Sweden and Finland. The
prize of EUR 15,000 is awarded every other year. In 2012, the prize was awarded jointly to
Divvun and Giellatekno at the University of Tromsø for their work on designing technology
tools for Sami languages, and to Aleksandra Andrejevna Antonova and Nina Jeliseevna
Afanasjeva (both from Russia) for their efforts to promote the Kildin Sami language.
The Committee of Experts has the following question regarding Article 7, paragraph 1, subparagraph c:
Lule Sami
56. The Committee of Experts notes the positive measures that have been taken and recalls
that there is still a need for resolute efforts to be made in many areas such as the shortage of
teachers, research, media, literature, development and production of teaching materials in
Lule Sámi.
Support for literature in Sami, whether Lule Sami, South Sami or North Sami, is provided as
part of the overall funding for cultural purposes which the Ministry of Culture makes
available to Sámediggi every year. The annual appropriation from the Ministry is transferred
to and allocated by Sámediggi. Sámediggi then distributes the funds to a variety of cultural
activities including artists’ stipends, library services, museums, theatres, festivals, cultural
centres and other cultural institutions, and literature. Measures to promote Sami literature also
benefit from project funding allocated through Arts Council Norway.
With respect to media, we refer to the comments in the response to paragraph 90 of the
Committee of Experts’ evaluation report below.
Most of NRK Sápmi’s radio and TV broadcasts are in North Sami, but there are also regular
broadcasts in Lule Sami and South Sami. There are 30-minute radio programmes in both these
languages every week as well as regular news pages on NRK’s teletext service (Tekst-TV)
and website NRK.no. The NordSalten newspaper features pages in Lule Sami.
Since 2011, the Research Council of Norway has funded a research project on the Lule Sami
spoken language through its Programme for Sami Research II. As from 2014, the programme
is funding a project aimed at producing software for machine translations from North Sami to
other Sami languages. Since 2001, moreover, the Research Council has provided funding for

17

several research and PhD projects on Sami languages in its two programmes for Sami
research.
See also the response to the Committee of Ministers’ fourth recommendation for information
on teaching and education.
The Committee of Experts has the following question regarding Article 7, paragraph 1, subparagraph c:
South Sami
63. The Committee of Experts notes the positive measures that have been taken but observes
that there is still a need for resolute efforts to be made in many areas such as the shortage of
teachers, research, media, literature, and the development and production of teaching and
learning materials in South Sámi.
With respect to literature, we refer to the comments on Lule Sami in the response to paragraph
56 of the Committee of Experts’ evaluation report above. The same applies to South Sami.
Moreover, we refer to the response to paragraph 97 of the Committee of Experts’ evaluation
report below.
See the response to the Committee of Minister’s fourth recommendation for information on
teaching and education.
The Committee of Experts has the following question regarding Article 7, paragraph 1, subparagraph c:
East Sami/Skolt Sami
66. The Committee of Experts has also been informed by the Norwegian authorities about the
Action Plan for Sámi Languages which foresees measures to revitalise Skolt Sámi. However,
the Committee has no clear information as to whether this language is still spoken in Norway.
It therefore asks the Norwegian authorities to clarify this issue in the next periodical report.
The Skolt Sami Culture across Borders project was a collaborative effort between three
countries: Finland, Norway and Russia. The project period began on 1 April 2010, and a
project report was presented on 20 December 2012. Strengthening and revitalising the East
Sami/Skolt Sami2 language was a pivotal goal of the project. The aim was to commence
entry-level language instruction and to increase knowledge of and interest in the language in
Norway and Russia. There were seven participants in the first East Sami/Skolt Sami language
course ever arranged in Norway.
East Sami/Skolt Sami teaching materials are now available in Norwegian and Russian, and in
digital form. The digital and sound materials are designed so that they can be used in teaching
in all three countries. Østsamisk museum (East Sami museum) plans to continue this work by
2

The Ministry of Local Government and Modernisation notes that the East Sami/Skolt Sami organisations have
different opinions as to the name they wish to use. The Ministry therefore considers it most appropriate to use a
version with a forward slash, i.e. “East Sami/Skolt Sami”. However, the Ministry emphasises that individuals are
entirely free, based on the principle of self-identification, to shape and express their identity and refer to their
affiliation in different ways. The Ministry’s choice of name for the group will not impose any obligation on free
institutions (such as academic institutions, museums and language centres).

18

offering language courses in Norway and Russia in cooperation with the Sami Knowledge
Centre in Lovozero, Russia. Giellatekno at the University of Tromsø and Østsamisk museum
have jointly published a digital Skolt Sami dictionary.
According to organisations representing this population group, there are no Skolt Sami/East
Sami language users in Norway today.
Sami languages
84. The Committee of Experts looks forward to precise information on the situation of the
Sámi-speaking prisoners and the measures taken to ensure their rights in the next periodical
report.
In 2013, the Norwegian Correctional Services, Northern Region, began work on translating
texts into North Sami. Initial priority has been given to information provided to inmates prior
to and while they are serving their sentence, and information for visitors. The translations are
available on the information pages of Tromsø Prison and Vadsø Prison on the Norwegian
Correctional Services’ website www.kriminalomsorgen.no.
A working group was commissioned by the Ministry of Justice and Public Security and the
Norwegian Correctional Services’ central administration (KSF) to review prison conditions
for Sami inmates and convicts. The working group submitted its report to the KSF in
December 2011, and a consultation and cooperation conference was held in Karasjok
municipality in May 2012.
The Directorate of Norwegian Correctional Services has drawn up an action plan designed to
ensure that Sami inmates and convicts serve their sentences under satisfactory, equitable
conditions. The action plan is based on the report of the working group and the consultation
meeting in Karasjok, and has been prepared in collaboration with the Norwegian Correctional
Services, Northern Region and Sámediggi. The plan consists of four main points on which
further efforts will be focused:





Ensure the language rights of inmates and convicts
Further develop the quality of everyday life in prison and while serving a sentence in
the community
Increase recruitment of employees to the Norwegian Correctional Services with a
knowledge of Sami culture and Sami language skills
Increase the use of the National Mediation Service in the execution of sentences

The action plan was sent to the Norwegian Correctional Services, Northern Region, and
Sámediggi on 10 February 2014. Responsibility for coordinating and implementing the
measures in the plan has been assigned to the Norwegian Correctional Services, Northern
Region.
Priority must be given to coordinating activities and protecting language rights. This means,
first and foremost, that rules and regulations and necessary information must be translated
into Sami, and made available electronically. Signs posted at the offices of the Norwegian
Correctional Services in the administrative area for Sami language must be in Sami.

19

Lule Sami
90. The Committee of Experts encourages the authorities to continue their efforts for the Lule
Sámi language to be more present in public life.
The state-owned Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation (NRK) has three television channels
and several radio channels, and is Norway’s largest broadcasting institution. NRK Sápmi
(formerly NRK Sámi Radio), which is organised as a special unit, produces programmes
targeting the Sami population. In 2012, NRK Sápmi introduced a new programme in Lule and
South Sami. NRK also broadcasts five children’s programmes in Lule Sami in 2012.
Most of NRK Sápmi’s radio and TV broadcasts are in North Sami. However, there are regular
broadcasts in Lule Sami and South Sami consisting of 30-minute radio programmes every
week and regular news pages on NRK’s teletext service and website NRK.no.
Under NRK’s Articles of Association, NRK is required to contribute towards strengthening
Sami languages, identity and culture. It is also stipulated that NRK must have regular
programming for children and youth in Sami. However, the Articles of Association do not
differentiate between the various Sami languages, referring instead to the Sami population and
to Sami language in general terms. NRK has editorial freedom to determine how the
requirements are met.
Production grants are provided from the Ministry of Culture’s budget for Sami daily
newspapers. In addition, small grants are given for the production of newspaper pages in Lule
Sami and South Sami in local Norwegian-language newspapers. In 2014, this support will
amount to total NOK 25 million. The funding has increased from 2004 to 2014 to NOK 13.4
million, thereby more than doubling in this period. The grants for Sami newspapers and Samilanguage newspaper pages are intended to facilitate democratic debate, opinion formation and
language development in Sami communities.
For example, the NordSalten newspaper contains pages in Lule Sami.
Bodø municipality has erected place name signs in Norwegian and Lule Sami in Bodø.
South Sami
97. The Committee of Experts considers that, in view of the dispersal of South Sámi speakers,
the presence of the language in electronic media and its visibility in the public space is
especially important. It therefore encourages the authorities to continue their efforts for the
South Sámi language to be more present in electronic media and in public life.
With regard to electronic media, we also refer to the general information on NRK provided in
the response to paragraph 90 of the Committee of Experts’ evaluation report above.
In 2012, moreover, a specially produced documentary series on South Sami culture was
shown on TV. NRK has also broadcast five children’s programmes in South Sami.
As regards newspapers, we refer to the information regarding grants for Sami daily
newspapers and Sami-language newspaper pages in the response to paragraph 90 of the
Committee of Experts’ evaluation report above.
20

The newspaper Snåsningen contains pages in South Sami.
Public buildings in Snåsa municipality have signs in Norwegian and South Sami.
Sami languages
115. The authorities also reported that closer transnational co-operation with Sweden in
regard to all three Sámi languages […] is being developed, including the elaboration of a
proposal for a collaboration agreement between Sweden and Norway on Sámi tuition. […]
[The Committee] encourages the authorities to provide information about the agreement and
how it is followed up in the next periodical report.
The collaboration between Sweden and Norway on Sami tuition has been expanded to include
Finland, which means that emphasis will be placed on collaboration on North Sami, in
addition to South and Lule Sami. At the latest meeting in Finland in November 2013, it was
decided to establish a working group comprising two persons from each country to conduct a
survey of Sami teaching materials in the three countries and propose ways in which the
countries can make use of each other’s materials. As it has taken some time to appoint the
members of the working group, work will not begin until after the summer of 2014.
South Sami
132. The Committee of Experts […] looks forward to receiving information on the results of
the concrete actions taken by the Ministry of Education towards teaching in/of South Sámi
and on the measures that have been taken by the County Governors of Troms, Nordland, SørTrøndelag and Nord-Trøndelag in cooperation with Sámediggi.
See the response to the Committee of Ministers’ fourth recommendation.
East Sami/Skolt Sami
134. In the fifth periodical report the authorities state the actions that have been taken, in
cooperation with Finland and Russia, for the strengthening and developing of the identity,
language and culture in a transnational perspective.
135. The Committee of Experts looks forward for more information on the substance of the
cooperation in the next periodical report.
The Skolt Sami Culture across Borders project was based on collaboration between three
countries, Finland, Norway and Russia; see the response to paragraph 66 of the Committee of
Experts’ evaluation report above. An important goal of the project was to strengthen
collaboration between stakeholders at various levels in these countries and to create a
transnational network for and conditions conducive to the intergenerational transfer of cultural
traditions. Over 350 participants from Norway and Russia were involved in the project
activities, which directly targeted the East Sami/Skolt Sami community. Information on East
Sami/Skolt Sami, their cultural heritage and the project was disseminated regionally,
nationally and internationally at open events. Strengthening and revitalising the East
Sami/Skolt Sami language was a key focus of the project.

21

The Committee of Experts has the following question regarding Article 7, paragraph 1, subparagraph g:
137. In the fifth periodical report no particular information is given on this point. The
Committee of Experts encourages the authorities to provide information on the results of the
initiatives taken in the next periodical report.
In the administrative area for Sami language, all pupils of primary and lower secondary
school age, regardless of ethnic affiliation, have a right to receive instruction in Sami. The
municipalities in the administrative area may decide that all pupils in the municipality should
receive instruction in Sami.
The municipalities are responsible for facilitating adult education, including in regional and
minority languages. Both adult learning associations and municipal authorities may initiate
courses if there is a desire for such activity.
Sámediggi has financed a five-year qualification and recruitment programme in Sami
languages at the Sami University College. The college, which has served as project
coordinator, has collaborated with several Sami language centres. The courses have been
decentralised to enable more participants to receive instruction in Sami languages. The
programme was terminated in 2013, and no funding has been allocated for its continuation. A
final report will be prepared in the course of 2014.
See the information on entry-level instruction in Sami under the response to the Committee of
Ministers’ fourth recommendation.
Sami languages
Lule Sami
145. In the fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts noted the work done by the
Árran centre on Sámi language issues, as a member of the University of the Arctic which coordinates the work of the Sami Institutions Network on High North Affairs and by the Bodø
University College (Nordland County). It however mentioned that there is a lack of research
in/on Lule Sámi in general.
146. The Committee of Experts has not received any new information on the matter.
The research institute for indigenous studies at Árran is a joint project between the University
of Nordland and Árran aimed at strengthening research, education, development activities and
dissemination of information from an interdisciplinary perspective. Research is to be linked to
the Lule Sami area and focus on language and cultural research from a variety of perspectives,
including an international indigenous perspective. The institute also aims to develop teaching
programmes that focus on the knowledge and cultural traditions of indigenous peoples, High
North issues and living conditions in the High North.

22

South Sami
148. In the fifth periodical report, the authorities state that there is one three-year
undergraduate programme in the teaching of specific school subjects for bilingual teachers at
Hedmark University College. A bachelor's degree allows students to specialise further in
various languages including South Sámi as an optional course.
149. The Committee of Experts looks forward to receiving information on the number of
students who attend these South Sámi classes.
This programme is no longer offered by Hedmark University College. Nord-Trøndelag
University College offers entry-level courses in South Sami, South Sami Level 1 and Level 2
and South Sami language and culture. These subjects are offered separately and are not part of
a complete bachelor’s degree, but may be incorporated into the teacher training programme,
the kindergarten teacher training programme or continuing education courses for teachers.
The number of students in 2013/2014:
South Sami Level 2 (30 credits)
South Sami language and culture (30 credits)
South Sami entry-level instruction (15
credits)
South Sami music course Med joik som
utgangspunkt (15 credits)

10 students
14 students
14 students
8 students

The Committee of Experts has the following question regarding Article 7, paragraph 1, subparagraph i:
Sami languages
152. As mentioned above, closer transnational co-operation with Sweden on the main three
Sámi languages […] was studied, with the elaboration of a proposal for a collaboration
agreement between Sweden and Norway on Sámi tuition […]. [The Committee of Experts]
encourages the authorities to provide information about the agreement and how it is followed
up in the next periodical report.
See under the response to paragraph 115 of the Committee of Experts’ evaluation. Norway’s
universities and university colleges are free to collaborate with Swedish institutions on Sami
languages wherever appropriate. The Swedish and Norwegian authorities are also discussing
potential collaboration. So far, no report has been produced on the results of this
collaboration.
The Committee of Experts has the following question regarding Article 7, paragraph 2:
155. During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed by representatives
of speakers of various minority languages that there are some cases where the schools
encourage parents not to demand any instruction in Kven or Sámi, for instance by telling them
that the child then misses out on instruction in Norwegian or other basic subjects.
156. The Committee of Experts urges the Norwegian authorities to take the necessary
measures for such discouragement to no longer take place.
None of the county governors in the four northernmost counties have received any indications
that parents are being advised not to let their children receive instruction in Kven or Sami.
However, the county governors have been told by teachers who give instruction in Sami and
Kven of parental concern that pupils receive too little instruction in Norwegian, and that
23

instruction in Sami and Kven may also affect instruction in other subjects. This concern has
arisen from the fact that the teaching hours for instruction in Sami and Finnish are largely
taken from the teaching hours allocated to Norwegian instruction. The changes that have now
been made in the distribution of subjects and hours may alter this situation, since there is now
greater leeway to reallocate hours from one subject to another (up to 5%).
The Language Council of Norway states, for its part, that in the winter of 2013–2014 it has
been contacted by language users who claim that they have been asked not to demand
instruction in Finnish as a second language, or that the school administration has been slow to
respond or has lacked knowledge about the actual application process. In these cases, the
Language Council has informed the parents or guardians about the process, and about their
right to lodge a complaint with the county governor of the county concerned. The Language
Council has the impression that the threshold for lodging a written complaint with county
governors is high for many parents/guardians.
The county governors have provided guidance to municipal school owners regarding the rules
and regulations governing instruction in Sami and Finnish. The guidance emphasises the
pupils’ rights and the school owners’ responsibility to ensure that schools give pupils
information and facilitate instruction in Finnish and Sami. The county governors have also
provided guidance to school owners and a large number of school administrators regarding
the changes in the distribution of subjects and hours that offer greater flexibility in terms of
facilitating instruction in Sami and Finnish and other languages.
The county governors of Troms and Finnmark hold annual meetings with teachers who
provide instruction in Finnish and Kven to discuss issues related to pupils/parents’ choice of
these subjects and to the dropout rates for these subjects. This group of teachers is extremely
dedicated to the subjects, and wish to help ensure that parents do not decline the offer of
instruction in Finnish or Kven. On the other hand, it is the school administrators and school
owners who usually meet with the parents and provide information on the subject. The county
governors therefore consider it important that they are aware of the pupils’ rights and can
inform parents/guardians as fully as possible.
A survey is to be conducted to find out why pupils do not choose Finnish/Kven, in part in
response to an inquiry from the Norwegian Kven organisation.
A special brochure has been produced on the right to instruction in Finnish and Kven. The
brochure was prepared by the county governors of Troms and Finnmark.
175. The Committee of Experts commends Lavangen municipality for the approach taken in
the protection and promotion of Sámi in their community and looks forward to receiving
information about the development and the results of the work in the next periodical report.
Lavangen municipality was incorporated into the administrative area for Sami language in
October 2009. The Sami language centre in the municipality was opened in the autumn of
2009. Among other things, the language centre has offered adult education in Sami in
cooperation with the Sámi University College. The centre is responsible for practical
development of a project to adapt the Ulpan method to Sami; see the discussion of the Ulpan
method in Norway’s fifth report. Based on this, the centre has offered courses in, for example,
language immersion methodology.

24

Five of the North Sami language centres cooperate with the University of Tromsø (UiT) in
providing Sami language courses for adults and opportunities to sit examinations at UiT. The
language centre in Lavangen has been involved in this cooperation project since 2012.
176. […] The Committee of Experts has been informed that because of the internal
migrations, Tromsø has become the biggest “Sámi urban centre”. Additional measures
therefore seem to be needed to promote the use of Sámi in Tromsø.
In 2013, Tromsø municipality entered into a cooperation agreement with Sámediggi. The
purpose of the agreement is to enable the Sami in Tromsø municipality to preserve their
language and culture. The agreement contains provisions concerning information, language
training, children and youth, health and care services and, not least, an intention to establish a
permanent Sami meeting place in Tromsø. Based on this agreement, Tromsø municipality will
draw up an action plan for Sami language and culture. At the same time, the municipality’s
master plans should reflect the Sami population’s right to preserve and develop its culture,
language and the way of life. The parties will cooperate on developing measures, projects and
recreational activities for children and youth. Together, they will develop a Sami information
pack for use in schools in Tromsø, with the stated objective of increasing the proportion of
pupils receiving Sami education.
Kven
This sub-chapter opens with a brief discussion of the situation for the Kven language. This is
followed by responses to the questions from the Committee of Experts regarding the Kven
language.
We are currently in the start phase of developing an infrastructure for the Kven language. This
applies both to language infrastructure, such as printed dictionaries, and to a normative
grammar, in addition to technical infrastructure such as digital dictionaries, spellcheckers,
interactive language learning tools, and other analytical tools.
The standardisation process aids active language use, particularly for a group that is
reclaiming its language. We refer to the further discussion of the situation for Kven under the
response to paragraph 13 of the Committee of Experts’ evaluation report above.
Based on their experience of language training for children and adults, the Sami language
centres see a potential for becoming positive language arenas for language users at different
levels. The same seems to apply for the language centre in Storfjord, which is a trilingual
institution that aims to promote Norwegian as well as Sami and Kven language and culture.
A small range of teaching materials has also been produced for use in teaching Kven language
and culture. Several new publications are under way.
The writer Alf Nilsen-Børsskog (1928–2014) has played a significant role in the development
of a modern Kven written culture. He based his writing on his Kven dialect and on the
principles of Finnish orthography. The third volume in the series entitled Elämän jatko,
Rauha (2011) has been published since the previous report. Nilsen-Børsskog also published a
collection of poems during this period: Merimies muistelee (2013). The fourth volume in the
Elämän jatko series has been submitted to the publisher.
25

Moreover, the writer Agnes Eriksen has published two dual-language children’s books in
Kven and Norwegian: Kummitus ja Tähtipoika/Spøkelset og Stjernegutten 1 and 2. The
language centre in Storfjord has published some booklets, a local language dictionary and a
multilingual reader (Bokmål (Norwegian), Finnish, Kven, North Sami and Nynorsk (New
Norwegian)).
Questions from the Council of Europe to Norway in connection with the sixth periodical
report:
The Committee of Experts has the following question regarding Article 7, paragraph 1, subparagraph a:
Kven
37. During the on-the-spot visit, the representatives of the Kven-speakers expressed the wish
to establish a permanent constructive dialogue with the authorities [...].
One forum for dialogue between the authorities and the national minority organisations is the
contact forum between government authorities and national minorities. The contact forum is
arranged around once a year. The ministries also have continuous dialogue with various
Kven/Norwegian Finn organisations. We also refer to information regarding the Language
Council of Norway’s activities and gatherings for minority languages under Policy,
legislation and practice – changes.
The Committee of Experts has the following question regarding Article 7, paragraph 1, subparagraph c:
45. During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed that the Language
Council of Norway has not yet started its work on the Kven language and that the Conference
on the revitalization of the Kven language has not led to any concrete measures yet. The
Ministry of Education, however, assured the Committee of Experts that the Conference will
soon have a follow-up and the project was not off the agenda. The Committee of Experts
looks forward to receiving information in this respect in the next periodical report.
The Language Council of Norway’s work on the Kven language is under way. The Ministry
of Culture3 assumes that the Language Council will base its work on the information and
exchange of views that emerged at the conference on revitalisation of the Kven language in
the summer of 2010; see the discussion under Policy, legislation and practice – changes.

3

The Ministry of Local Government and Modernisation assumes that the question should have have been
addressed to the Ministry of Culture, not the Ministry of Education and Research as stated in paragraph 45 of the
Committee of Experts’ evaluation report.

26

The Committee of Experts has the following question regarding Article 7, paragraph 1, subparagraph c:
48. The Committee of Experts encourages the authorities to continue their efforts on the
standardisation of the Kven language and looks forward to receiving information on the
follow-up to the Conference on the revitalization of the Kven language. The Committee of
Experts has also been informed about the work presently being carried out in Sweden
regarding the standardisation of Meänkieli. It believes it would be beneficial to the work on
the standardisation of Kven to establish contacts with the same type of work going on in
regard to Meänkieli.
The work on standardising Kven is now well established, and must be said to have acquired a
fixed form through the system that was established by the Kven Institute; see the response to
paragraph 13 of the Committee of Experts’ evaluation report and the preamble regarding
Kven above. Representatives of Meänkieli speakers, among others, have been contacted in
connection with planning future work on developing word formations and vocabulary. With
regard to following up the conference on revitalisation of the Kven language, we refer to the
response to paragraph 45 of the Committee of Experts’ evaluation report above.
The Committee of Experts has the following question regarding Article 7, paragraph 1, subparagraph d:
Kven
73. As far as place names are concerned, the Committee of Experts urges the authorities to
report on the practical implementation of the Act on Place Names and encourages them to
take measures to facilitate the effective collecting of Kven place names.
Pursuant to the Act of 18 May 1990 No. 11 relating to Place Names, the Ministry of Culture
appoints place name consultants for Norwegian and Kven place names and Sámediggi does
likewise for Sami place names. The place name consultants provide advice and guidance on
the spelling of place names.
Paikannimipalvelus, the Kven place name service, often notifies of the need for administrative
decisions regarding the spelling of Kven place names on maps and signs. The procedural rules
in the Act relating to Place Names ensure that an expert in language and names provides
advice on spelling before names are adopted by the Norwegian Mapping Authority. The
provisions in the Act relating to Place Names ensure that any place names that exist in Sami
and Kven in addition to Norwegian are adopted simultaneously with the Norwegian names.
Public bodies are responsible for using Kven names that have been adopted in their services,
for example on signs.
A database has been created to document and publish Kven place names
(www.kvenskestedsnavn.no). This is edited and updated by the Kven place name service. The
place name service for Norwegian and Kven place names is administered by the Language
Council of Norway. The Language Council has provided extra funding towards creating the
database. The hope is that the database will serve as a source for anyone with an interest in
place names, particularly those in Kven. Place names are bearers of identity and sources of
both linguistic and cultural information, and are therefore suitable for use in other forms of
dissemination such as teaching and research.
The database per se is not a tool for collecting names, but it is an important means of
documenting and disseminating the names that have been gathered there. To date, the material
27

compiled in the database comprises some 10,000 names. The very existence of the database
makes it easier to see the connection between collecting and publishing names.
In its 2014 budget allocation the Ministry of Culture earmarked funds to set up a grant scheme
for collecting and registering old place names.This entails gathering and registering
Norwegian Sami, Kven and, potentially, Forest Finnish place names. The scheme will be
administered by the Language Council of Norway.
74. [… ] The Committee of Experts encourages the Norwegian authorities to increase the
support of the Kven Ruijan Kaiku newspaper in order for it to be published more frequently
and to encourage and facilitate the training of Kven speaking journalists.
Ruijan Kaiku is a trilingual (Kven, Finnish, Norwegian) newspaper that is published roughly
once a month. Since 1995, the newspaper has had a journalist editor in addition to several
freelance journalists. The newspaper is owned by Nordavis AS (66%) and Norwegian Kven
Organisation – Ruijan Kveeniliitto () (34%). The newspaper has 500 subscribers, and in 2014
it received grants totaling NOK 1,102,000 from the Ministry of Culture.
In addition, it received an operating grant of NOK 450,000 from the Ministry of Local
Government and Modernisation. In 2014, the newspaper received NOK 200,000 in funding
from the Ministry of Local Government and Modernisation to expand a staff member’s parttime position, so the newspaper now has two full-time positions.
The newspaper has long had ambitions of expanding its activities so that it can publish
weekly. One practical challenge is that it is difficult to find enough journalists with a
command of all three languages, so the editorial desk would need a language consultant to
translate between the languages.
77. The Committee of Experts encourages the authorities to further enhance their support for
Kven culture, through general and/or specific funding mechanisms and to make sure, through
the establishment of a structured dialogue with the speakers, that they are supporting the
measures which the speakers consider important.
Regarding the Kven language and culture, the Ministry of Culture considers it right to give
priority to the support measures described in the response to the Committee of Ministers’
second recommendation above. Additional to these are the opportunities open to Kven
cultural initiatives to apply for project funding from Arts Council Norway. We refer to
Appendix 2, which contains a summary of Kven projects that received such funding between
2011 and 2013.
Grants were also given to several Kven language initiatives from the Ministry of Local
Government and Modernisation’s budget allocation; see Appendix 6.
[box] The Committee of Experts strongly urges the authorities to take appropriate measures
to improve the presence of Kven in broadcasting.
Kven has been added as a language option on NRK’s online weather forecast service, yr.no.

28

The Committee of Experts has the following question regarding Article 7, paragraph 7, subparagraph f:
Kven
105. […] The Committee of Experts asks the authorities to make sure that the eventual
closing of this school does not hamper the application of the Charter in Norway. […]. It
therefore urges [the Ministry of Education and Research] to take immediate contact with the
Porsanger municipality with the purpose of ensuring that Kven education will be available for
the pupils who want it in the forthcoming school year.
The municipalities have responsibility for primary and lower secondary education, including
its structure. The Government cannot instruct a municipality to maintain certain schools.
However, the Act relating to Primary and Secondary Education stipulates that when at least
three pupils of Kven-Finnish stock attending primary and lower secondary schools in Troms
and Finnmark request it, the pupils have the right to receive instruction in Finnish. This is a
statutory right that must be fulfilled, regardless of school structure or of any plans to close
down schools.
Kven
109. The Committee of Experts invites the Norwegian authorities to provide exact figures on
the number of children attending Kven education at different levels and looks forward to
receiving information on the development of school materials in the Kven language.
Number of pupils with Finnish as their second language in primary and lower secondary
education, nationwide
Primary and lower secondary school pupils in Troms and Finnmark have the right to receive
instruction in Finnish as a second language if at least three pupils of Kven-Finnish stock
request it. Instruction is offered in Finnish as a second language from grades 1 to 10.
Instruction in Kven is offered provided sufficient teaching resources are available and if
pupils/guardians request tuition in Kven instead of Finnish. The curriculum for Finnish as a
second language covers both Finnish and Kven language and culture.
Number of pupils with Finnish as their second language in primary and lower secondary
education, nationwide:
School year 2013/2014
School year 2012/2013
School year 2011/2012
School year 2010/2011

594 pupils
600 pupils
657 pupils
754 pupils

29

The figures for the individual grades for the 2013/2014 school year are as follows:
Grade

No. of pupils

Grade 1
Grade 2
Grade 3
Grade 4
Grade 5
Grade 6
Grade 7
Grade 8
Grade 9
Grade 10

73 pupils
68 pupils
88 pupils
63 pupils
76 pupils
65 pupils
51 pupils
39 pupils
40 pupils
31 pupils

The information system for primary and lower secondary educations (Grunnskolens
informasjonssystem (GSI)) publishes figures showing the number of pupils receiving
instruction in Finnish as a second language, but not whether this tuition is provided in Finnish
or Kven.
Every year, the Norwegian Directorate for Education and Training allocates over NOK 1
million towards developing teaching aids in Finnish as a second language, which includes
Kven, and towards measures to improve the competence of teachers of the subject.
Three textbooks in Finnish as a second language have been developed in recent years: one for
grades 3 and 4, one for grades 5 to 7, and one for the lower secondary level. A Norwegian–
Finnish dictionary has also been developed. A textbook in Kven and a grammar (book) in
Finnish are under development, as are various booklets in Finnish and Kven.
[box] The Committee of Experts strongly urges the authorities to develop a special
curriculum for Kven in co-operation with the speakers and to improve the situation of the
Kven language at all appropriate stages of education.
There are no immediate plans for a Kven curriculum. The Kven written language is
undergoing a process of language prescription and standardisation. There are few qualified
teachers and teaching aid developers. The curriculum for Finnish as a second language covers
both Finnish and Kven language and culture.
The Committee of Experts has the following question regarding Article 7, paragraph 7, subparagraph h:
Kven
140. According to the representatives of the Kven speakers, the University of Tromsø and
Finnmark University College provide courses in Kven. These courses are however not
permanent, are offered at irregular intervals and only at undergraduate level. There are
moreover no ear-marked funds and positions for the Kven language, literature or culture at the
University of Tromsø, nor at the Finnmark University College. The Research Council of
Norway’s programme for research into Kven/Finnish/Forest Finnish issues was also
terminated in 2008 and has not been continued.

30

[box] The Committee of Experts encourages the Norwegian authorities to take measures to
promote a permanent offer of Kven language courses.
The University of Tromsø has established contact with the Kven-speaking communities. The
size of the student base does not warrant offering language courses in Kven on a permanent
basis, as the demand for such courses varies from year to year. The University of Tromsø
therefore offers courses when the need accumulates. The courses in Kven are dependent on
having students, and the Ministry of Education and Research is confident that the University
will resolve this issue in the best interests of the students.
Romani
The Committee of Experts has the following question regarding Article 7, paragraph 1, subparagraph c:
Romani/Romanes
51. The Committee of Experts noted during the on-the-spot visit that there was an interest
among the representatives of Romani/Romanes speakers as regards teaching of
Romani/Romanes. It welcomes the measures taken and looks forward to receiving precise
information on their effective results.
In cooperation with the then Ministry of Government Administration, Reform and Church
Affairs, the Ministry of Education and Research has tried to find ways to develop teaching
material in Romani/Romanes but has failed to find qualified persons to develop such material.
The Norwegian Directorate for Education and Training will further explore possibilities for
developing teaching material in Romani/Romanes.
Legal authority for mother-tongue instruction in Romani/Romanes is provided by the Act
relating to Primary and Secondary Education, sections 2-8 and 3-12.
Pupils attending the primary and lower secondary school, and upper secondary school, who
have a mother tongue other than Norwegian or Sami “have the right to adapted education in
Norwegian until they are sufficiently proficient in Norwegian to follow the normal teaching of
the school. If necessary, such pupils are also entitled to mother-tongue instruction, bilingual
subject teaching, or both”.
In other words, mother-tongue instruction in Romani/Romanes is linked to whether the pupil
is sufficiently proficient in Norwegian to follow normal teaching.
The Norwegian Directorate for Education and Training is developing material about national
minorities, including the Roma and Romani people/Tater communities. This material is
primarily intended for teachers; see the responses to paragraphs 113, 157 and 158 of the
Committee of Experts’ evaluation report.
The Ministry of Local Government and Modernisation has given grants to a project that will
develop a small ABC/teaching material in Romanes for Roma children. See Appendix 6.
Stiftelsen romanifolket/taternes kulturfond, a foundation for Romani people/Tater culture,
awards grants to projects aimed at promoting Romani people/Tater language and culture. The
foundation was allocated NOK 5 million for this purpose in 2014.

31

The Committee of Experts has the following question regarding Article 7, paragraph 1, subparagraph d:
Romani/Romanes
80. The Committee of Experts welcomes the measures taken and underlines the necessity of
such measures to fight against discrimination and negative stereotypes. It however notes that
no measures are taken to specifically promote the use of the language in the media.
[box] The Committee of Experts encourages the authorities to take measures to improve the
presence of Romani and Romanes in public life, in particular in the media.
The current grant schemes for minority-language publications offer grants to publications that
use different minority languages, including Romani and Romanes.The grant scheme for local
broadcasting offers special grants for operational and investment purposes to local radio
stations for ethnic and minority language groups. The general principle established is that
particular consideration should be given to applications from ethnic and minority language
groups for funding of local radio initiatives.
Romani/Romanes
112. During the on-the-spot visit, the representatives of the Taters mentioned a project aiming
at collecting stories from old travellers and transcribing them. The transcribed text will then
be used to develop a written standard. This project involves Taternes Landsforening, the
national association of Taters, and a Professor in linguistics from the University of Oslo. The
Committee of Experts is looking forward to receiving information on the progress of this
project in the next periodical report.
Taternes Landsforening is conducting a language project in cooperation with the Department
of Linguistics and Scandinavian Studies at the University of Oslo and the Queen Maud
University College of Early Childhood Education. The aim for the project is to make Romani
a complete written language.
In its reports, the association states that it has made tape recordings of elderly members of the
Romani people/Tater communities around the country in order to document their language. It
also wants stories about the Romani people/Taters to be translated into Romani so that
Romani people/Taters and others can learn the language. According to the report, a language
researcher at the University of Oslo has developed basic material for a book of stories told by
Romani people/Tater persons, in Norwegian and Romani.
The Ministry of Culture has provided funding for this project amounting to NOK 278,000 in
2007 and NOK 300,000 in 2009, but no report on the project has yet been submitted. The
information given here has been obtained from Taternes Landsforening’s annual reports.
113. The Committee of Experts welcomes the measures taken and encourages the authorities
to continue its support to projects aimed at protecting and promoting Romani and Romanes.
The Norwegian Directorate for Education and Training notifies schools and kindergartens
about the Romani and Romanes languages in its information material; see the responses to
paragraphs 157 and 158 of the Committee of Experts’ evaluation report. In 2014, the
Norwegian Directorate for Education and Training will also consider ways of developing
teaching material in Romani and Romanes, among other languages.
32

Romani and Romanes
142. In the fifth periodical report, the Norwegian authorities state that the Research Council of
Norway has for several years worked on initiating research into Romani and Romanes. This
has been very difficult for various reasons, but the Research Council of Norway announced a
PhD project position on the Romani language in 2012.
144. The Committee of Experts welcomes the new developments in this sphere and looks
forward to receiving information on the PhD project in the next periodical report.
A PhD project in Norwegian Romani people/Tater languages was initiated in the autumn of
2013 and will run over three years. The project is based at the Center for Multilingualism in
Society across the Lifespan at the Department of Linguistics and Scandinavian Studies,
University of Oslo.
The Committee of Experts has the following question regarding Article 7, paragraph 3:
158. The Committee of Experts encourages the authorities to ensure that teachers have
enough material and knowledge about the minority languages and the cultures they represent
to positively include them in their teaching. It also encourages the authorities to support
projects from the minorities that aim at sharing information on their languages and cultures,
such as for example the project for a new Sámi house of culture in Oslo, as a replacement of
the former one.
In addition to the information material mentioned in the response to paragraph 157 of the
Committee of Experts’ evaluation report, the Ministry of Education and Research and the
Norwegian Directorate for Education and Training have supported a project on the Romani
people/Tater since 2004. The project was originally an initiative launched by Taternes
Landsforening. The main objectives of the project have been to promote knowledge about
Romani people/Tater culture in schools and kindergartens and to foster a sense of pride
among children and youth who use these languages. Programmes are again being conducted
in schools and kindergartens this year. Among other things, drama is used as a method
through which children and pupils learn about Romani people/Tater culture and history, and
Romani songs are also included. Representatives for Taternes Landsforening participate in
this initiative.
The Norwegian Directorate for Education and Training has also begun work on developing an
online resource dealing with the national minorities. This online resource is intended for use
in teaching activities in schools and in kindergarten activities to promote knowledge about the
national minorities among children and youth. The online resource will contain different
forms of cultural expression from the five minorities, such as songs, recipes, pictures,
personal narratives, and small language ‘titbits’. The online resource will also contain
suggestions for teaching plans and for plans for use in the kindergartens. This is being done in
close cooperation with museums that hold collections related to the national minorities.
The association called Foreningen Samisk hus i Oslo (Sami House in Oslo) was formed in
2004 using operating funds from Sámediggi and the City of Oslo. In 2013 Foreningen Samisk
hus i Oslo was turned into a private limited liability company with effect from 1 January
2014. Aksjeselskapet Samisk Hus AS comprises Sámediggi, Oslo Sámiid Searvi (an
association for Sami people living in Oslo), the Sami People’s Party, and Samisk
sosialdemokratiskforening (a Sami association for social democrats).
33

Sámediggi has guaranteed the lease on the premises until August 2017. The purpose of the
company is to run Samisk Hus Oslo as a cultural institution for use by Oslo’s Sami
population. According to the company’s articles of association, the purpose of Samisk Hus
Oslo is to promote and develop Sami language, culture, identity and community life from
historical and contemporary perspectives.
An information booklet entitled Gávnos serves as a resource for local efforts to introduce
Sami content in teaching plans. The booklet contains texts covering Sami culture, language,
and social issues related to competence aims in Norwegian, religious and ethical education,
social sciences, history, geography, and religion and ethics. Teachers in other subjects can
also gain insight and ideas from Gávnos. The booklet is currently undergoing revision and
will be ready for the new school year in August 2014.
Romanes
The international Gypsy festival Yagori
Since 2000, Yagori, the international Gypsy festival, has received annual funding from the
Ministry of Local Government and Modernisation. In 2014 this funding amounted to NOK
350,000. The festival presents some of the leading artists in international Gypsy music and
dance. The Ministry regards this as a positive contribution towards dissemination of Roma
language and culture.
See the discussion of measures relating to both Romani and Romanes under the sub-chapter
entitled Romani above.
All languages
Measures that apply to more than one of the regional or minority languages
The Committee of Experts has the following question regarding Article 7, paragraph 1, subparagraph e:
100. The Committee of Experts encourages the authorities to take new initiatives with a view
to creating links or opportunities for exchange of views among representatives of all regional
and minority languages.
We refer in this connection to the Norwegian Language Year in 2013 and to the lessons
learned from it. The Language Council of Norway and the Norwegian Language Year
arranged the Minority Language Day in Oslo in October 2013; see Policy, legislation and
practice – changes above. The purpose of the event was to facilitate cooperation and
experience exchange between the national minorities.
The contact forum between government authorities and national minorities was held on 26–27
May 2014. The topics for the meeting were non-discrimination and the national minorities’
languages.

34

The Committee of Experts has the following question regarding Article 7, paragraph 3:
157. In the fifth periodical report, the authorities state that the Norwegian Directorate for
Education and Training is creating a brochure to provide an overview of and an insight into
the five national minorities in Norway. During the on-the-spot visit, the Norwegian authorities
mentioned that a school book on national minorities is being produced. The Committee of
Experts welcomes these initiatives and encourages the authorities to provide information on
the production and distribution of these documents in the next periodical report.
The Norwegian Directorate for Education and Training is currently preparing information and
guidance material on national minorities. The booklet contains information on the history,
languages and way of life of the minorities, and is planned for publication in 2014. The
purpose of the material is to enhance knowledge about the national minorities among staff in
schools and kindergartens. The booklet also contains information on how school and
kindergarten staff can disseminate knowledge about and encourage reflection on the
minorities’ situation, so that schools/kindergartens treat children and youth from the national
minorities with respect and in a way that engenders trust.
A book entitled Nasjonale minoriteter i det flerkulturelle Norge (National Minorities in a
Multicultural Norway) by Anne Bonnevie Lund and Bente Bolme Moen (ed.) was published
in 2010, and deals with the different minorities and their respective histories. The target group
for the book is students at bachelor and master level.
The Ministry of Local Government and Modernisation has developed an electronic
educational programme on indigenous and national minorities for civil servants. The aim is to
spread knowledge about these minority groups and to create understanding for the type of
issues that affect them. The programme also covers aspects of history, social issues, and
relevant laws and regulations.
The Committee of Experts has the following question regarding Article 7, paragraph 4:
163. The Committee of Experts encourages the authorities to continue the dialogue with the
minority language representatives, in matters related to their languages.
In connection with preparing information on national minorities, the Norwegian Directorate
for Education and Training has held meetings with and received input from the national
minority organisations.
See also the response to paragraph 100 of the Committee of Experts’ evaluation report.
The Ministry of Education and Research holds regular meetings with Sámediggi to discuss
issues related to measures in kindergartens and teaching in schools/educational institutions.
These meetings are held four times a year. In addition, consultations are conducted when
necessary, pursuant to the Procedures for Consultations between State Authorities and the
Sami Parliament.

35

Part III
The Charter, Part III – Implementation of the undertakings and initiatives to
follow up the Committee of Experts’ recommendations
The Council of Europe requests that in Part III a description be provided of how the
undertakings under the Charter have been implemented, with a focus on new developments
since the previous report.
The Council of Europe requests additional information in relation to the undertakings about
which the Committee of Experts did not receive sufficient information in the previous round to
evaluate their implementation.
For undertakings that the Committee of Experts believes were not met, we would request that
the state indicate what measures have been taken to implement the provisions.
As far as the requests and so-called “box recommendations” of the Committee of Experts are
concerned, the Council of Europe requests a detailed description of the legal and practical
measures the Government has implemented.
Article 8 – Education
Summary of the number of pupils with Sami as their first, second or third language:
Language

First language

North Sami
877
Lule Sami
19
South Sami
20
Source: GSI figures for school year 2013–2014

Second language
Sami 2
525
44
48

Second language
Sami 3
545
30
18

General comments
187. In the fifth periodical report, [...] the authorities also mentioned that in 2009, a working
group on Sámi teaching materials was established with representatives from the Sámi
Parliament, the Ministry of Education and Research and the Norwegian Directorate for
Education and Training. In June 2010, the group presented a report with proposals for
measures for more efficient development and production of Sámi teaching materials. The
Committee of Experts welcomes these positive initiatives and looks forward to receiving
more information on their development in practice in the next periodical report.
Responsibility for following up the report from the working group that assessed measures for
more efficient development and production of Sami teaching materials lies primarily with
Sámediggi. It is the understanding of the Ministry of Education and Research that Sámediggi
now follows up the projects it grants funding to more closely by, among other things, having
more regular contact with publishers. Development and production of Sami teaching materials
seem to be more efficient than before.

36

Article 8, paragraph 1, sub-paragraph i
The new national curriculum regulations for pre-school teacher education were adopted by the
Ministry of Education and Research on 4 June 2012 and came into force on 1 July 2012. The
national curriculum regulations for Sami pre-school teacher education were adopted by the
Ministry of Education and Research on 20 August 2013. Programmes under the new
curriculum applied for students who were admitted to them from the 2013/2014 academic
year.
188. The Committee of Experts considered that the undertaking was fulfilled in the previous
monitoring round.]It noted the new course at the University of Tromsø, where North Sámi is
taught as a foreign language; the change on the teaching of North Sámi from a subject to
mother tongue education at the University of Oslo; and the unification of the Sámi University
College with the Nordic Sámi Institute, creating an institution which deals with both teacher
training and research in various Sámi subjects. [...].
189. In the fifth periodical report, the authorities state the positive developments and
strengthening of Sámi course provision at the University of Tromsø where tuition is provided
in 11 Sámi subjects (on grammar, syntax, literature, cultural studies and history, etc.). […].
190. The Committee of Experts considers that the undertaking is fulfilled and looks forward
to receiving information on the results of the developments mentioned during the fourth and
fifth cycles in the next periodical report.
The University of Tromsø offers courses in Sami literary science, Sami linguistics, Sami
dialectology and language history, Sami history of textual interpretation and indigenous
methodology, Sami cultural studies, and North Sami language up to master’s degree level.
The university also offers courses in North Sami as a foreign language. In the 2011/2012
academic year, it offered specialisations in South Sami in cooperation with North Trøndelag
University College; see the response to paragraphs 148 and 149 of the Committee of Experts’
evaluation report above. No courses in Sami are offered by the University of Oslo.
The Committee of Experts has the following question regarding Article 8, paragraph 2:
198. The Committee of Experts welcomes the information as regards the teaching of North
Sámi in Oslo. It encourages the authorities to increase their efforts in this domain and invites
them to provide information on Sámi education in Tromsø in the next periodical report.
The Sami kindergarten in Oslo is owned by the City of Oslo and has a citywide catchment
area. The kindergarten has 28 children. The aim for the kindergarten is that children outside
the Sami core areas should also have the opportunity to preserve and develop Sami language
and culture. The kindergarten is a training site for Sami student kindergarten teachers and
cooperates closely with the Sámi University College in Kautokeino. The kindergarten also
disseminates language and culture to other university colleges in Norway. The kindergarten
cooperates closely with Sámediggi, from which it receives earmarked funds for promoting
Sami language and culture.
In the autumn of 2013, Samisk hus i Oslo arranged a decentralised study programme in North
Sami language in cooperation with the Sámi University College. This course entitled students
to earn 15 credits on completion of the examination. The course was part of Sámediggi’s fiveyear adult education programme.
37

A summary of the number of pupils with Sami as their first, second or third language is
provided in the introduction to Article 8 above.
Article 9 – Judicial authorities
Article 9, paragraph 1 Administration of justice in criminal and civil cases
Working group report on the Sami dimension of the judicial system
The working group published its report on the Sami dimension of the judicial system in 2011.
The report was distributed for consultation among relevant actors and was positively received.
A competency strategy for the courts and the Norwegian Courts Administration for 2011–
2015 (Kompetansestrategien for domstolene og Domstoladministrasjonen 2011-2015)
describes the roles and responsibilities in competence development activities. Expertisebuilding measures related to the Sami dimension in the judicial system fall under the remit of
the interdisciplinary working group. Competence development measures are elaborated in
dialogue with relevant groups in the courts
In 2013, the Norwegian Courts Administration funded a competence development initiative to
increase knowledge of Sami culture and traditions, arranged by the Sámi University College.
207. The Committee of Experts [...] however encourages the authorities to continue their
efforts to promote the use of North Sámi in courts.
The Norwegian Courts Administration recently approved funding of an additional half-time
language position. Indre Finnmark District Court now has the equivalent of one full-time
language position. The reasoning behind the Norwegian Courts Administration’s decision to
improve its competence in North Sami is that this will promote the use of Sami in the courts.
Indre Finnmark District Court arranged a seminar in April 2013 dealing with language
challenges and due process protection (Språkutfordringer og rettssikkerhet).The seminar was
aimed at the courts, court interpreters, lawyers, law students, police personnel, Sami language
personnel from different bodies, the Directorate of Norwegian Correctional Services, the
Norwegian Mediation Service, Sámediggi and other stakeholders. The Norwegian Courts
Administration reasons that if different actors are better informed about the court’s capability
to use Sami, this will in itself promote the use of North Sami in the courts.
Pursuant to the Act of 17 June 2005 relating to Legal Relations and Management of Land and
Natural Resources in the County of Finnmark (Finnmark Act), a special court should be
established to handle any disputes over rights that may arise once the Finnmark Commission
has investigated rights in a particular field. According to the plan, the Uncultivated Land
Tribunal for Finnmark will begin normal operations on 1 January 2015.
Five judges and two deputies were appointed in the Council of State. Account was taken of
applicants’ knowledge of history, culture and geography, and of different population groups
and industries, including knowledge of Sami languages.

38

Article 9, paragraph 3 Translation
The courts
The Sami legal terminology project entitled Samiske lovtermer published its final report on 1
May 2013. The project was led by the Tana Sami Language Centre and the Sami Trade and
Development Centre (SEG) and was funded by the then Ministry of Government
Administration, Reform and Church Affairs, Sámediggi and Tana municipality. The project
had its own group of experts and cooperated with Indre Finnmark District Court. The project
translated terms from the General Civil Penal Code, the Criminal Procedure Act and the
Dispute Act. Parts of the Dispute Act, including the Lugano Convention, were also translated
into Sami. The project also developed a list of phases and suggested amendments to the
approved list of Sami legal terminology from 2005.
The project produced almost 3,000 terms, 700 of which were approved by Sámediggi’s
Language Council in 2005. Terminology projects that receive funding from Sámediggi must
submit terms and language material to Sámediggi for approval. The Norwegian Courts
Administration published the approved list of Sami terminology from 2005 on its website, and
wants to publish the other terms once they are approved by Sámediggi. Indre Finnmark
District Court has adopted the new terms to a large extent and will adopt new terms as and
when they are developed.
The following laws and regulations have been translated into North Sami and published on
the Ministry of Agriculture and Food’s website (general overview):
-

-

Act of 15 June 2007 No. 40 relating to Reindeer Husbandry (Reindeer Husbandry Act)
Regulations of 21 June 2011 relating to the Reindeer Husbandry Development Fund
Regulations of 14 June 2010 relating to early retirement in the reindeer husbandry
industry
Regulations of 17 June 2010 relating to grants for relief arrangements in the reindeer
husbandry industry
Regulations of 19 June 2008 relating to grants to prevent conflicts between the
reindeer husbandry industry and other affected parties
Regulations of 19 June 2012 relating to grants to siida members and semi-domestic
reindeer
Regulations of 14 June 2010 relating to grants for reindeer grazing areas and semidomestic reindeer
Regulations of 21 June 2011 relating to reporting of reindeer felled and reindeer meat
stocks
Regulations of 17 June 2009 relating to grants for transport of felled reindeer
Regulations of 19 June 2008 relating to compensation for expenses, additional work
and financial losses incurred by reindeer owners due to measures to prevent
radioactivity in reindeer meat
Supplementary regulations of 7 December 1999 relating to extended conversion pay
for persons not subject to active conversion under the regulations relating to
conversion pay, section 3.

39

Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
Article 10, paragraph 1 The Government’s administrative areas
Article 10, paragraph 1, sub-paragraph a Oral and written enquiries
Sami in the justice sector – East Finnmark Police District, West Finnmark Police District,
and the Norwegian Police University College
In 2010, the National Police Directorate revised instructions regarding resources to cover
additional costs generated by use of Sami languages. The aim was that the instructions should
now apply throughout the police force’s area of responsibility. Furthermore, the Directorate is
currently developing the police force’s electronic case management system to better
accommodate Sami languages. Prompt text has been developed for document templates in
both North Sami and South Sami. This will be implemented during 2014.
In 2009, the National Police Directorate formed a contact group consisting of Sami-speaking
police officers from the police districts of East Finnmark, West Finnmark and North
Trøndelag. The purpose of the contact group is to discuss issues related to administration of
Sami languages in the police force and to provide advice and guidance to the National Police
Directorate in areas where there is a need to change systems or procedures. The contact group,
which is headed by the Directorate, convenes regularly and attends meetings and seminars
that are relevant to developing administration of Sami languages within the police force.
Meetings are also held with Sámediggi, the Sami National Centre for Mental Health
(SANKS) and other Sami institutions that are relevant to the work of the police.
Establishment of the contact group has proven highly useful for achieving continuity in the
work on administering North Sami in the police force. The group has provided constructive
input to the National Police Directorate in areas where improvements have been implemented
in recent years. This particularly applies to the police force’s electronic case management
systems, where North Sami can now be used in several areas within the force’s case
management system, including management of criminal proceedings. The contact group has
also contributed to strengthening contact between the police force’s central administration and
Sami institutions.
Statens Barnehus (Children’s House) in Tromsø, which has responsibility for conducting
judicial interviews of and following up children who have been exposed to violence or abuse,
was in 2011 assigned national responsibility for following up Sami children. It was allocated
funding to appoint a Sami-speaking clinical psychologist to fulfil this national responsibility.
A programme has been initiated to prevent domestic violence in Sami communities. The
programme, which has been used successfully in Norwegian-speaking municipalities,
comprises a film and a guidance scheme that is implemented in all Sami-speaking
municipalities in Finnmark. The entire programme is conducted in North Sami.
North Sami on the Norwegian Tax Administration’s website
In the spring of 2013, the Tax Administration’s website skatteetaten.no was upgraded with a
language option for North Sami. The language option leads to an overview page that provides
users with general information and contact details in Sami. The language option/page also
contains all the forms, guidelines and brochures available in North Sami.

40

Guidance from the Norwegian Tax Administration’s information service
Taxpayers who write in North Sami to Skatteopplysningen, the Norwegian Tax
Administration’s information service, will receive a reply in North Sami. Taxpayers who call
the information service must ask to be referred to a North Sami case officer. Current practice
is that when the Norwegian Tax Administration’s information service receives enquiries from
taxpayers who require oral guidance in Sami, their contact details are entered into an internal
log system, and a Sami-speaking case officer contacts them within 24 hours. The previous
solution used by the Norwegian Tax Administration’s information service automatically
forwarded calls to Sami-speaking case officers, but this system was discontinued due to the
low volume of enquiries.
Translation of legislation and guidelines to North Sami
Several of the brochures and forms issued by the Norwegian Tax Administration, such as the
guidelines for completing tax returns, have been translated into North Sami. The forms are
available in electronic versions that can be completed online. Printed versions were also
produced up until the 2012 income year. There are still some forms and guidelines on Altinn4
that have not yet been translated into Sami.
Electronic tax returns
Electronic tax returns are not available in Sami. If a taxpayer selects the North Sami language
option and enters Altinn to submit a tax return, a PDF file of the Sami-language version of the
tax return is attached. Any amendments that need to be made to electronic tax returns must be
done in Bokmål (Norwegian). Providing electronic tax returns in Sami will require costly
alterations to the tax return processing system. (There are currently no plans to enable
taxpayers to make amendments to tax returns electronically in Sami).
Information in Sami in the Norwegian Labour and Welfare Administration
Since the previous report in 2011, the Norwegian Labour and Welfare Administration (NAV)
has translated four of its main brochures into North Sami. These brochures contain
information on retirement pensions, work assessment allowances, daily cash benefits and
recruitment assistance for employers.
With regard to the Sami menu item on nav.no, the agency has focused on monitoring visits to
and use of the Sami web pages since 2011. The volume of visitors is relatively low. To better
reach the Sami population with information, efforts are currently being made to determine
why visitor volumes are so low.
User surveys in the administrative area for Sami language
NAV regularly conducts local user surveys in the administrative area for Sami language. The
results provide a basis for improving the quality of the agency’s services. Among other things,
users are asked about how accessible they perceive their NAV office to be in terms of
contacting the office in Sami and receiving a reply in the same language.
Users say that by and large they find that it is possible to arrange meetings with an
advisor/case officer who speaks Sami. They also find that they can call their NAV office and
make enquiries at their NAV office in Sami. However, they find it less easy to write to and
receive a reply from NAV in Sami. In Finnmark, the average score for user satisfaction with

4

Altinn is a web portal for electronic dialogue between private individuals or businesses and the public sector.

41

NAV’s service overall rose from 3.7 in 2011 (on a scale from 1 to 6) to 4.0 in 2012 and to 4.4
in 2013.
Translation of documents into Sami in the transport sector
The Norwegian Public Roads Administration has issued a safety brochure in North Sami for
drivers of snow scooters (På tur med snøscooter - En guide til sikker kjøring). This brochure
has been published on the Norwegian Public Roads Administration’s website for the Northern
Region. Moreover, the Norwegian Public Roads Administration is in the process of
translating theory tests for passenger cars and belt-driven motorbikes into North Sami.
216. The Committee of Experts was furthermore informed that a new survey on the use of
North Sámi by the public authorities has been done and that the results will be made public in
May 2012. It looks forward to receiving the results of this new survey in the next periodical
report.
217. The Committee of Experts encourages the Norwegian authorities to continue their effort
in this domain and considers that the undertaking remains fulfilled.
Sami information on public web portals – survey of current status
In February 2012, the Agency for Public Management and eGovernment (Difi) published a
report on the status of Sami information provided on public web portals (Samisk informasjon
på offentlige nettsteder – statuskartlegging). The purpose of the survey was to find out how
the political goals of increased use and visibility of the Sami languages were being followed
up in public agencies’ digital production and how many agencies had implemented the UTF-8
standard (the standard that makes it possible to present Sami characters on websites). The
report was prepared in response to an assignment given in a letter of allocation from the then
Ministry of Government Administration, Reform and Church Affairs.
The survey showed that approximately 80 per cent of agencies possessed the technical
capability to publish in Sami. Thirty-six per cent of public agencies published content in
Sami. Only 5 per cent of the agencies published information extensively in Sami, but many
have started work on systematically updating their Sami-language content.
The survey shows that the amount of Sami-language content published on regjeringen.no by
different ministries varies considerably. The report made particular mention of the Ministry of
Local Government and Regional Development, the Ministry of Agriculture and Food and the
Ministry of Children, Equality and Social Inclusion at the time as ministries that published a
considerable volume of content in Sami languages.
Article 10, paragraph 2 Local and regional authorities
Interpreting services
Finnmark Hospital Trust, Sámediggi and the Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and
Telemedicine have cooperated on a project to provide interpreting services in Finnmark
Hospital Trust.5 The project mapped some of the needs for Sami interpreting services in
5

Furskognes, Ann-Karin, Eliassen, I., Molund, B., Christiansen, E.K. (2013): Project report “Tolkeprosjektet”
(Interpreting Project), Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine, University Hospital of Northern
Norway Trust.

42

Finnmark Hospital Trust and conducted a pilot scheme using a Sami interpreter via video
conferencing on a laptop.
The project developed an e-learning programme containing films, facts and a test section. The
programme provides training in the use of interpreters, updated information on the rights of
Sami patients and the duties of health care personnel. The project was completed and a report
published in the spring of 2013. Northern Norway Regional Health Authority has been
charged with following up the conclusions of the report.
Article 10, paragraph 2, sub-paragraph g,
Statistics Norway
Wherever relevant, Statistics Norway now consistently uses both Norwegian and Sami place
names/municipality names in its tables. Statistics Norway also issues a publication entitled
Sami Statistics every other year. It is published in both Norwegian and North Sami.
Article 10, paragraph 5 Use and introduction of last names
Use of Sami characters in the National Population Register
In the autumn of 2009 the National Population Register introduced the Sami character “Á”,
which is the most-used letter in Sami names.
227. During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed that the
municipalities were granted a two-year extension to implement the new regulation on Sámi
characters: from 2011 the municipalities have to add the new characters when they update
their systems, but they have until January 2013 to fully implement the regulation [...].
228. The Committee of Experts [...] is looking forward to receiving information in the next
periodical report on the results of the implementation of the new regulation which might lead
to fulfilment of the undertaking.
229. Based on the information received, the Committee of Experts must conclude that at
present the undertaking remains not fulfilled.
[box] The Committee of Experts encourages the Norwegian authorities to ensure that the
national population registers and other public institutions accept Sámi names in their
original form.
The regulations of 5 April 2013 No. 959 concerning ICT standards in the public sector
(standardisation regulations) require public agencies to support6 Sami characters in their IT
systems. All new internal systems and all internal systems that undergo extensive
reorganisation must support all Sami characters. In addition, all agencies must support Sami
characters in their electronic exchange of information with other agencies. These
requirements were imposed on central government agencies from 1 January 2012 and on
municipal agencies from 1 January 2013.

6

Support means that the systems and records should be able to receive, store and transmit Sami characters.

43

Some central registries (such as the Norwegian Cadastre) support Sami characters. The
National Population Register implemented support for the character “À”, which is used in 95
per cent of Sami names, in 2009.
The replacement time for some public systems is relatively long, and it is therefore estimated
that it will take time for all systems to be upgraded to a common character set. The Agency
for Public Management and eGovernment (Difi) is currently conducting a study to take a
closer look at which characters the public sector should support and how characters that are
not supported should be represented in public administration. It is important to clarify how the
public sector should manage Sami characters and personal, company and place names with
characters that do not belong to the Norwegian alphabet.
We estimate that it will take a few more years before Norwegian authorities can guarantee full
implementation as asked for by the Committee of Experts. Based on how the regulations have
been adopted, we ensure a gradual transition to full support as new solutions are gradually
developed. Faster transition would incur an unreasonably high cost. Work is being done to
ensure that all public agencies set requirements for common character sets in all new systems
and that all solution suppliers adapt as quickly as possible. This will reduce the cost of
integrating solutions.
Article 11 – Media
Article 11, paragraph 1, sub-paragraph a, iii
See the discussion under Article 11, paragraph 1, sub-paragraph c, ii.
Article 11, paragraph 1, sub-paragraph c, ii
Radio and television programmes
In 2012, NRK Sápmi, the Sami-language division of the Norwegian Broadcasting
Corporation, produced a total of 246 hours of television transmissions and 1,754 hours of
radio transmissions. In 2012, NRK broadcast a total of 262 hours of news in Sami on radio
and 153 hours on television. NRK Sápmi also broadcasts on the digital radio network (DAB)
and broadcast a total of 414 hours of news in Sami and 127 hours of transmissions from
Sámediggi. NRK also regularly produces Sami-language programmes for children and youth.
A new radio series on Sami language, identity and culture was broadcast in 2012.
Since 2011, NRK has strengthened its Sami-language programming and has begun to use web
TV as a platform for news and current affairs content.
Article 11, paragraph 1, sub-paragraph e, i
Support schemes for newspapers
The support given to Sami newspapers and Sami-language news pages is intended to facilitate
publication of newspapers in Sami and thereby democratic debate, opinion formation and
language development in Sami society. Allocations between 2004 and 2014 have increased by
NOK 13.4 million, and have thus more than doubled during that period.

44

Article 11, paragraph 1, sub-paragraph f, ii
Audiovisual productions
The rules and regulations governing funding for audiovisual productions ensure equal status
for the Norwegian and Sami languages in all support schemes administered by the Norwegian
Film Institute.
Since 2009 the Ministry of Culture has given government grants to the International Sámi
Film Centre (ISF) in Kautokeino. The state funding allocated to the film centre is intended to
be used for developing and producing short films and documentaries, competence-building
projects and projects for children and youth. In 2014, this grant amounted to NOK 3,158,000,
representing a doubling of the first grant allocated in 2009 (NOK 1,500,000). ISF makes an
important contribution to Norwegian and international film culture. The purpose of the centre
is to develop Sami film and the Sami audiovisual production community, and to cooperate
with indigenous film production communities worldwide. ISF seeks to promote Sami filmmaking and Sami film in Norway, Sweden, Finland and Russia.
Subtitling and dubbing of children’s films
The industry organisation Film & Kino funds several film initiatives through the Norwegian
Cinema and Film Foundation. According to the regulations relating to films and videograms,
the fund’s resources may be used to, among other things, dub children’s films into Sami. The
Norwegian Cinema and Film Foundation’s indirect tax revenues have been drastically
reduced in recent years, making it increasingly difficult for Film & Kino to finance the
different cultural initiatives set out in the regulations. The Ministry of Culture will look more
closely at the division of responsibilities between the State and Film & Kino in a white paper
regarding films to be issued in the near future.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Updated information on Sami cultural buildings
Cultural buildings – Østsamisk museum (East Sami Museum) in Neiden
The Ministry of Culture has contributed almost NOK 43 million towards the building of
Østsamisk museum in Neiden. The grant includes funding for exhibitions and fittings.
Sámediggi has administrative responsibility for Østsamisk museum, which is part of the Tana
og Varanger Museumssiida foundation. The building has been taken into use but has not yet
been opened to the public. The museum will open to the public once the final technical repairs
and the work on the exhibitions are completed.
Cultural buildings – Saemien Sijte (South Sami Museum)
Saemien Sijte has responsibility for Sami museums throughout the South Sami region.
Sámediggi has administrative responsibility for Saemien Sijte. Statsbygg (the Norwegian
Government’s key advisor in construction and property matters) has prepared a preliminary
project for new premises for Saemien Sijte in Snåsa, on commission from the Ministry of
Culture. If the Storting (The Norwegian parliament) approves commencement of the project,
it will be included in the government property rental scheme (statens husleieordning).
Cultural buildings – Beaivváš Sámi Teáhter (National Theatre of the Indigenous Sami People
in Norway)
Sámediggi has administrative responsibility for Beaivváš Sámi Teáhter. Statsbygg has
elaborated a construction programme for a new theatre building for Beaivváš, on commission
45

from Sámediggi. The project will be processed according to the procedures for financing
property rental for Sami cultural buildings.
Support to cultural activities
General
Support to cultural activities plays a particularly significant role in preserving and developing
Sami languages. Since 2002, the Ministry of Culture’s allocations to Sami art and cultural
activities have for the most part been grouped under one item in the fiscal budget. The annual
appropriations from the Ministry are transferred to and allocated by Sámediggi. Sámediggi
distributes resources to various Sami cultural activities, such as museums, theatres, festivals,
meeting places, library services, art stipends, literature, implementation of the language
provisions laid down in the Sami Act, etc.
In 2014, the Ministry of Culture appropriated NOK 77.2 million to Sámediggi for cultural
activities. By comparison, the amount appropriated in 2011 was NOK 67.4 million. The
Ministry of Culture notes that Sámediggi places high priority on cultural activities.
The Storting (The Norwegian parliament) grants government stipends, including support for
cultural activities. The Sami artist Mari Boine has received a government stipend since 2012.
Riddu Riððu Festivála, international indigenous people’s festival
Riddu Riððu Festivála, the international indigenous people’s festival, is held every year in
July in Kåfjord, Troms county. The festival was established in 1991 by Gaivuona Samenuorat
(Kåfjord’s Sami youth organisation) under the name Jagi Vai Beaivvi (Sami Culture Days). It
is said to have been established as the result of a Coastal Sami youth rebellion against the
hiding away of Sami culture. The purpose of the festival is to “highlight and develop Coastal
Sami culture through encounters with its own essence and with other cultures”.
In 2009, Riddu Riððu Festivála was designated the status of a cultural hub festival
(knutepunktfestival), making it eligible for combined state and regional funding of 70 per cent
and 30 per cent respectively. The government grant in 2014 amounts to NOK 2,220,000.
Festivals that are designated cultural hub events also undertake to develop their genre,
cooperate with other bodies, etc. Criteria for considering and evaluating cultural hub events
have been developed.
In 2013, the Ministry of Local Government and Modernisation gave a grant worth NOK
330,000 to Riddu Riđđu Festivala to fund a project to promote all the languages in the Sami
areas. The aim of the project was to generate interest in Sami languages and to document
similarities and differences between them. The project looked at 10 different Sami languages.
The work was presented in a brochure and through different forms of artistic expression.
Dramatikkens hus (Norwegian Center for New Playwriting)
Dramatikkens hus in Oslo is a national competence and development centre intended to
promote the development of new plays and stage scripts and to participate in bringing about
and performing Sami plays and stage scripts for instance. The government grant in 2014
amounts to NOK 14.4 million.

46

Beaivváš Sámi Teáhter (National Theatre of the Indigenous Sami People in Norway)
We refer to the discussion of Beaivváš Sámi Teáhter in Norway’s fifth periodical report.
Article 13 – Economic and social life
Article 13, paragraph 2, sub-paragraph c
236. In the fifth periodical report, the Norwegian authorities state that the problems identified
in the previous rounds regarding the use of North Sámi in the health sector are on their way to
be solved. Various measures have been taken in this sphere [...] The authorities also mention
that “a special Sámi scheme is being implemented under the Directorate of Health’s dementia
programme.”
237. During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed by the authorities
that the Norwegian Directorate of Health has initiated a three-year programme which is aimed
at increasing the quality care for the elderly, in which eight out of nine Sámi municipalities
are taking part, that a hospital in the County of Finnmark has introduced a compulsory twoday Sámi language training course for the health staff and that a specific project is aiming at
using new technologies such as video conferences [...].
238. The Committee of Experts [...] asks the authorities to report on the results of these
measures in the next periodical report. The Committee of Experts also encourages the
authorities to study the possibility of establishing some economic incentive measures that
would ensure the presence of qualified health staff in small municipalities.
See the discussion in the response to the Committee of Ministers’ first recommendation.
Article 14 – Transnational contacts
Transnational cooperation Tana–Utsjok
Utsjok School in Utsjok municipality on the Finnish side and Sirma School in Tana
municipality on the Norwegian side collaborate on education in Sami language and culture.
Some of the tuition is provided jointly. The same teaching materials are used on both sides of
the border. The project also provides guidance to teachers. Utsjok and Tana municipality also
cooperate on providing Sami education in kindergartens. The project arranges, for example,
courses for kindergarten and school personnel in the municipalities and develops teaching
material in Sami languages and natural sciences.

47

Appendix 1
Overview of Arts Council Norway’s grants for Sami cultural projects provided from the
Norwegian Cultural Fund’s allocation for project-based cultural heritage work
Year

Recipient

Title

2012

Varanger Sami Museum/
Varjjat Sami Musea

2012

Center for Northern Peoples
AS7
Stabbursnes Nature House
and Museum

Documentation project
Traditional sheep products in
Unjárga/Nesseby
Construction of traditional Sami
dwellings (bealljegoahti)
Documentation and a video
installation based on Sea Sami and
Reindeer Sami activities
Lihkastagat ja Lihkáhusat
Movements and emotions–
documentation of Sami movements
Project on Sami place names in
Alta and neighbouring coastal
municipalities
Data collection and dissemination
project: Seven (cookie) recipes –
kitchen stories

2012

2013

Elle Sofe Henriksen

2013

Álttá Sámi Giellaguovddáš
AS8

2013

Center for Northern Peoples
AS

Total grant
NOK
100 000

70 000
120 000

100 000

140 000

140 000

2

The company is located in Manndalen in Kåfjord municipality, Nord-Troms. Its primary activities are the production and dissemination of
culture, a cafeteria and a museum, all based on the culture of the Sea Sami and Northern Peoples. The center also houses the Riddu Riđđu
Festival, the Contemporary Museum for Northern Peoples,Ája Gáfedat, the Sami Language Centre, Sami library services for Troms, the
public library, Nord-Troms Museum, NRK Sápmi, the Troms office of the Sámediggi, Sáve design, the K-sekretariatet IKS and a youth club.
The center is part of the Sami cultural house structure and covers the Nord-Troms area in particular. The center is funded in part by operating
grants from Sámediggi and Troms county.
8
Álttá Sámi Giellaguovddáš AS was founded in October 2006. The company is established in Alta municipality, and rents premises in Álttá
Siida. The purpose of the company is to promote, strengthen and preserve the Sami language and culture, primarily in Alta municipality.
Highlighting Sea Sami history in the area and local Sami traditions is a pivotal focus.

48

Appendix 2
Overview of Arts Council Norway’s grants for Kven cultural projects, provided from
the Norwegian Cultural Fund’s allocation for project-based cultural heritage work
Year

Applicant

Title

2011

Siivet AS

2011

Siivet AS

2012

Halti Kven Cultural Centre
IKS

2012

The Kven Association in
Alta/Alattion Kvaaniserua

2012

Municipality of Nesseby

2013

Siivet AS

2013

Siivet AS

Under en annen himmel (Under a
different sky) – Kven nature
documentary
Den store kjærligheten (The great
love) – Kven documentary
Video documentary - Paaskiviikko
– Kven Cultural Days in NordTroms
Samuli Paulaharju and the Kvens in
Alta: A visual portrayal in photos,
sketches and text – preliminary
project
Documentation, preservation,
teaching and presentation of
weaving (grindveving) in Nesseby
Hypätä ennen Wirkola (Jumping
before Wirkola) – a documentary
film about the unknown history of a
minority)
Sydämen arre (Treasures of the
heart) – online publication of Kven
films and documentation

Total grant
NOK
200 000

150 000
50 000

6 000

70 000

200 000

60 000

49

Appendix 3
Overview of Arts Council Norway’s grants for projects for Romani or Romanes,
provided from the Norwegian Cultural Fund’s allocation for project-based cultural
heritage work
Year

Recipient

Project

2011

Kai-Samuel Vigardt

2011

Lowri Rees

2012

Kai-Samuel Vigardt

Documentation project:
Romanimanus rakrar avri! – The
Romani peoples’ own stories
Documentary film on the Roma and
education (working title) –
supplementary grant
Romanimanus rakra avri –The
Romani people’s own stories –
continuation and dissemination in
2012

Total grant
NOK
100 000

100 000

100 000

50

Appendix 4
Overview of Arts Council Norway’s grants for projects relating to the Sami, Kven and
Romani or Romanes and museum and archive development projects, provided from the
Norwegian Cultural Fund’s allocation for general cultural purposes
Sami culture
Year

Recipient

Project

2012

Establishment of a joik song
archive
Contemporary sources

2012

Sámi Arkiiva / Sami
Archives
Sámi Arkiiva / Sami
Archives
RiddoDuottarMuseat

2012
2012

RiddoDuottarMuseat
Varanger Sami Museum

2013

Sør-Trøndelag county

2013

Sámi Arkiiva/Sami
Archives

2012

GOVVA MUITALA – Sami stories
and history
Primus for Sami material in Sami
Digital guide
Ceavccageadge/Mortensnes
Sørsamisk digitalt (South Sami
digitally)
Stemmer (Voices). Legacy from the
Nordic Sami Institute

Total grant
NOK
80 000
100 000
170 000
125 000
400 000
400 000
150 000

Kven culture
Year

Recipient

Project

2012

Varanger Museum IKS /
Vadsø Museum – Ruija
Kven Museum

Levende minner (Living memories)
– Kven portraits from Varanger

Total grant
NOK
150 000

Romani culture
Year

Recipient

Project

2011

Hedmark County Museum
AS, Glomdal Museum
branch

Historier ved bålet (Stories around
the fire)

Total grant
NOK
230 000

51

Roma culture
Year

Recipient

Project

2011
2012
2013

Oslo Museum
Oslo Museum
Oslo Museum

Roma in Oslo
Roma in Oslo
Roma in Oslo (multi-year)

Total grant
NOK
600 000
800 000
3 000 000

52

Appendix 5
Overview of Arts Council Norway ‘s grants for performing arts projects related to Sami culture,
provided from the Norwegian Cultural Fund’s allocation
Year

Recipient

Project

2011

Elle Sofe Henriksen, Finnmark

2011
2012

Åarjelhsaemien Teatere
Sydsamisk Teater, Nordland
Elle Sofe Henriksen, Finnmark

Beatnaga ii galgga gulgii geahččat
(Don’t judge a book by its cover) Merlin Theatre – Budapest, Hungary April 2011
Gaaje – Free performance art - theatre

2012

Johanne Eltoft, Troms

2012

Barents Dance Festival,
Finnmark

2012

Simone Grøtte Pedersen,
Troms

2013

Åarjelhsaemien teatere
Sydsamisk Teater, Nordland

2013

Márkomeannu, Nordland

2013

Elle Sofe Henriksen, Finnmark

2013

Kastellet Kultursenter AS,
Aust-Agder

2013

Elle Sofe Henriksen, Finnmark

2013

Yngve Sundvor, Akershus

2013

Statsteateret, Akershus

Jorggáhallan – Free performance art dance
Reindeer dance – Boazodánsa – Other
performing arts events /
Dissemination/guest performances
Elle Sofe Henriksen and Liu Qi:
Connection & Refreshment – Shortterm assignment - choreographer
Mannen som stoppet Hurtigruta (The
man who stopped the coastal steamer)
– Free performance art – dance
Elsa Laula - kvinne som sprengte
grenser (Elsa Laula – a trail-blazing
woman) - Riddu Riđđu Festival and
South Sami Cultural Festival 2012
Kristin Mellem et al. – Kaffekopp og
salmebok (Coffee cup and psalm book)
– Guest performance
Jorggahallan - Umeå Sami
Association – Umeå – Guest
performance
Beatnaga ii galgga gulgii geahččat
(Don’t judge a book by its cover)
Fjæreheia, Grimstad – Guest
performance
Lihkastagat ja Lihkáhusat –
Movements and emotions –
documentation of Sami movements
1814 Norga - en western fra vidda - (A
mountain plateau western)
Performance text development
1814 Norga – Free performance art theatre

Total grant
NOK
90 000

300 000
330 000
210 000

50 000

450 000

90 000

35 000

100 000

60 000

300 000

75 000

800 000

53

Appendix 6
Overview of grants for language projects, provided from the Ministry of Local
Government and Modernisation’s grant budget9
Grants for Kven projects
Year

Recipient

Project

2011

Halti Kven Cultural Centre

2011

The Kven Institute

2011
2011

The Kven Institute
ĆálliidLágádus

2011
2012

Storfjord Language Centre
Halti Kven Cultural Centre

2012

The Kven Institute

2012

Siivet AS

2012
2013

Storfjord Language Centre
Halti Kven Cultural Centre

2013
2013
2013

Iđut AS
The Norwegian Kven
Association/Kven youth network
Siivet AS

Documentation and dissemination
of Kven culture in Nord-Troms
Youth choir project: Uet laulus Ođđa lávlagat – New songs
Common Kven grammar
Comic strip: Kapteinens jul
published in Kven
Operating costs
Kven language projects in NordTroms
Youth choir project: workshop and
concert
Kven documentary/video
documentation
Operating costs
Kven language projects in NordTroms
Publication of a Kven novel
Language camp

2013
2013
2013
2013
2013
2013
2014

Ruijan Kaiku newspaper
The Norwegian Kven Association
Siivet AS
The Kven Institute
The Kven Institute
Storfjord Language Centre
Halti Kven Cultural Centre

2014

Iđut AS

2014

Stiftelsen Laboratoriet

2014

The Kven Institute

2014
2014
2014

Siivet AS
Storfjord Language Centre
The Norwegian Kven Association

Documentary film “Under a
different sky”
Establishment of virtual editing
Language courses for children
Development of manuscripts
Kven sound course
Conference
Operating costs
Kven language projects in NordTroms
Publication of a Kven novel and
audiobook
Publication of a book on the Kven
people
Language and language technology
project
Kven documentary
Operating costs
Kven theatre project

Total grant
NOK
250 000
50 000
100 000
50 000
600 000
300 000
100 000
50 000
600 000
500 000
150 000
70 000
80 000
130 000
70 000
30 000
150 000
61 000
620 000
505 000
210 000
50 000
500 000
100 000
620 000
100 000

9

Up until the end of 2013, grants were provided from the Ministry of Government Administration, Reform and
Church Affairs’ grant budget.

54

Support for other language projects
Year

Recipient

Project

2013

La Lumake sjuvla

ABC book in Romanes

Total grant
NOK
100 000

Support for Sami language projects
Year

Recipient

Project

2012

County governor of Nordland

2012

Nord-Trøndelag county

2012

Municipality of Engerdal

2012

Municipality of Tana

2012

Árran Lule Sami Centre

2012

The Arctic University of Norway

2012
2012
2013

The Arctic University of Norway
Aajege – Sami Language and
Competence Centre
Riddu Riđđu Festivála

2013
2013
2013

East Sami Museum
The Arctic University of Norway
County governor of Nordland

2014

County governor of Nordland

2014
2014

East Sami Museum
The Arctic University of Norway

South and Lule Sami language
projects in the Action Plan for Sami
Languages
Part-financing of a three-year
(2010-2012) project manager
position for a project to strengthen
South Sami language and culture
South Sami school programmes
2012 (last year of pupils in the
municipality)
OVTTAS! Sami language, school
and kindergarten development in the
Tana valley – last part of a four-year
project
Sami place names in a Pite Sami
area – last part of a three-year
project
Project to develop a keyboard for
indigenous languages in Russia
Sami administrative dictionary
Development of South Sami
language application
Sami language project to focus
attention on all the Sami languages
Skolt Sami language across borders
Sami administrative dictionary
South and Lule Sami language
projects in the Action Plan for Sami
languages
South and Lule Sami language
projects in the Action Plan for Sami
languages
Skolt Sami language across borders
Sami administrative dictionary

Total grant
NOK
2 400 000

300 000

300 000

200 000

300 000

635 000
250 000
120 000
330 000
700 000
250 000
2 450 000

2 550 000

700 000
472 000

55

Appendix 7
A list of the national minority and Sami organisations that have been informed about
the process and were invited to the oral public hearing on the draft report
Det mosaiske Trossamfund, Postboks 2722 St. Hanshaugen, 0131 Oslo
Det mosaiske Trossamfund, Postboks 3563 Hospitalløkkan, 7419 Trondheim
Club Romano, Platousgate 6, 0190 Oslo
International Romani Unions representative in Norway, c/o Raya Bielenberg,
Kjelsåsveien 28F, 0488 Oslo
Den Norske Romforening, c/o Andreas Muller, Nordalsv. 19A, 0580 Oslo
Romani Kultura, c/o Jan Jansen, Innspurten 4b, 0663 Oslo
Sjuvliano Kerr, Martin Linges vei 10. 0692 Oslo
Romanifolkets Riksforbund, Postboks 701, 1509 Moss
Taternes Landsforening, Glommengata 29, 2211 Kongsvinger
Skogfinske interesser i Norge, c/o Terje Audun Bredvold, 2283 Åsnes Finnskog
Landsorganisasjonen for romanifolket, c/o Inger Kvernodd
Rindes vei 16 3950 Brevik
Foreningen Romanifolkets Kystkultur, Postboks189, 4330 Ålgård
Norske Kveners Forbund/Ruijan Kveeniliitto, Hansjordnesgt 9, 9009 Tromsø
Kvenlandsforbundet, c/o Bjørnar Seppola, 9143 Skibotn
Norsk-Finsk Forbund, c/o Nils Petter Pedersen, Nyborgveien 53, 9800 Vadsø
Samenes folkeforbund, samene@samene.no
Norske samers riksforbund, nsr@nsr.no
Sámi NissonForum, Postboks 110, 9730 Karasjok
Sárahkka c/o Kirsti S. Suongir, 9845 Tana
Foreningen for Øst-samene i Neiden, 9930 Neiden

56

