Strasbourg, 5 January 2012

MIN-LANG/PR (2012) 1

EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES

Fifth periodical report
presented to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe
in accordance with Article 15 of the Charter

NORWAY

1

THE EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR
REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES
FIFTH PERIODICAL REPORT

NORWAY

The Ministry of Government Administration, Reform and Church
Affairs
December 2011

2

Contents
Part I ........................................................................................................................................... 4
Foreword ................................................................................................................................ 4
Users of regional or minority languages ................................................................................ 5
Policy, legislation and practice – changes.............................................................................. 6
The Committee of Ministers' recommendations - Measures for following up the
recommendations ................................................................................................................. 11
Part II........................................................................................................................................ 15
The Charter Part II – Overview of measures implemented to apply article 7 to the state's
recognised regional or minority languages .......................................................................... 15
Article 7 – Information on each language and measures to implement the Committee of
Experts' recommendations................................................................................................ 16
Part III ...................................................................................................................................... 44
The Charter Part III - Implementation of the undertakings and initiatives to follow up the
Committee of Experts' recommendations ............................................................................ 44
Article 8 - Education ........................................................................................................ 45
Article 9 - Legal authorities ............................................................................................. 48
Article 10 - Administrative authorities and public services ............................................. 50
Article 11 - Media ............................................................................................................ 55
Article 12 - Cultural activities and cultural facilities ....................................................... 57
Article 13 - Economic and social life............................................................................... 58
Article 14 - Transnational contacts .................................................................................. 58
APPENDICES...................................................................................................................... 59

3

Part I
Foreword
The Council of Europe's Committee of Ministers adopted the European Charter for Regional
or Minority Languages (the Charter) in 1992. Norway ratified the Charter in 1993 and it
entered into force in 1998. In accordance with the Charter's article 15, the states must report
every three years. This is Norway's fifth periodical report on the implementation of the
Charter in Norway.
Sami (North Sami, Lule Sami and South Sami), Kven, Romanes and Romani are recognised
as regional or minority languages in Norway, and are thus ensured protection under the
Charter. To facilitate the involvement of the affected groups in the preparation of Norway's
fifth periodical report, the draft report has been drawn up in Norwegian.
The national minority organisations and Sámediggi (The Sami Parliament) were briefed on
the reporting early on in the process. The organisations and Sámediggi were also informed of
their opportunity to submit 'shadow reports' to the Council of Europe. At the same time the
Ministry of Government Administration, Reform and Church Affairs also offered financial
and practical assistance with translating shadow reports to English.
Norway's fifth report on the Charter has been widely circulated to relevant public bodies,
affected organisations, organs and institutions, Sámediggi and civil society. (A list of the
consultative bodies is provided in Appendix 5.)
Involving affected groups in work on matters that concern them is a fundamental principle of
the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities. Therefore, involving
organisations with a basis in a national minority has formed a natural part of the process of
preparing the report on the Charter. The relevant organisations have been given an
opportunity to make oral contributions, as well as written ones. (A list of the national minority
organisations that have been briefed on the process and invited to the oral public hearing is
provided in Appendix 5)
The Ministry received a number of contributions from various organisations and bodies in
connection with the public hearing. Some of the contributions have been included in the
report. The consultative bodies have also raised a number of issues that do not directly affect
the implementation of the Charter. The Ministry will deal with these contributions in
connection with other matters.
Some organisational changes have been implemented in the policy area since Norway last
reported in 2008. Administrative responsibility for the Charter was transferred from the
Ministry of Culture and Church Affairs to the Ministry of Labour and Social Inclusion in June
2009.
Responsibility for coordinating Government's policy towards the Sami and national minorities
was thereafter, on 1 January 2010, transferred from the Ministry of Labour and Social
Inclusion to the Ministry of Government Administration, Reform and Church Affairs. The
4

Ministry of Government Administration, Reform and Church Affairs thus bears primary
responsibility for implementing the Charter and has prepared the fifth periodical report in
collaboration with other involved ministries.
None of the organisational changes entail any change in direction for the policy area or for the
implementation of the Charter in Norway.
Norway's fifth periodical report on the Charter is available in Norwegian and English.
Norway's 2008 periodical report, the evaluation report from the Council of Europe's
Committee of Experts and recommendations from the Council of Europe's Committee of
Ministers have been translated into Norwegian. Documents associated with Norway's reports
in 2005 and 2008 are available in Norwegian and English. All documents relating to Norway's
periodical reports on the Charter are available from the Ministry of Government
Administration, Reform and Church Affair's website:
http://www.regjeringen.no/nb/dep/fad/tema/nasjonale_minoriteter/midtspalte/minoritetssprak
pakta.html?id=86936
This report has attempted to avoid repeating information provided in previous reports.
For further information on the work on following up and reporting on the Charter, please
contact:
The Ministry of Government Administration, Reform and Church Affairs
The Department of Sami and Minority Affairs
Postboks 8004 Dep
N-0030 OSLO
Tel.: (+47) 22 24 71 75
Email: postmottak@fad.dep.no

Users of regional or minority languages
The Council of Europe requests updated information on the number of users of regional or
minority languages, the geographic distribution of the users and the general demographic
situation.
No registers are kept currently in Norway based on ethnicity (with the exception of
Sámediggi's electoral roll, cf. below). Many people within the national minorities themselves
are, for historical reasons, extremely sceptical about registration based on ethnicity. This
attitude was emphasised in the public hearing with the organisations held in connection with
reporting on the Charter.
The authorities are talking to the national minority organisations to identify appropriate and
accurate methods of obtaining more knowledge about the living conditions of the groups, so
that this information may be used as a basis for policy development. In connection with the
development of the plan for research on national minorities, there has been talk of finding a
way of obtaining better basic data when it comes to Kvens/Norwegian Finns1, although no
1

In recent years there has been debate about the use of the term Kvens, especially in Eastern Finnmark. One of
the organisations associated with the minority has expressed a desire that the Ministry also refer to the group as

5

solution concerning how this work could be structured has been found so far. The Kvenland
Federation (Kvenlandsforbundet) pointed out during the report's public hearing that they
wanted the language situation for Finnish and Kven surveyed at an individual level, but they
do not want registration based on ethnicity. The authorities' assessment is that such a survey
would be extremely challenging in terms of methodology.
Sámediggi's electoral roll is an exception from the general rule that registers are not kept
based on ethnicity. The electoral roll is maintained in connection with the National Population
Register. Registration in Sámediggi's electoral roll is voluntary. Registration in the electoral
roll is a condition for being eligible to vote in elections for Sámediggi and for being eligible
for election to Sámediggi.
Sámediggi carries out project-financed work on Sami statistics. Statistics Norway (SSB) has
been granted permission to study whether Sámediggi's electoral roll, in combination with
other data sources, may be used as a basis for establishing Sami statistics based on
individuals. Other data sources are the 1970 census and the reindeer husbandry census.
Following the study, it will be decided whether SSB will be permitted to use this source on a
permanent basis.
A larger survey of use of Sami languages will also be carried out; see Part II, article 7 under
answers to question 7.

Policy, legislation and practice – changes
In connection with Norway's fifth report, the Council of Europe requests that Norwegian
authorities explain changes in general policy, legislation or practice in relation to regional or
minority languages. The Council of Europe requests that the Norwegian authorities identify
developments expected in the next monitoring period, such as changes in policy or budget,
policy plans or other factors that may have direct or indirect effects on the situation for
regional or minority languages in Norway.
Report no. 28 (2007-2008) to the Storting – Sami policy
In the spring of 2008, the Government presented Report no. 28 (2007-2008) to the Storting –
Sami policy. The report is the most important Sami policy document from this Government.
The Report to the Storting provides a broad presentation of the most important challenges for
the Government's policies for Sami society. The Government focuses on two elements in
particular: Sami languages and 'everyday policy'.

'Norwegian Finns'. The Ministry of Government Administration, Reform and Church Affairs has had a dialogue
with relevant organisations and institutions about which term(s) the Ministry should use in relation to this
minority group in official documents. The Ministry recognises there is disagreement among the
Kvens/Norwegian Finns' organisations about which term it would be most appropriate to use, and that some of
the organisations have also expressed scepticism about the use of a term involving a slash, i.e. 'Kvens/Norwegian
Finns'. However, in order to demonstrate that reference is being made to a national minority, the Ministry still
considers it most appropriate to use the term 'Kvens/Norwegian Finns' in official documents. However, the
Ministry emphasises that based on the principle of self-identification individuals are free to formulate and
express their identity and refer to their ethnicity in various ways. The Ministry's choice of term for the group will
not entail any obligation for free institutions (e.g. within academia, museums and language centres).

6

'Everyday policy' concerns the practical integration of Sami considerations in policy
formulation and measures in all areas of society and at all administrative levels. 'Everyday
policy' also concerns good interaction between the Sami user and public administration and
service providers.
The use of the Sami language in public and in the practical communication of information and
services is decisive in order to provide equal, good services to Sami users.
The public sector is therefore encouraged to acquire information about Sami issues within
their own activities. It is further emphasised that communication and information in Sami to
Sami users is key to providing adequate services. One prerequisite for good quality services is
staff with competence in Sami language and culture.
Action Plan for Sami Languages
In Report no. 28 (2007-2008) to the Storting it was ascertained that the situation for Sami
languages is severe. The Government therefore proposed an Action Plan for Sami Languages
in 2009. The Action Plan has been drawn up in dialogue with Sámediggi. One important goal
is to increase the number of users of Sami languages. The Action Plan particularly focuses on
the Lule Sami and South Sami languages. In the Action Plan period, the Government will
facilitate stronger efforts for Sami languages in different areas of society; particularly in
training, education, and public service and care provision, as well as the use and visibility of
Sami languages in public. One prerequisite for a secure future for Sami languages is
promotion of languages' status and making them visible.
The Action Plan consists of three components:
Learn – which focuses on strengthening tuition in and about the North, Lule and South Sami
languages in kindergarten, strengthening arenas for the use of Sami and improving the
opportunities for parents to learn Sami. Recruitment to education in Sami languages is an
important focus area.
Use – which focuses on increasing public service provision in Sami, including strengthening
competence in Sami language and culture in public agencies and services, developing
language technology and increasing information on Sami languages for Sami users.
See – which focuses on raising the visibility of Sami languages in public. Use of Sami
languages in media, film, literature and online are key here. As are road signs in Sami.
The Action Plan has a duration of five years. Annual reports will be prepared on the
achievement of the Action Plan's objectives and the implementation of its measures. The first
report, Action Plan for Sami Languages – status 2010 and further efforts 2011, was presented
in February 2011.
Arenas for using Sami languages
The Action Plan for Sami Languages particularly focuses on increasing the use of Sami
languages in areas where Sami languages have a weak position. An important instrument in
this respect is to strengthen arenas for the use of Sami languages. The County Governor of
Nordland has been tasked with initiating projects that can strengthen the Lule Sami and South
Sami language communities. From 2011, this has been extended to comprise the Marka Sami

7

region in the North Sami language region. Important measures in connection with this are
cross-border language camps in cooperation with Swedish educational authorities.
Action Plan to improve living conditions for the Roma in Oslo
An action plan to improve the living conditions for the Roma people in Oslo was presented by
the Government in June 2009. The target group is Roma who are registered in the National
Population Register in Norway, and who define themselves as Roma, with Norwegian or
foreign citizenship. Most Roma registered in the Nation Population Register reside in Oslo.
The plan's measures shall contribute to making established schemes more available to the
Roma and to combat discrimination against the Roma. The plan was drawn up in
collaboration with Roma organisations. The Ministry of Government Administration, Reform
and Church Affairs is responsible for following it up and cooperates with the Roma on this
through the newly established Samråd mellom rom og norske myndigheter (Forum for
dialogue between the Roma and Norwegian authorities. Samråd held its first meeting on 8
April 2010.
There are no specific language measures in the action plan, but a scheme for primary and
lower secondary schools has been established. See discussion under the fifth recommendation
of the Committee of Ministers, Part I.
Report no. 35 (2007-2008) to the Storting – “Mål og meining” – A comprehensive
Norwegian language policy
In 2008, the Government presented a Report to the Storting on language in Norway, Report
no. 35 (2007-2008) to the Storting –“Mål og meining” – A comprehensive Norwegian
language policy. The main subject of the report is the Norwegian language and the position of
Norwegian as an adequate and society-supporting language in Norway. The report also
discusses issues concerning the languages of indigenous people and various minority
languages, both Sami languages, the languages of national minorities, sign language and other
minority languages in Norway. The report includes a review of the status of the languages, the
Council Of Europe's comments concerning Norway's fulfilment of the Charter, and a
discussion on measures for strengthening and protecting the various languages.
In connection with the work on the language report, various representatives of the national
minorities in Norway were invited to meet with the Ministry in 2006 and discuss relevant
issues, and the Ministry received a number of contributions for the report.
The language report stipulates that all specialist ministries have a responsibility to take
language policy into consideration when drawing up and implementing their own sector
policy. At the same time the Ministry of Culture bears general responsibility for language
policy. Among other things, this entails that the Ministry of Culture must play a coordination
and driving force role for language policy in relation to the other ministries.
The Language Council of Norway is the Government's consultative body for language issues
and will in the years ahead play an initiating and coordinating role in the work on following
up the new, strategic language policy that the language report has laid down the framework
for. The report states that the Language Council of Norway should be given an extended and
thus more comprehensive area of work and responsibility in terms of language policy. This
has been pursued through a strengthening of the Language Council of Norway's operating
budget for the current year. The Ministry is working to specify the responsibilities and duties

8

Language Council of Norway should have in relation to languages other than Norwegian,
including the languages of national minorities, see Part II, Article 7 Kven, questions 50-51.
With respect to Sami languages, the language report specifies that section 3-12 of the Sami
Act states that Sámediggi must work to protect and further develop Sami languages in
Norway.

2008 A Year of Cultural Diversity
The Government decided that 2008 would be used to mark cultural diversity, cf. Report no.
17 (2005-2006) to the Storting. The Cultural Diversity Year was not specifically directed at
language work, but we nevertheless believe that it is appropriate to mention this initiative.
The objective of the Cultural Diversity Year was that this year “would indicate the start of a
process where the stimulation of cultural diversity becomes a characteristic of Norwegian
cultural policy”. The Report to the Storting on the Cultural Diversity Year specifically
mentions work for indigenous peoples and national minorities to strengthen cultural diversity
in Norway, and the secretariat for the Cultural Diversity Year had contact and meetings with
representatives of Sámediggi and of all national minorities. The advisory reference group that
was established for the year included representatives with Sami and Romani people/Tater
backgrounds. The information brochure produced by the secretariat was available in North
Sami .
The Cultural Diversity Year was organised with county contacts who reported to the
secretariat at the Ministry of Culture on each county's activities during the year. There was a
focus, especially in the three northernmost counties, that both Sami and Kven are part of the
natural cultural diversity that has always characterised this region, but activities that included
provision of, about and for Sami, Kvens/Norwegian Finns and the Romani people/Taters were
also reported in the counties Nord-Trøndelag, Sør-Trøndelag, Oppland and Rogaland.
Report no. (2008-2009) to the Storting – Museums of the future. Administration,
research, communication, renewal
In 2009, the Government presented a Report to the Storting on the museum sector, Report no.
(2008-2009) to the Storting – Museums of the future. Administration, research,
communication, renewal (the Museum Report). The report describes the background and
overarching goals for museum policy in Norway, provides a status report for the museum
sector, and presents challenges, assessments and measures for the museums' work and role in
society in the future. The report points out that "museums are assigned a central role in the
implementation and realisation of cultural and minority political rights and obligations arising
out of the Charter and the Framework Convention [for the Protection of National Minorities],"
and both Sami museums and museums with links to national minorities were presented in the
report, see chapters 6 and 7. There is a dedicated museum network for minorities and cultural
diversity. Oslo Museum is the museum responsible for the network.
Action plan for cultural cooperation in the High North
“Region of opportunity – an action plan for cultural cooperation in the High North” was
presented by the Ministry of Culture and Church Affairs in September 2009. The plan
includes several measures linked to different parts of Sami culture; music (Riddu Riððu
Festivála), dramatic art (Beaivváš Sami Teáhter), archives (Sami archive), museum (Varanger
Museum), culture building for Sami cultural institutions, the grant to Sámediggi for Sami

9

cultural activities, film (The International Sami Film Centre and the Sami Film Festival in
Kautokeino).
In line with the Norwegian-Russian action plan for cultural cooperation in the High North,
three-year programmes will be established for the cooperation. For the first programme period
from 2010 – 2012, the art and culture of indigenous peoples is one of five focus areas that
have been emphasised.
The translation service for the ministries
The Government's goal is that as many press releases and new items as possible on the
Government's website, regjeringen.no, will be translated into the three Sami languages. To
make it easier for the ministries to fulfil this goal, a dedicated translation service was
established in 2009 in the Government administration services. The service has been in
operation since May 2010. As a result of this service, the number of translated press releases
and news items increased from approx. 70 in 2009 to approx. 190 in 2010. The number of
translations has decreased in 2011, but the Ministry of Government Administration, Reform
and Church Affairs has initiated various measures to raise the number of translations to a
significantly higher level.
In 2011, framework agreements have been drawn up with four North Sami translators, one
South Sami translator and one Lule Sami translator. This will make the service even easier to
use for the ministries. The Ministry of Government Administration, Reform and Church
Affairs has informed the other ministries of the service and presented specific proposals for
translation routines. A significant increase in the number of translations is planned.
Statistics
There have been some changes with respect to Statistics Norway's (SSB) production of
statistics in this area. SSB publishes Sami Statistics every second year. This includes tables of
Sami kindergartens and the Sami language in primary and lower secondary school. The
language part of the publication has been extended with a table in the latest edition showing
the number of pupils with Sami as their first and second language in primary and lower
secondary school. This was published in English for the first time in 2010 (in addition to
Norwegian and Sami). Sami Statistics was first published in 2006. It was published on the
Sami people’s day, 6 February. Thereafter, the publication has been published on the same
date in 2008 and 2010. The next edition will be published on 6 February 2012.
It should also be mentioned that the Analysis Group for Sami Statistics publishes an annual
report entitled “Samiske tall forteller” [Sami figures relate]. SSB is represented in the analysis
group, which is a governmental committee appointed by the Ministry of Labour and Social
Inclusion (now the Ministry of Government Administration, Reform and Church Affairs) and
Sámediggi. “Samiske tall forteller” was first published in the autumn of 2008. Four reports
have been published so far (Samiske tall forteller 1-2-3-4). The fourth edition was published
in the autumn of 2011. These publications include a chapter with commented on statistics on
Sami languages in kindergarten and school. These are detailed statistics that show the
development in the number of Sami language kindergartens, the number of children with
access to Sami language kindergartens (North, South and Lule Sami), the number of primary
and lower secondary school pupils with Sami on their curriculum (North, South and Lule
Sami), and detailed statistics of the Sami language in upper secondary school, both as a first
and as a second language.

10

There were no changes with respect to other minority languages.

The Committee of Ministers' recommendations - Measures for following up
the recommendations
The Council of Europe's Committee of Ministers adopted, by a resolution on 10 March 2010,
recommendations for Norwegian authorities based on the Committee of Experts' evaluation of
Norway's implementation of the Charter.
In this sub-chapter we will provide an overview of legal and practical measures the authorities
have implemented in order to follow up the recommendations. In those points where the same
subject is discussed in both the recommendations from the Committee of Ministers and the
recommendations from the Committee of Experts, the subjects are initially discussed
exclusively in the comments on the recommendations from the Committee of Ministers
below, with a reference to the relevant recommendation from the Committee of Experts.
Measures for following up the recommendations from the Committee of Ministers:
1.
Ensure that social services and health care institutions within the administrative
district for Sami language provide services in North Sami
Health and care services
The Norwegian Directorate of Health is currently transforming the teaching nursing home in
Karasjok into a national teaching nursing home for the Sami population, with an emphasis on
reaching the health and care services and the population in the administrative district for Sami
language. The teaching nursing home will also include home care services.
In addition the Sami University College held courses for health staff in the autumn of 2010
with an emphasis on teaching Sami language and culture. Finnmark Hospital Trust (Helse
Finnmark) also has a goal that all employees must complete a course in Sami language and
culture. We have no overview of which activities individual municipalities have initiated.
In parallel, a special Sami scheme is being implemented under the Directorate of Health's
dementia programme. The Directorate has surveyed how dementia is diagnosed and treated in
the municipalities in the administrative district for Sami language. It would be relevant to
follow this up with various competence and information measures, including the adaptation of
existing material with an additional Sami module (language and culture).
Mental health
National Sami Competence Centre — mental health care (SANKS) has been developed into a
centre of expertise with both significant scientific and popular science production and
comprehensive advisory activities and patient-oriented work. SANKS’ vision is to develop a
good mental health care service for the Sami population in Norway.
In addition to the headquarters in Finnmark, SANKS has established regional offices in
Tysfjord, Snåsa and Oslo. The regional offices provide a base for touring activities and a
presence in many more places where Sami live than the headquarters are able to reach.
2.
Clarify the status for Lule Sami and South Sami in relation to Part III of the
Charter
11

The Ministry of Government Administration, Reform and Church Affairs has started a review
of the Sami Act's language rules as one of the measures in the Action Plan for Sami
Languages (see Part I, chapter on policy, legislation and practice - changes). In connection
with this, an assessment of the status of Lule Sami and South Sami in relation to the Charter's
Part III will be carried out. Norwegian authorities will get back to the Council of Europe with
information on this as soon as the issue has reached a conclusion.
3.
Continue efforts to ensure teaching in/of Lule Sami and South Sami , including the
development of educational material
Working group on Sami teaching materials
In 2009, a working group was established with representatives from Sámediggi, the Ministry
of Education and Research and the Norwegian Directorate for Education and Training. In
June 2010, the group presented a report with proposals for measures for more efficient
development and production of Sami teaching materials, including separate measures for
South Sami and Lule Sami teaching aids. Sámediggi is responsible for following up the
report. The Ministry of Education and Research will keep abreast of the follow-up through
regular collaborative meetings with Sámediggi, among other things.
The County Governor of Nordland also operates a network for South Sami teachers, which
focuses on the needs of these teachers and the challenges they face. The County Governor has
also developed a database for educational material in South Sami. This enable all South Sami
teachers to share their work, and the database is particularly useful to new teachers as
compensation for inadequate teaching materials.
The County Governor of Nordland has also granted funds for the completion of Samasta,
which is a 'computer based' course in Lule Sami.
Language training for teachers
The County Governor of Nordland has focused on improving language training for South and
Lule Sami teachers. The County Governor has invited highly qualified teachers from Scotland
and Israel to teach South Sami teachers efficient language training techniques. An educational
programme for South and Lule Sami, based on the so-called Ulpan method is under
development. (See discussion of the Ulpan method under part II, Sami Languages.)
Distance education
Many Sami move from small places to larger villages and towns. The Ministry of Education
and Research therefore believes that distance education using multimedia technology is
necessary to fulfil the right of Sami pupils to be educated in Sami in school. The County
Governor of Nordland has organised courses on distance education and is developing a
scheme to improve teachers' competence in this subject.
The Ministry of Education and Research has since 2009 provided funds for a pilot project in
Lule Sami distance education at Drag School under the auspices of the Directorate for
Education and Training/the County Governor of Nordland. Following guidelines in the
Directorate for Education and Training's plan for Sami distance education, the funds are to be
used to develop Drag School into a resource centre for Lule Sami distance education. The
target group is primary and lower secondary school pupils all over the country who are
entitled to education in Lule Sami. The resource centre currently utilises its entire available
capacity and requires more teachers.

12

The transition from pilot project to ordinary operations presents some challenges, particularly
in connection with teaching resources and operation in 2012. The Directorate for Education
and Training will, in cooperation with the county governors of Nordland and Finnmark,
continue work on the plan for Sami distance education to ensure the service maintains a high
level of quality and also satisfies the demand.

4.
Continue efforts to protect and promote Kven, particularly within education and
broadcasting media
Kven in education
Pupils with Kven-Finnish backgrounds in primary and lower secondary schools in Troms and
Finnmark are entitled to learn Finnish as a second language when at least three pupils request
this. Tuition can be provided in Kven.
Statistics for primary and lower secondary school education in/about the languages of national
minorities is apparent from The School Information System (Grunnskolens
informasjonssystem (GSI). With respect to education in Finnish/Kven, tuition is provided in
Troms and Finnmark. GSI provides an overview of tuition in Finnish as a second language, by
year and by girls and boys.
In the 2010/2011 school year, 754 pupils in primary and lower secondary schools were given
lessons in Finnish as a second language. It is not recorded whether the lessons are in Finnish
as a second language or Kven. Lessons in Kven may be given if the children/parents request
this. At the upper secondary level there are 24 pupils in Finnmark and two pupils in Troms
who receive lessons in Finnish.
As a part of the Knowledge Promotion Reform, a new curriculum has been developed for
Finnish as a second language, which includes lessons from the first year of primary school up
to and including the third year of upper secondary school.
The curriculum in Finnish as a second language includes both the Kven and Finnish
languages, as well as Kven and Finnish culture. When developing the current curriculum it
was important to emphasise that the students have language tuition options, contrary to the
previous curriculum. In the text of the curriculum it is stated that students may receive tuition
in Finnish or Kven. In the culture part, which also includes social studies and literature, the
pupils learn about both Kven and Finnish culture.
Planning, organising, facilitating and implementing the tuition in accordance with the
curriculum's competence targets is a local responsibility. Guidelines have therefore been
prepared for the Finnish as a second language curriculum. Work has been coordinated by the
County Governor of Finnmark in cooperation with the County Governor of Troms. Both the
group that prepared the new curriculum and the group that developed the guidelines,
comprised teachers with both Finnish and Kven backgrounds in order to ensure that the Kven
perspective was maintained. The reference group for the work consisted of experts from
different communities, including from the Kven Institute.
The curriculum is based on the European framework and has the same structure as other
language training. Grants are provided for training and for study authorisation for teachers.
There is also a goal to provide tuition in Finnish as a second language to pupils and
apprentices with Finnish/Kven backgrounds in upper secondary education. Grants are
13

provided to county authority and private schools who provide such tuition. Grants are also
provided for the development of teaching materials in Finnish/Kven, and a collaboration has
been established between several schools in the counties of Finnmark and Troms and the
county of Lappland in Finland on training in Finnish.
Kven in broadcasting
The Norwegian Media Authority monitors public service broadcasters' obligations. In the last
three public service broadcasting reports, the Media Authority has concluded that the
Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation's (NRK's) service for national minorities has not
achieved adequate levels, either in scope or subject. In the latest report, for 2009, the Media
Authority is critical of the fact that NRK, despite the Media Authority's repeated comments
on this area, still provides a marginal service for national minorities. (The Kven service
consists of Finsksendinga in Finnish and Kven every Wednesday on the P2 radio channel in
northern Norway.) Based on the comments from the Media Authority, the Minister of Culture,
via NRK's general assembly, demanded that this must be pursued.
Some measures to protect and promote Kven are also mentioned under Part II, Article 7,
Kven.
Other efforts for the Kven language
Conference on the revitalisation of the Kven language
In June 2010 the Ministry of Culture, the Ministry of Government Administration, Reform
and Church Affairs and the Ministry of Education and Research organised a conference in
Skibotn on the revitalisation of the Kven language. Among the participants were
representatives of the Kven organisations, relevant cultural, educational and research
communities, the Council of Europe's Committee of Experts, and state, regional and local
authorities at the administrative and political levels. The keynote speakers were Norwegian
and Swedish experts in Kven/Finnish/Meänkieli.
Kainun institutti - The Kven Institute
Kainun institutti - The Kven Institute receives operating funds from the Ministry of Culture to
work on the development, documentation and communication of knowledge on the Kven
language and culture. The funds are also intended to cover the costs of a language board for
Kven. The institute has organised work on language standardisation through a Kven language
council and a Kven language assembly. The Kven Institute's 2009 annual report states that the
current status for language standardisation is that the “spelling rules are finished, and that the
language assembly has adopted a set of central and controversial grammatical characteristics”.
The Kven Institute's 2010 annual report states that “ The language assembly has held four
meetings in 2010 and the language bodies have had one joint meeting. They have progressed
so far in their work that one now can start work on summarising a Kven grammar.”
The Kven Institute received the following operating grants from the Ministry of Culture
between 2008–2011:
2008
3.533 million NOK

2009
4.533 million NOK

2010
4.678 million NOK

2011
4.823 million NOK

14

5.
Take measures to develop language tuition in Romani and Romanes in cooperation
with the speakers
Romanes
Neither the Ministry of Education and Research nor the Ministry of Government
Administration, Reform and Church Affairs has received any explicit requests for language
training in Romanes organised by the authorities. At the public hearing it was pointed out that
members of the group had previously inquired about the possibility of implementing language
measures under their own auspices.
In cooperation with a Roma association, Romani Kultura, a scheme has been established for
primary and lower secondary schools who wish to use Romanes speaking first language
assistants. The initiative came from Roma mothers who who have fully or partially completed
upper secondary school in Sweden. In January 2011, a course for bilingual kindergarten
assistants was started at Oslo University College in which assistants with Roma backgrounds
will participate.
Norway has started a collaboration with Sweden on online resources for first language tuition.
As of 2011, the website www.morsmal.no is administered by the National Centre for
Multicultural Education. The Swedish website includes several variants of Romanes. These
have been tested for adult education in Sweden.
The Ministry of Education and Research has had a report drawn up on the relationship
between the Education Act and international conventions, particularly with Roma in mind.
The report is currently being considered by the Ministry.
The Norwegian Directorate for Education and Training is annually allotted funds for the
development of educational measures for national minorities. The Directorate is working on
creating a brochure to provide an overview of and an insight into the five national minorities
in Norway.
Romani
Neither the Ministry of Education and Research nor the Ministry of Government
Administration, Reform and Church Affairs has received any explicit requests for language
training in Romani organised by the authorities. However, funds have been granted for
independent language measures. The organisations for the Romani people/Taters have
received project funds for collecting words and developing a Romani dictionary. At the public
hearing it was stated that this was a necessary part of the preliminary work before it would be
possible to start language tuition.

Part II
The Charter Part II – Overview of measures implemented to apply article 7
to the state's recognised regional or minority languages
In this part of the report the Council of Europe requests information on measures the state has
implemented to apply article 7 to the state's recognised regional or minority languages.
(Regional or minority languages are defined in article 1 a.)

15

The Council of Europe further asks that it be informed on new measures implemented after
the previous report and that it be provided with a detailed account of legislative and practical
measures the state has implemented to follow up the proposals and the so-called box
recommendations that the Committee of Experts provided in the previous evaluation report(s).
In this part of the report we will, for each of the relevant languages, provide information on
measures the state has implemented and account for the follow up of the proposals and box
recommendations from the Committee of Experts. The numbering of the questions from the
Committee of Experts is identical to the numbering in the fourth evaluation report.

Article 7 – Information on each language and measures to implement the
Committee of Experts' recommendations
In the evaluation report the Committee of Experts asks for an update on the situation of
regional or minority languages.
The following languages are recognised as minority and regional languages in Norway: Sami
(North, South and Lule Sami ), Kven, Romani and Romanes.
In connection with the public hearing Norway's fifth report, the Norsk-finsk forbund
(Norwegian-Finnish Association)/Norjalais-suomalainen liitto forwarded a demand for
Finnish to be approved as a minority language in accordance with part II of the Charter like
Finnish and Meänkieli are in Sweden. The matter is being considered by the Ministry of
Government Administration, Reform and Church Affairs.
In relation to all regional or minority languages, the Committee of Experts has the
following question:
7. Have the Norwegian authorities initiated work to collect more reliable data
concerning the number of users of regional or minority languages and their geographic
distribution?

Surveying the usage of Sami languages
In the spring of 2011, the Ministry of Government Administration, Reform and Church
Affairs, the Ministry of Education and Research and Sámediggi took the initiative to carry out
a major language survey to assess the language situation at an individual level among the
Sami population. The report from the survey will be available in the spring of 2012. The
purpose of the survey was to gain an overview of the number of people who have a command
of each of the Sami languages orally and in writing, in which contexts they use the language
and to which degree Sami is used for interaction in kindergartens, schools, work, education,
leisure, local communities, and in voluntary or political work.
The results of the survey are intended to form the basis for language planning at all levels of
society, including at state, regional and municipal levels. The results will be used to design
and implement measures that lead to the preservation and development of Sami languages.
16

Other regional or minority languages
No surveys have been carried out for the other regional or minority languages. This is due in
part to the challenges associated with developing statistics based on ethnicity, see discussion
in Part I, sub-chapter Users of regional or minority languages.
See discussion in Part I, sub-chapter on Users of regional or minority languages.
In relation to Kven, the Committee of Experts has the following introductory question:
11. The authorities are asked to clarify the number of speakers of Kven and their
geographic distribution.

Kvenlandsforbundet want a survey carried out of the language situation for Finnish and Kven
at an individual level, but they do not want registration based on ethnicity.
The authorities' assessment is that such a survey would be extremely challenging in terms of
methodology.

In relation to Pite Sami, the Committee of Experts has the following question:
23. The authorities are asked to provide information on Pite Sami (Arjeplog Sami).

Duoddara Ráffe Pite Sami center is working to revitalize the Pite Sami language and culture.
In 2010, the centre was awarded funds from the Ministry of Government Administration,
Reform and Church Affairs to operate information and course activities on the Pite Sami
language and culture.
Sámediggi has delegated responsibility for Pite Sami museum activities to Árran - lulesami
center. The Ministry of Government Administration, Reform and Church Affairs has granted
Árran - lulesami center funds for a three-year project ending in 2012. The aim of the project
is to help preserve, promote and revitalise the use of Sami place names in the Pite Sami area.
Pite Sami is classified as an extinct language according to UNESCO's 'Red List'.
The Council of Europe also points out certain special questions that have arisen since
the evaluation of Norway's fourth report:
24. What measures have been taken to promote Kven in adult education (see also
question 101. below)?

No special measures have been taken to promote Kven in adult education beyond the courses
in Kven at the University of Tromsø and Finnmark University College.
The Kven Institute offers courses for adults locally.
17

.
24. Have stronger efforts been made in the work to standardise the language?

We refer to the discussion of the Kven Institute's annual reports for 2009 and 2010 as a
response to the fourth recommendation from the Committee of Ministers, discussed in Part I.
There is disagreement between the different organisations in the group as to whether work on
standardisation is the right direction, as a large proportion of the minorities use the Finnish
written language and thus already have a written language.

Question in the Committee of Experts' evaluation report on the status of the Lule and
South Sami languages
28. Please clarify the issue of the possible application of Part III of the Charter to Lule
and/or South Sami.

We refer to the discussion of the issue in connection with the Committee of Ministers' second
recommendation, Part II.

Sami languages
Action Plan for Sami Languages
The Action Plan for Sami Languages is the most relevant and comprehensive measure the
Norwegian authorities have implemented since the previous report on the Charter. We refer to
the discussion on the Action Plan for Sami Languages and the measures therein under Part I,
sub-chapter on Policy, legislation and practice – changes. Also see the discussion on Report
no. 28 (2007-2008) to the Storting – Sami Policy, in the same location.
Contributions to Sami languages, information, etc.
The Ministry of Government Administration, Reform and Church Affairs provides annual
grants for Sami languages. In 2011, the Ministry will distribute funds based on applications
and closer evaluation to specific earmarked projects. In 2011, approx. NOK 11 million was
appropriated for this purpose.
The purpose of the grant scheme is to strengthen Sami languages by facilitating the increased
use of Sami languages in public, to increase the number of Sami language speakers, to
increase the volume of public information provided to the Sami in Sami, and to increase the
amount of information on Sami issues provided to the Norwegian population.
The Ministry of Government Administration, Reform and Church Affairs will prioritise
measures related to the Action Plan for Sami Languages.

18

Sami education in kindergarten and school
The Directorate for Education and Training has been tasked by the Ministry of Education and
Research to develop guidelines for the national curricula for subjects, in order to support
teachers in their work. The aim is that the guidelines will help ensure the tuition is better
adapted to the educational needs of pupils.
The work also includes guidelines for the curriculum for the Knowledge Promotion Reform –
Sami, and guidelines have been developed for the curricula in Sami as a first language and
Sami as a second language. Experts from Sami communities have contributed to the work on
the Sami guidelines. Lohkkanguovddáš/Centre for Sami in Education at the Sami University
College has been a central partner. Sámediggi has also helped quality assure the guidelines for
the curricula in Sami languages. Sámediggi is responsible for the development and stipulation
of these plans, cf. the Education Act, chapter 6.
The guidelines provide advice and guidance on how tuition can be planned and carried out, as
well as how pupils can be evaluated at different levels. The guidelines provide specific
examples on how relevant content can be ensured in the competence targets at all levels and
of the progression between levels. The guidelines maintain the five basic skills: reading,
writing, oral expression, mathematics and mastering digital skills.
The guidelines are published online, in North Sami, South Sami, Lule Sami and Norwegian.
The Directorate for Education and Training has, in cooperation with Sámediggi and the
county governors of Troms and Finnmark, produced an information brochure about the right
to receive and the obligation to provide Sami tuition. The brochure's target group is school
owners (in practice municipalities). The brochure has been published on www.udir.no.
Some students live in places where it is difficult to follow a regular education in Sami, and
arrangements have therefore been made to enable them to receive distance education. The
County Governor of Finnmark is the coordinator and bears primary responsibility for North
Sami distance education. The Country Governor must facilitate and ensure that good contact
is established between the municipalities. The focus is on the quality of the tuition, and
network meetings for online teachers are organised annually in cooperation with other county
governors.
We also refer to the discussion on the situation for Sami languages in the area of education as
a response to questions 64, 110 and 117.
Pupils who receive tuition in Sami have more lessons per week than pupils who do not take
Sami. This is a challenge for many schools. Sámediggi, the Directorate for Education and
Training and the Ministry of Education and Research have reviewed the subject and lesson
distribution for pupils with Sami in primary and lower secondary schools and upper secondary
schools. The group's report was presented in the winter of 2011.
Statistics for primary and lower secondary tuition in Sami languages/Sami as a subject
Statistics for primary and lower secondary school education in Sami languages are available
from the School Information System (Grunnskolens informasjonssystem (GSI). Education
based on ethnicity is not recorded.

19

With respect to Sami languages, an overview of tuition is provided
• at the national, county municipal, municipal and school levels
• in the three Sami languages, distributed by tuition in first and second language; the
latter distributed between levels 2 and 3
• distributed by form
• distributed by girls and boys
According to the School Information System (GSI), in the 2010/2011 school year there are
928 students who take North Sami as a first language, 1,145 who take North Sami as a second
language (Sami 2 and 3), 29 who take Lule Sami as a first language, 68 who take Lule Sami
as a second language, 18 who take South Sami as a first language and 72 students who take
South Sami as a second language.
The statistics show that of the 1,145 students in primary and lower secondary school who
receive tuition in North Sami as a second language in the current school year, there are 539
students at level 2 and 606 students at level 3.
Out of the 68 students who receive tuition in Lule Sami as a second language, 44 receive
tuition at level 2 and 24 tuition at level 3. Out of the 72 students who receive tuition in South
Sami as a second language, 18 receive tuition at level 2 and 62 tuition at level 3.
Statistics for upper secondary education in Sami/Sami as a subject
Sami as first language
The statistics for grant eligible Sami tuition in upper secondary education from the Directorate
for Education and Training/VIGO, show that in 2009-2010 there were a total of 215 students
who received tuition in the subject of Sami as first language. 190 received North Sami tuition,
4 received South Sami tuition and 23 received Lule Sami tuition. (This makes 217, which is
probably due to two students being recorded with two subject codes at the same time).
Sami as a second language
At the upper secondary level, statistics from the Directorate for Education and Training/VIGO
show that in the 2009/2010 school year, 154 students received tuition in the various Sami
languages as a second language: 142 received tuition in North Sami as a second language, 10
in South Sami and 11 in Lule Sami .
Statistics for upper secondary school are far more detailed than for primary and lower
secondary schools due to the division into subjects and study programmes. The Directorate
for Education and Training and Sámediggi are currently discussing how to obtain good
statistics for Sami in upper secondary education, while also ensuring that privacy is
maintained. In certain subjects/study programmes/schools there are so few students that they
are easily identified.
Students in Oslo who request tuition in South Sami or Lule Sami are provided with this as
free distance education. Language and culture gatherings are also organised in both the South
Sami region and by Árran - lulesami center for Lule Sami. The Education Department in
Oslo Municipality covers the costs in connection with these gatherings.

20

Higher education
The Ministry of Education and Research awarded NOK 700,000 to the Sami University
College with a request to cooperate on Sami tuition with the University of Nordland, NordTrøndelag University College, the University of Tromsø and Finnmark University College.
North Sami is the largest language, but the Ministry has in its proposed recruitment strategy
concentrated more resources around South Sami and Lule Sami.
Tuition is also provided in Lule Sami at the University of Nordland.
The Centre for Sami in Education/Lohkanguovddas
The Centre for Sami in Education/Lohkanguovddas at the Sami University College was
established in 2007. The centre is a resource centre particularly directed at working towards
promoting the oral and written use of Sami in the population. This entails strengthening the
use of Sami in the educational system. The centre also carries out research and development
work related to the subject area.
The centre is funded by the Ministry of Government Administration, Reform and Church
Affairs, the Ministry of Education and Research and Sámediggi.
Recruitment strategy for Sami higher education
The Ministry of Education and Research will put into effect a national recruitment strategy for
Sami higher education. The strategy will be in effect from 2011 to 2014 and particularly
emphasises Sami teacher training and Sami languages. In 2011, NOK 1.5 million was allotted
for recruitment measures. The emphasis will be on South and Lule Sami.
In addition to this, a new general plan for a Sami three-year undergraduate programme in preschool teaching is being drawn up.
The consultation agreement between government authorities and Sámediggi
The Minister of Local Government and Regional Development and the President of
Sámediggi entered into an agreement on procedures for consultations between Government
authorities and Sámediggi in May 2005. It was confirmed by Royal Decree on 1 July 2005
that the agreed procedures must apply to all government administration. The background for
the stipulation of the consultation procedures is the right of indigenous peoples to be
consulted in matters that may directly concern them, cf. article 6 of ILO Convention No. 169
on indigenous and tribal peoples in independent states.
As a result of the consultation agreement, there are a number consultations between
governmental authorities and Sámediggi on many different matters during the course of a
year.
Sámediggi and the Ministry of Education and Research hold consultations as required and
have also introduced cooperation meetings every six months. At the meetings, information on
pertinent matters is exchanged and discussed, information on matters that may be subject to
consultation is provided, and planning for any consultations is carried out. This results in
fewer consultations, as matters are to a greater degree discussed in the cooperation meetings
and/or in more informal contexts. The cooperation meetings have led to better prepared
consultations with better insight into and understanding of each other's roles and viewpoints.

21

The meetings have also provided a better mutual understanding of internal processes and
requirements.
More general information on the consultation agreement is available in Norway's report of
2008 on the implementation of ILO Convention No. 169.
Sami adult education project
The County Governor of Nordland has, pursuant to the Action Plan for Sami languages,
introduced two different measures based on the so-called Ulpan method.
The County Governor of Nordland wishes to help develop methods that significantly increase
the efficiency of language tuition, based on the Ulpan method. In other areas the method has
resulted in fluent oral language skills in a matter of months. The experience from other
countries shows that more efficient language learning methods result in significantly more
young people and adults wanting to learn languages. The project comprises adaptation of the
Ulpan method to Sami and thereafter recruitment of motivated participants to a Sami learning
programme. The Municipality of Lavangen is responsible for practical development and the
University of Nordland acts as expert consultant to the project.
South Sami language tuition for adults
In 2010, the County Governor of Nordland initiated a project to adapt the Ulpan method for
South Sami. Among other things, the method enables elderly Sami who have a good
command of Sami to participate in the tuition. The target group is adults, parents and young
people who want to learn South Sami. The measure was implemented in 2010 and 2011.
Other measures for Sami languages
A number of measure have been introduced in different areas of society to enable and
encourage the use of Sami languages. In connection with this we would like to present the
following measures:
Sami language centres
The development of Sami language centres has been important for the revitalisation of Sami
language and culture. The language centres' tasks are to develop and strengthen educational
measures within Sami language, culture and industry, and also to disseminate information on
Sami culture. The language centres organise courses in everything from Sami as a play
language for children and Sami tuition for municipal employees, to duodji courses (Sami
handicrafts). The language centres are also meeting places for the Sami community. The Sami
language centres are partly funded by grants from Sámediggi and partly by grants from the
municipalities. In 2011, Sámediggi has allotted NOK 5.67 million in grants to Sami language
centres. The funds are distributed to 10 Sami language centres (8 of these language centres are
for the North Sami language).
Spell checking software for Sami languages
The Divvun project was initiated in 2004. The project has been funded by Sámediggi, the
Ministry of Education and Research and the Ministry of Government Administration, Reform
and Church Affairs.

22

The Divvun Project has developed spell checking and correction software for North, Lule and
South Sami. The software is free and may be downloaded from the internet. This type of
language technology is vital for the survival of Sami languages as living languages in today's
society. The technology is language-independent and may therefore provide a good
foundation for corresponding work for other minority languages.
In order to ensure the survival of North, South and Lule Sami as living languages, NOK 4.7
million was appropriated in 2011 for the establishment of an operational and development
organisation around Divvun. The organisation was linked to the University of Tromsø in 1
July 2011.
The Correctional Services
In 2009 and 2010, one Sami speaking trainee was admitted each year to the Correctional
Service of Norway Staff Academy. The Correctional Services have initiated some translation
work and have also started work on better signage.
The Ministry of Justice/the Correctional Services' central administration have established a
working group to review prison conditions for Sami prisoners and convicts. This is a part of
the work on following up Report no. 37 (2007-2008) to the Storting – Effective punishment –
less crime – a safer society and the Action Plan for Sami Languages. Among other things, the
working group will:
1. Evaluate how the Correctional Services implement different penalties such as prison
sentences, preventive detention, community sentences, etc. for Sami convicts.
2. Present specific proposals for how the Correctional Services best can address Sami
speaking prisoners/convicts such that the purpose of the punishment is achieved, including
considering whether a separate manual should be prepared for the group.
3. Investigate the need for expertise and capacity for a Sami competence centre in Troms or
Finnmark, including specific proposals for recruitment ('recruit and retain') of employees with
Sami language skills and knowledge of Sami culture. The group must investigate the
consequences of establishing a competence centre as an integral part of the Correctional
Services in Troms or Finnmark.
4. Obtain knowledge about how other agencies in the administrative area address their
obligations toward the Sami population in practice. Whether or not the correctional services in
Sweden and Finland have introduced specific measures should also be investigated.
5. Carry out financial and administrative calculations for all the proposals presented.
The working group's report is expected to be completed by 31 December 2011.
The Norwegian Labour and Welfare Administration (NAV)
The Ministry of Labour is working to ensure that Sami users of NAV are met by the Sami
language, cultural competence and knowledge of Sami social conditions. NAV is responsible
for implementing key parts of labour and welfare policy. In addition to heading the service's
work in this area, NAV must handle tasks in the social and living conditions field. Targets
related to maintaining the Sami perspective in NAV are discussed and specified in the
allotment letter from the Ministry of Labour to NAV.
Measures in connection with elections
The following material is translated into Sami languages in connection with elections:
• Announcements (North Sami) – four in 2009
• Text on the Ministry of Local Government and Regional Development's election portal:
www.valg.no (North Sami)

23

• Brochures about elections (North Sami, Lule Sami, South Sami)
• Posters for polling stations (North Sami, Lule Sami, and South Sami)
Grants are provided to improve knowledge about elections and to increase participation in
elections. Sámediggi's Committee for Youth Policy (SUPU) was awarded NOK 184,000 in
2009 for a campaign to get Sami young people to join Sámediggi's electoral roll and to vote in
the elections for Sámediggi. The campaign's target group was Sami young people.
ČálliidLágádus (AuthorsPublisher) was awarded NOK 336,000 in 2009 for the translation of
Avis i Skolen's election booklets tailored for three target groups: the intermediate level, the
lower secondary level and the upper secondary level. They want to translate the booklets into
North, Lule and South Sami.
Information on kindergarten provision and kindergarten
Sámediggi has prepared a special information brochure on kindergarten provision for Sami
children. The brochure is available in South, Lule and North Sami. The Ministry of Education
and Research has distributed this to all municipalities and county governors.
The Ministry of Education and Research has prepared an information brochure for parents on
kindergarten. The brochure specifically focuses on the new objects clause and the
establishment of a new parent committee for kindergartens. The brochure has been translated
into all three Sami languages.
Culture building – Saemien Sijte
Saemien Sijte bears Sami museum responsibility for the entire South Sami area. Sámediggi
bears administrative responsibility for Saemien Sijte. Statsbygg (the Norwegian Government's
key advisor in construction and property affairs) has started planning new premises for
Saemien Sijte in Snåsa on behalf of the Ministry of Culture.
Cultural buildings – Eastsamisk Museum in Neiden
The Ministry of Culture has awarded a total of NOK 42 million for the construction of the
Eastsami Museum in Neiden. The grant includes funds for exhibitions and fixtures.
Sámediggi bears administrative responsibility for the Eastsami Museum, which is a part of the
consolidated unit of Tana and Varanger Museumssiida. At the time of writing the building has
not been opened due to technical issues. It has therefore not been appropriate to install
exhibitions at the premises. The official opening will likely take place in the autumn of 2012.
Eastsami Museum: Language memory - dialogue and communication
In 2010, the Norwegian Archive, Library and Museum Authority granted project support of
NOK 62,000 to the Eastsami Museum for its "Language memory - dialogue and
communication" project. The project is a hybrid between art and culture/language
preservation in which the aim is to create a meeting place for dialogue around the East
Sami/Skolt Sami language with a permanent art video installation in the museum that will
open next year. The East Sami/Skolt Sami language is under threat of extinction. A few
people in Northern Finland and the Kola Peninsula speak the language today, but none in
Norway. The project has three parts: dialogue meeting, translation and communication.
The museum has compiled a good deal of language material in recent years. One important
goal of the project is to return the compiled knowledge and material to the local community

24

and informants, and thus invite discussion on the future of the East Sami/Skolt Sami
language. Here the museum and installation could be an arena for meetings and debate.
Art and cultural preservation
The Arts Council Norway administers and distributes funds from the Norwegian Cultural
Fund. Grants have been made to several projects directed at Sami and minority languages. See
Appendix 2 for an overview of the distribution of funds to the museum and cultural heritage
projects related to Sami culture that have received support from the Arts Council Norway and
the Norwegian Archive, Library and Museum Authority between 2008-2010. As of 1 January
2011, the Norwegian Archive, Library and Museum Authority has been discontinued and its
work on archives and museums has been merged into the Arts Council Norway.
Also see the discussion under Part III, article 12, Cultural activities and cultural facilities.
Beaivváš Sami Teáhter
Beaivváš Sami Teáhter promotes theatre activities in Sami languages and thereby Sami
culture. The theatre is intended to cover the Sami areas in Norway, but also works in the Sami
areas in neighbouring countries to a certain degree. Administrative responsibility for Beaivváš
Sami Teáhter was transferred to Sámediggi in 2002. Since 2008, Beaivváš Sami Teáhter has
been included as part of the reporting in the annual budget proposition from the Ministry of
Culture to the Storting, such that the results are viewed in the context of the other dramatic art
institutions with fixed annual support.
In 2009, Beaivváš Sami Teáhter was also one of two main partners for the State Touring
Theatre (Riksteatret), which focused particularly on the northern areas in its anniversary year.
The two theatres presented a collaborative production in connection with this.
The Sami language award - Gollegiella
The Sami language award – Gollegiella – was presented by the Swedish Minister for Rural
Affairs during the Nordic Ministers and Sami Assembly Presidents Meeting in Stockholm in
November 2010. The recipients were two female language advocates for the North Sami and
South Sami languages. The language award was established in 2003 by the Sami ministers
and Sami assembly presidents in Finland, Sweden and Norway. The award is presented every
two years to individuals, groups, organisations or institutions from Finland, Sweden, Russia
and Norway that have made an exceptional effort to promote Sami languages. The award is
worth EUR 12,500.
Sami cultural buildings and institutions help to raise the visibility of Sami cultural life. They
act as arenas for the development of Sami culture and play an important role in the
development of Sami languages. In 2011, Sámediggi allotted NOK 9.588 million for the
purpose.
Dramatic arts
For a discussion of grants for projects related to Sami culture and language between 20082010 from the Arts Council Norway, see Appendix 3.
The House of Drama (Dramatikkens Hus)
The House of Drama in Oslo is a national competence and development centre for new
Norwegian and Sami theatre. The House of Drama received funds to establish the centre in
2009 with a view to starting activities from 2010. The purpose of The House of Drama is to
25

bolster interest in new Norwegian and Sami theatre, to improve the quality and scope of
contemporary writing for the stage/theatre, and to develop national competence in developing
scripts for the stage.
Radio and television broadcasts
The Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation's (NRK's) Sami Radio's regional offices in Tysfjord
and Snåsa were strengthened in 2007. This has resulted in more comprehensive content and
coverage of a greater geographical area for Sami news broadcasts on both radio and
television. The majority of broadcasts are in North Sami, but both South Sami and Lule Sami
are also used in radio broadcasts. These two Sami languages are thus broadcast weekly by the
national television broadcaster NRK1. (For a discussion of radio and television broadcasts in
North Sami, see Part III, article 11, item 1, sub-item c, ii.)
Film subtitling
The industry organisation Film & Kino administers a grant scheme for film subtitling. The
scheme is financed through a cinema and video sales charge (Norsk kino- og filmfond). The
scheme's governing document states that grants may be given to cover costs related to the
subtitling of cinema films with “Norwegian or Sami dialogue”. The purpose is to make “films
with Norwegian or Sami dialogue accessible for those with hearing impairments”.
Another purpose the fund's proceeds may be used for is the “dubbing of films for children”.
The purpose is to make films for younger age groups available in Norwegian. Film & Kino
also supports the distribution, including dubbing, of quality films on DVD (the S film
scheme). Given the lack of Sami language children's films on DVD, the Ministry of Culture
has stated that any applications for dubbing to Sami will be given high priority by Film &
Kino.
Support schemes for newspapers
Two local newspapers in Norwegian language (Lokalavisa NordSalten and Snåsningen)
received contributions from the support scheme for Sami newspapers to produce pages in
Lule and South Sami in 2010. (For a discussion of support schemes for North Sami
newspapers, see Part III, article 11, item 1, sub-item e, i).

The Committee of Experts has the following questions in relation to article 7, para. 1,
subpara. a:
Lule Sami
60. (box) What steps have the authorities taken to increase efforts to protect and
promote Lule Sami?

Efforts to strengthen and promote the Lule Sami language form an important part of the
Action Plan for Sami Languages. (See the discussion of the Action Plan in Part I, sub-chapter
on Policy, legislation and practice – changes). In order for South Sami and Lule Sami to have
good opportunities to develop, particular efforts are being directed at the needs of these
language communities. In 2009, the County Governor of Nordland was tasked by the then
Ministry of Labour and Social Inclusion (now: the Ministry of Government Administration,
Reform and Church Affairs) to develop measures to strengthen the Lule Sami and South Sami
26

languages. The assignment applied to the entire action plan period. In 2009 and 2010, the
County Governor received a total of NOK 3.2 million for this purpose.
We would like to present the following examples of measures to protect and promote Lule
Sami:
As a measure in the Action Plan for Sami Languages, the County Governor of Nordland will
in 2011 start improving the competence of pre-school teachers in kindergartens with Lule
Sami children, or which are in areas with a living Lule Sami culture. The content will consist
of both culture and language. With respect to language, emphasis will be on methodology and
measures that make the language visible and alive for everyone in kindergarten. The
organisation work will include networking, visits and teaching practice. The County Governor
of Nordland has the practical and general responsibility, and the University of Nordland will
have responsibility for the academic content.
In September 2009 the County Governor of Nordland, in cooperation with Drag school and
the Sami school in Jokkmokk, organized a common language camp for the schools' Lule Sami
pupils. Further, the County Governor of Nordland in cooperation with Drag school and the
schools in Jokkmokk and Gällivarre, has organized a Lule Sami language camp in 2010. The
target group for the language camp was young people who speak Sami as their first language,
and 19 pupils participated. The language camps will be held annually in Norway and Sweden
respectively. A new Lule Sami language camp will be organised in Drag in 2011.

South Sami
63. The authorities are asked to report on the measures envisaged in the White Paper
on Sami policy and on how they have been implemented.

One of the most important measures for following up measures for the Sami languages in
Report no. 28 (2007-2008) to the Storting is the Action Plan for Sami Languages. Efforts to
strengthen and promote the South Sami language form an important part of this Action Plan.
(See the discussion of the Action Plan in Part I, sub-chapter on Policy, legislation and practice
– changes).
As a measure in the Action Plan the County Governor of Nordland will in 2011 start
improving the competence of pre-school teachers in kindergartens with South Sami children,
or that are in areas with a living South Sami culture. (See the comment on measures for Lule
Sami children under the response to question 60.) The measure will be implemented in
cooperation with the County Governor of Nord-Trøndelag and the County Governor of SørTrøndelag. Nord-Trøndelag University College will be responsible for the academic content.
One measure in the Action Plan for Sami languages is that County Governor of Nordland
must strengthen careers advice for South Sami and Lule Sami youth. The goal is to motivate
increases in applications to higher education among Sami students, with focus on language
and teacher education. One further wishes to limit the dropout rate from Sami tuition between
primary and lower secondary school and between upper secondary school and higher
education. A work group has been appointed that will work towards increasing recruitment to

27

Lule Sami teacher education. A corresponding work group will be appointed to work for
recruitment to South Sami studies.
Snåsningen, which is a local newspaper in the Municipality of Snåsa in the South Sami
language district, produces newspaper pages in South Sami. The newspaper receives press
support via the Ministry of Culture budget.
In accordance with measures in the Action Plan for Sami Languages, the Ministry of Health
and Care Services in cooperation with Sámediggi will examine more closely how equality in
health services can be maintained in the Lule Sami and South Sami areas. The matter has been
discussed with Sámediggi. The Ministry and Sámediggi will pursue the matter.
The Ministry of Government Administration, Reform and Church Affairs distributes funds for
the development of social studies terminology in South Sami.
In order to strengthen both Lule Sami and South Sami, almost NOK 1.2 million was granted
to the Research Council of Norway's Sami research programme. In 2010, funds were
increased to NOK 1.65 million. The funds are earmarked for research efforts into these two
languages, including PhD positions.

South Sami
64. (box) What steps have been taken to increase efforts to protect and promote South
Sami, especially in the field of education?
Sweden and Norway have established a working group that will investigate opportunities for
closer transnational cooperation. The working group will prepare a proposal for a
collaboration agreement between Sweden and Norway on Sami tuition, first and foremost
with distance education, teacher training and teaching materials in mind. The group will
investigate the opportunity for better cooperation on all three Sami languages, but will place
special emphasis on cooperation on Lule and South Sami. In September 2011, the agreement
will be presented to the relevant ministries in Sweden and Norway, which are the Ministries
of Education and Research in both countries.
The County Governor of Nordland arranges annual conferences to bolster the competence and
motivation of South Sami teachers.
Good cooperation has been developed with Sweden on language camps for South Sami
students. This work is being done under the auspices of the County Governor of Nordland.
The objective of the language camps is to revitalise, strengthen and develop South Sami as a
language for use and interaction. Feedback indicates that the measures are appreciated by both
teachers and students. Contacts are established across the border, which is important as the
settlements are widespread and communities are small. At the same time the pupils indicate
that they can use and have the courage to use the language more, including during their free
time. The project also aims to follow up the parents of participating students. So far four
language camps have been held, and interest in these camps has been significant.

28

Skolt Sami (East Sami)
65. Have the Norwegian authorities investigated the possibility of teaching Skolt Sami
(East Sami) in cooperation with Finland?

The Ministry of Government Administration, Reform and Church Affairs has focused on
facilitating the planning of cross-border measures that contribute to revitalising, raising the
visibility of and strengthening the East Sami/Skolt Sami language. Skolt Sami is classified as
an extinct language in Norway according to UNESCO's 'Red List'. It is therefore extremely
positive that the language holds a stronger position in our neighbouring countries, Finland and
Russia. Finland stands out with East Sami/Skolt Sami tuition in school. In 2010, a three-year
collaboration project was started between East Sami/Skolt Sami communities and institutions
in Norway, Finland and Russia. The main aim of the project is to contribute to strengthening
and developing the identity, language and culture in a transnational perspective. The project is
funded by grants from Interreg Sápmi and national contributions from Norway and Finland.
The Ministry will focus on the necessary follow-up of the project and will discuss follow up
measures with the project's partners, East Sami/Skolt Sami communities, and the Sami
assemblies and authorities in these three countries.
Lule Sami
77. Have the authorities investigated the possibilities of stimulating the use of Lule
Sami, especially outside the institutions?

An important focal point in the Action Plan for Sami Languages and the follow up of this is to
stimulate the use of the Sami languages outside institutions.
One measure in the Action Plan requires the County Governor of Nordland to initiate a
project to strengthen Sami languages through social media. The project will be carried out by
the University of Nordland. The purpose of the measure is to shed light on the use of Sami in
social media and to outline measures to strengthen the use of Sami in these media. The target
group of the project is Sami youth. The project will also include Lule Sami.
In the autumn of 2010, Lule Sami broadcasts were transmitted on YouTube (Nuoraj TV). The
broadcasts were produced by young people. The media service will include features, humour,
fiction and news. The main target group is young people between the ages of 15-28 with an
affiliation to the Tysfjord/Hamarøy area. An important part of the project is that the young
people themselves have an opportunity to participate by submitting videos. The project is
partly funded by the Ministry of Government Administration, Reform and Church Affairs.
See the response to question 60.
North, Lule and South Sami
78. and 86. The authorities are asked to report on the outcome of projects carried out
by the Ministry of Justice and the Municipality of Tana on the development of legal
terminology in North, Lule and South Sami.
29

The Municipality of Tana has in the years from 2006 to 2009 had responsibility for the "Sami
legal terminology" project. The project has particularly focused on developing terminology
for the Dispute Act and the Criminal Procedure Act in North Sami. The project has been
funded by the Ministry of Labour and Social Inclusion (now: the Ministry of Government
Administration, Reform and Church Affairs), Sámediggi and the Municipality of Tana.
As a follow up to the “Sami legal terminology” project, the Municipality of Tana has started a
two-year project called “Sami legal terms”. The project started up on 1 December 2009 and
will be concluded in December 2011. The project is funded by the Ministry of Government
Administration, Reform and Church Affairs, Sámediggi and the Municipality of Tana. The
Sami language board, Indre Finnmark District Court and Giellateknologiija at the University
of Tromsø are important partners. The Tana Sami Language Centre and SEG (Sami Ealáhusja Guorahallanguovddáš/ Sami Trade and Development Centre) head the project on behalf of
the Municipality of Tana.
The purpose of the Municipality of Tana's “Sami legal terms” project is to contribute to
strengthening legal protection of the Sami community by contributing to the good
development of North Sami as a legal language.
The project develops legal terms in North Sami. Terms from the Criminal Procedure Act, the
Dispute Act and the Penal Code will be transferred to a database system that will, for
example, enable publication of the terms as a digital dictionary. The database will initially
comprise almost 3,000 legal terms and phrases. Thereafter, the work will focus on terms for
the Court of Justice Act. The project also includes work on the translation of acts.
Lule Sami
80. The authorities are asked to provide information on the actual use of Lule Sami in
relations with the administration, and on the interpretation/translation facilities
available in Lule Sami.
In 2008, Sámediggi's language board carried out a survey on the use of Sami languages. The
purpose of Sámediggi's 2008 language survey was to investigate selected institutions' use of
the Sami language in Norway, and investigate the interest in choosing Sami languages in
schools and kindergartens. Five institutions responded to the survey in the Lule Sami area.
80% of these institutions claim that the population receive services in Lule Sami. 20% say
that they do not.

Lule Sami
81. The authorities are asked to provide information on the visibility of Lule Sami on
public signs, buildings and in local newspaper advertisements.

The official use of place names in Sami and Kven is regulated by the Act on Place Names. In
places where multilingual names have been adopted pursuant to the provisions of the act, the
Sami and/or Kven name must be used in public spaces alongside the Norwegian name.

30

Within the administrative district for Sami language, place names, pursuant to the provisions
of the Place Name Act must be signposted or indicated on maps in the following order: Sami,
Norwegian, Kven. The use of Lule Sami on signs is therefore relevant for the Municipality of
Tysfjord, which was included in the administrative district for Sami language in 2006.
More and more public buildings are being given signs with Sami names within the traditional
Sami district. In the administrative district for Sami language awareness has been raised
around Sami signs, although there is no direct requirement for this in the regulations.
On the part of the Government, both Report no. 28 (2007-2008) to the Storting – Sami Policy
and the Action Plan for Sami Languages emphasise the importance of raising the visibility of
the Sami languages in public, including signs in Sami.
Pursuant to the Sami Act, section 3-2, announcements from public bodies directed at the
population within the administrative district must be made in both Sami and Norwegian. In
practice, this could be in the form of newspaper advertisements. National authorities have
little control of how this is implemented in practice.
Lule Sami
83. The authorities are asked to comment on the presence of Lule Sami on TV.
It follows from its governing document that NRK must “contribute to strengthen the
Norwegian and Sami languages, identity and culture” and that “NRK must have daily
broadcasts for the Sami population”. The majority of NRK Sápmis's broadcasts on radio and
TV are in North Sami, but Lule Sami also has fixed broadcasts.
For more information see the comments on Lule Sami TV broadcasts on You Tube (Nuoraj
TV) under the response to question 77.

Lule Sami
84. The authorities are asked to comment on the visibility of Lule Sami in the print
media with regard to the needs expressed by its speakers.

The NordSalten newspaper, which is a local newspaper in the Lule Sami language area,
receives funds via the Ministry of Culture's budget to produce Lule Sami inserts. Nordsalten
produced 70 pages in Lule Sami in 2010.
South Sami
87. The authorities are asked to provide information on whether Snåsa also has an
official name in South Sami.

The official Sami name of the Municipality of Snåsa is Snåasen tjielte. Snåsa Municipal
Council decided in a meeting on 27 May 2010 to apply to use the Sami name Snåasen tjielte
31

for the municipality. The Municipal Council's decision was ratified in a cabinet meeting on 24
September 2010 in accordance with section 3, no. 3 of the Local Government Act.
South Sami
88. The authorities are asked to provide information on the Norwegian Labour and
Welfare Administration office in Snåsa and whether it deals with health issues.

The authorities want Sami speaking users to be taken care of with respect to both language
and culture when they are in contact with the Norwegian Labour and Welfare Administration
(NAV). NAV has stated that in the case of a vacant position at NAV's office in Snåsa, the job
advert will request South Sami skills.
This office does not deal with health matters to a greater degree than other NAV offices.

South Sami
90. The authorities are asked to comment on the presence of South Sami on TV.

We refer to the comment under the response to question 83. The majority of NRK Sápmis's
broadcasts on radio and TV are in North Sami, but South Sami also has fixed broadcasts.
The news programme Oððasat is broadcast from Monday to Thursday on the P2 national
network and uses both Sami and Norwegian, hereunder also South Sami and Lule Sami.
South Sami
91. The authorities are asked to provide information on the presence of South Sami in
the printed press.

The local newspaper Snåsningen produced 48 pages in South Sami in 2010.

The Committee of Experts has the following questions in relation to article 7, para. 1,
subpara. f
Sami languages
Lule Sami
108. The authorities are asked to provide an assessment of the situation of pre-school
education in Lule Sami.

In the municipalities of Bodø and Tysfjord, a total of 27 children with Lule Sami backgrounds
had their kindergarten provision tailored on the basis of their language background in 2010.
The County Governor of Nordland has received funds from the Ministry of Education and
Research to strengthen work with the Lule Sami and South Sami languages. Several seminars
32

and network meetings have been arranged between kindergartens and schools in connection
with this. Please also see the response to question 110.
Lule Sami
110. The authorities are asked to clarify the situation of Lule Sami at all levels of
education and indicate the number of students.

In the 2010/2011 school year, 29 students took Lule Sami as a first language and 68 had Lule
Sami as a second language. There is a need for access to tuition in Lule Sami, especially in
distance education. The number of students in traditional Lule Sami areas is stable, but there
is increasing demand in the cities.
The County Governor of Nordland has arranged a motivation and recruitment seminar Lule
Sami youth. The purpose of the seminar was to motivate Lule Sami youth to pursue higher
education.
The County Governor also organises annual teacher conferences on Lule Sami tuition.
South Sami
112. The authorities are asked to provide information on the discussions between the
Ministry of Education and Research and Sámediggi on the need for more permanent
actions directed towards kindergartens in South Sami regions.

There are no pre-schools in Norway, but pre-school provision is covered by kindergartens.
The Ministry of Education and Research and Sámediggi cooperate on measures aimed at
kindergarten provision in Sami areas. The initial focus has been on disseminating information
via brochures, meetings, etc. The county governors of Troms, Nordland, Sør-Trøndelag and
Nord-Trøndelag have been specially tasked with cooperating with Sámediggi on measures
aimed at the South Sami kindergarten sector.
The Ministry of Education and Research has its own competence strategy that focuses on
language as a particular priority area. The county governors have, in cooperation with
Sámediggi, initiated various language development measures.
Lule and South Sami
117. (box) What steps have been taken to improve education in Lule and South Sami,
in particular concerning the training of teachers and the production of teaching
materials?

See the discussion under the third recommendation from the Committee of Ministers, Part I.

33

East Sami
117. Have the Norwegian authorities investigated the possibility of teaching Skolt Sami
(East Sami) in cooperation with Finland?

See the response to question 65.
The Committee of Experts has the following questions in relation to article 7, para. 1,
subpara. h
South Sami
125. The Norwegian authorities are asked to provide information on courses for
bilingual language teachers, including statistics on the number and profile of teachers
who have received trained, at Hamar University College.

There is one three-year undergraduate programme in the teaching of specific school subjects
for bilingual teachers at Hedmark University College. A bachelor's degree allows students to
specialise further in the following languages: Urdu, Turkish, Arabic, Vietnamese, Kurdish,
Somali, Russian and South Sami. Students may also choose to study other more general
subjects. The curricula will be based on the university college's regular provision, but have an
approach that allows students to utilise their own language and their own cultural experiences.
Kven
This sub-chapter contains an initial brief discussion of the situation of the Kven language and
the actions the Norwegian authorities have initiated in relation to Kven. It then responds to
questions from the Committee of Experts concerning the Kven language.
The Kven Institute Securing historical language materials
In 2008, the Norwegian Archive, Library and Museum Authority granted project support
amounting to NOK 50,000 to the Kven Institute for its "Protection of historical language
materials" project. The project involves recovering and publishing sound recordings of Kven
dialects in the Finnish National Sound Archive. There are approx. 420 hours of audio
recordings of Kven dialects and almost half of these are digitised. The Kven Institute has a
project in which the digitised material is being transcribed. The material is of great value from
a linguistic and language history point of view, and the stories contain valuable information
about the Kvens' everyday life. The recordings cover the whole of the Kven area and are
primarily from the 1960s and 1970s.
Please also refer to the discussion of the Government's actions in relation to the Kven
language under the Committee of Ministers' fourth recommendation (Part I), which discusses
the Government's efforts to protect and promote Kven, especially in education and broadcast
media.

34

Under Article 7, para. 1, subpara. c, the Committee of Experts has the following
questions:
Kven
49. The Norwegian authorities are asked to comment on the development of a new
cultural centre for Kven speakers, in addition to the cultural centre in Porsanger.

In 2009, the Ministry of Culture granted project funds for a pilot project under the auspices of
the Kvenland Federation (Kvenlandsforbundet) which would primarily focus on networking
and the literacy of people in Norway with a Kven or Finnish-related spoken language
background. The project is intended to provide those who are about to learn the language with
extended opportunities to participate in a language environment where the language is in
living use. The project has received NOK 430,000 kroner from the Ministry of Culture. The
project description notes that the work on the language project will be carried out as a
collaborative project between Skibotn kvenforening, Kveenibaikka kultursenter and the
Kvenland Federation.
Please refer to the description of the project funding for the language centre in Storfjord as a
pilot project, as a response to question 67.
Kven
50-51. The Norwegian authorities are asked to provide information on measures in
relation to the Kven language, based on the White Paper on language policy, which
will be followed up by the Ministry of Culture.
Varanger Museum IKS: Kven names on the web and map
In 2009 and 2010, the Norwegian Archive, Library and Museum Authority granted project
support amounting to NOK 100,000 to Varanger Museum IKS for its "Kven names on the
internet and map" documentation and dissemination project. The project is a collaboration
between various Kven institutions. This is a joint effort to digitise names that have already
been collected and their history from various sources, and to add names that have not been
documented until now.
The Kven language newspaper - Ruijan Kaiku
The Kven newspaper Ruijan Kaiku has for years received grants through the support schemes
for the press and periodic publications, either directly from the Ministry of Culture or the
Norwegian Culture Fund, which is administered by the Arts Council Norway. The Kven
language newspaper is an important part of the necessary infrastructure for the Kven
language. From 2011 Ruijan Kaiku's grant has been moved from the Norwegian Culture Fund
to a fixed operational subsidy directly from the Ministry of Culture in order to provide the
newspaper with more predictable budget support. Ruijan Kaiku's grant amounted to NOK 1
million in 2011.
The Language Council of Norway is facing an expansion of its activities and responsibilities
to include languages other than Norwegian. As part of this expansion of its activities and
responsibilities, the Language Council shall help protect and strengthen national minority
languages in Norway. As far as its future activities and responsibilities for national minority
35

languages are concerned, the Language Council has determined that Kven will receive first
priority.
Please also see the discussion about the conference on the revitalisation of the Kven language
under the response to the Committee of Ministers' fourth recommendation.
Under Article 7, para. 1, subpara. d, the Committee of Experts has the following
questions:
Kven
67. The Norwegian authorities are asked to explain what measures have been taken to
further enhance support for Kven culture through general and/or specific funding
mechanisms?

Grant scheme for Kven
The Ministry of Government Administration, Reform and Church Affairs provided grants
totalling NOK 200,000 to various Kven initiatives in 2008. The measures ranged from film
and Nordic cooperation measures to Kven language measures.
In 2009, approx. NOK 575,000 was provided in grants to six Kven projects involving
information measures, Nordic cooperation, and pure language measures. NOK 500,000 was
also provided for the operation of a trilingual centre in the Municipality of Storfjord.
In 2011, a total of NOK 200,000 was provided in grants to three Kven projects involving
cultural activities for youth, the publication of Kven Christmas booklets, and work on
collating Kven grammar. In addition to this, a total of NOK 750,000 was provided between
2009-2011 for the operation of Halti Kvenkultursenter's 3-year "Documentation and
dissemination of Kven culture" project in Troms and campaign/revitalisation activities for the
Kven language in Northern Norway.
In the same period, NOK 1.680 million was provided for the operation of the language Centre
in Storfjord. The Language Centre opened in 2010 and is Norway's first multilingual language
centre. The centre, which works to strengthen Sami and Finnish/Kven in the Municipality of
Storfjord, helps to build bridges between the Norwegian, Sami and Kven cultures. The centre
is financed by project funds from the Ministry of Government Administration, Reform and
Church Affairs, Troms County Authority, Sámediggi and the Municipality of Storfjord.
See Appendix 4 for a more detailed overview of the grants.
Kven culture
The Arts Council Norway administers and distributes funds from the Norwegian Culture Fund
and projects that contribute to Sami and minority languages may apply for funding from this.
A number of cultural projects related to the Kven language and culture received grants from
the Arts Council Norway between 2008-2010; see Appendix 2 for an overview of these.

36

Kven
69. (box) What measures have been taken to improve the presence of Kven in
broadcasting?

See the discussion under the Committee of Ministers' fourth recommendation, Part I.
Kven
71. What measures have been taken to improve the presence of Kven in the media in
general?

Please refer to the discussion of the Kven language newspaper Ruijan Kaiku under the
responses to questions 50-51.

Kven
72. The Norwegian authorities are asked to comment on the practical implementation
of the Place Name Act with regard to Kven.

Responsibility for adopting signs on classified and county roads has been delegated to the
district offices of the Norwegian Public Roads Administration, while municipalities are
responsible for adopting signs on municipal roads (signs authority).
In order for a Kven place name to be used on a sign, the place name must be approved and
registered in the Central Place Name Registry.
The signs standard (preliminary edition 2007), chapters 1-2.2, states that such established
place names shall be used on any road direction signs for the place.
The process usually starts with municipalities, organisations or individuals contacting the
signs authority. The signs authority quality assures the proposed place name with the
Norwegian Mapping Authority before the signs are ordered and installed in the usual way.
The costs of normal place name signs on classified roads are covered by the Norwegian
Public Roads Administration, while the costs of signs on county and municipal roads are
covered by the county or municipality, respectively.
The Committee of Experts has the following questions in relation to article 7, para. 1,
subpara. f:
Kven
101. (box) What concrete measures have been taken to develop a special curriculum in
Kven in cooperation with the Kven speakers and to improve the situation of the Kven
language at all appropriate stages of education?
37

During the oral public hearing on the report it was pointed out that there ought to be a clear
distinction between measures that cover the Kven language and measures that cover the
Finnish language. However, we have chosen to continue to provide an overall presentation
because many measures include both Kven and Finnish.
Primary and secondary school
See the discussion of the curriculum for Finnish as a second language under the discussion of
the Committee of Ministers' fourth recommendation. The provision only includes Kven and
Finnish as a second language.
From and including 2005, the County Governor of Finnmark has received annual funding for
the development of teaching materials about Kven culture. The funding was advertised, and a
lot of teaching materials about Kven culture were produced in the years up to 2008. The
County Governor also provided funds to develop the website kvensk.no and the digital
textbook Aikamatka for students in upper secondary school.
From and including 2009, the County Governor has expanded its work to develop teaching
materials in Finnish and Kven as a second language. The County Governor chose to prioritise
the development of a textbook for Finnish as a second language, tailored for pupils in the 5th7th grade, since this had been requested for a long time. This is now being printed and will
soon be ready for distribution to schools. The County Governor has also initiated the
development of a similar textbook for lower secondary school grades.
The County Governor has been informed that standardised written Kven will soon be ready
for use, meaning that textbooks can be translated into Kven. The County Governor will be
able to work with the Kven community when it comes to translating textbooks.
The County Governor has in 2011 provided funding to produce a textbook for primary
schools in Kven.
The county governors of Troms and Finnmark organise an annual seminar for teachers who
teach Finnish as a second language curriculum. The seminar's topics vary from year to year,
and parts of the programme will always deal with the Kven dimension.
State grants are provided to municipalities, counties and private schools in Troms and
Finnmark that provide students with a Kven/Finnish background tuition in Finnish as a
second language. The grant is calculated on the basis of the number of hours per year,
multiplied by a rate.
In the 2010/11 school year, teaching hours were allocated to one group for Kven tuition for
the first time. The County Governor has not previously received an application for this. The
county governors also grant study authorisations every year to teachers who want further
training in the subject. Authorisations have been granted for both Finnish and Kven further
education.
Higher education
No measures have been implemented by the Ministry of Education and Research to develop a
special syllabus for Kven language users. Finnmark University College is now working with

38

the University of Tromsø to arrive at a division of work with a view to developing course
provision in Kven.

The Committee of Experts has the following questions in relation to article 7, para. 1,
subpara. h:
Kven
120. (box) Have the authorities taken measures to promote a permanent offer of Kven
language courses at the University of Tromsø?

No special measures have been implemented by the Ministry of Education and Research for
permanent provision in Kven. These are priorities that in this case are decided by the
university board of the University of Tromsø.

The Committee of Experts has the following questions in relation to article 7, para. 4:
Kven
131. The Norwegian authorities are asked to comment on cooperation with Kven
speakers in matters relating to the promotion and protection of the Kven language.

The County Governor of Finnmark is responsible for the coordination of tuition in
Kven/Finnish as a second language. The County Governor maintains a dialogue and has held
meetings with the special interest organisations Norsk-Finsk Forbund (Norwegian-Finnish
Association) and the Norwegian Kven Organisation. The challenges associated with language
learning have been discussed. The two special interest organisations regularly provide
information about what is happening within their organisations.
The Kven Language Council has participated in a seminar for teachers of Finnish as a second
language in order to brief them on the development of written Kven. The seminar was
organised by the County Governor.
Romani

The Committee of Experts has the following questions in relation to article 7, para. 1,
subpara. a:
Romani and Romanes
45. Does the mandate of the Romani People’s Fund cover language matters and the
development of books and language materials?

39

In Norway's report in 2008, it was stated that on 18 June 2005 the Storting adopted a
resolution on the appropriation of NOK 75 million for the Romani People's/Taters' Culture
Fund as collective compensation for past wrongs.
The foundation that manages the fund was established by Royal Decree on 12 October 2007,
and at the same the foundation's governing document were adopted. The foundation's purpose
is to disperse the annual return on the Romani People's/Taters' Culture Fund to initiatives and
activities that promote conservation and development of the Romani people's/Taters' culture,
language and history. This will also include the development of books and other materials in
Romani/about the Romani language, although the board is free to decide their own priorities.
As far as the fund's dispersals in 2011 are concerned, the board has decided that tuition in and
dissemination of the Romani language will be one of two prioritised areas.
The foundation has, up to 2011, received returns totalling approx. NOK 24 million and has
dispersed funds to projects in accordance with the foundation's purposes since 2008.

Romani and Romanes
54. Have the authorities followed up the request from representatives of the Romani
association to develop their language and make it accessible in education? Have the
authorities provided support for the development of teaching materials?

Neither the Ministry of Education and Research nor the Ministry of Government
Administration, Reform and Church Affairs have received enquiries from the Romani
people's/Taters' organisations concerning a desire for tuition in Romani in public primary and
lower secondary schools.
Neither the Ministry of Education and Research nor the Ministry of Government
Administration, Reform and Church Affairs have received enquiries from Romani
people/Taters concerning tuition in Romani in public primary and lower secondary schools.
However, grants have been made to the Romani people's/Taters' organisations for language
courses.
In 2007 and 2009, the Ministry of Culture provided project funding for a language project
under the auspices of Taters’Association of Norway (Taternes Landsforening) involving the
collection, translation and transcribing of Romani in Norway. The project has received a total
of NOK 578,000 from the Ministry of Culture. The goal of the project is to eventually
produce textbooks that can provide a basis for first language tuition in schools.
Landsorganisasjonen for Romanifolket (LOR) a romani organisation) is also carrying out
work aimed at developing a basis for language tuition in Romani. The work being done by
LOR is aimed at encouraging young members to learn the language. The work being done by
LOR has been organised through study circles. The organisation receives state aid for
education.

40

Romani and Romanes
55. (box) What steps have been taken by the authorities to intensify their efforts to
protect and promote the Romani and Romanes languages, in cooperation with the
speakers, and especially in the field of education?

We refer to the answer to question 54 above.

The Committee of Experts has the following question in relation to article 7, para. 1,
subpara. d:
Romani and Romanes
75. (box) What measures have been taken to improve the presence of Romani and
Romanes in public life?
There is a permanent exhibition at Glomdalsmuseet, Latjo Drom. The exhibition presents the
Romani people's/Taters' culture and language. (See the discussion of Glomdalsmuseet in
Norway's third report on the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities,
p. 23.)
Besides this, support is provided via the Romani People's/Taters' Culture Fund to increase the
presence of Romani in the public sphere. Allocations from the fund are administered by the
group itself.

The Committee of Experts has the following questions in relation to article 7, para.1,
subpara. f:
Romani and Romanes
104. What measures have been taken to develop alternative ways and appropriate forms
of teaching Romani and Romanes?

We refer to the discussion concerning question 54.

Romani and Romanes
104. (box) What measures have been taken to develop teaching materials and to provide
teacher training in Romani and Romanes?

We refer to the discussion concerning question 54.

41

The Committee of Experts has the following questions in relation to article 7, para. 1,
subpara. h:
Romani and Romanes
122. The authorities are asked to provide information on research and study related to
Romani and Romanes languages at universities or other higher education institutions.

The Research Council of Norway has for several years worked on initiating research into
Romani and Romanes. This has been very difficult for various reasons, but the Research
Council of Norway now reports that it will be possible to start a PhD project on the Romani
language in 2012.
The authorities are unaware of any other research in this field.
Romanes

Romani and Romanes
55. (box) What steps have been taken by the authorities to intensify their efforts to
protect and promote the Romani and Romanes languages, in cooperation with the
speakers, and especially in the field of education?

There are no specific measures regarding Romanes in the field of education.
The Equality and Anti-Discrimination Ombud pointed out in the public hearing that Roma
children's language rights must be safeguarded when children are placed in care for their own
good. The action plan to improve the living conditions for the Roma people discusses child
welfare measures. The Child Welfare Act states that child welfare work must be based on the
individual child, his/her family and the community to which the child belongs. Upon
placement in, for example, a foster home or institution, the location of the placement shall be
chosen on the basis of what is best given the child's character and need for care and education
in a stable environment. Appropriate consideration shall be given to whether continuity in the
child's upbringing is desirable, and to the child's ethnic, religious, cultural and linguistic
background. Upon placement in foster care, the child welfare service must always consider
whether any of the child's family or close network can be selected as a foster home.
It is a challenge finding child welfare measures that safeguard both the child's linguistic and
cultural background and that at the same time are considered to be the best measures based on
the child's other individual needs.

42

The Committee of Experts has the following question in relation to article 7, para. 1,
subpara. d:
Romani and Romanes
75. (box) What measures have been taken to improve the presence of Romani and
Romanes in public life?

The International Gypsy Music Festival Yagori
The Ministry of Government Administration, Reform and Church Affairs has provided annual
support to the International Gypsy Music Festival Yagori since 2000. In 2010, this support
amounted to NOK 321,000. The festival presents some of the foremost practitioners of
international gypsy music and dance. The Ministry considers this a positive contribution to
the dissemination of Roma culture and language.

The Committee of Experts asks questions in relation to article 7, para.1, subpara. f and
article 7, para. 1, subpara. h, questions 104 and 122, respectively.
No specific measures have been implemented that are aimed at Romanes in the relevant
fields.

All languages
The Committee of Experts asks the following question in relation to all languages,
article 7, para. 1, subpara. e:
All languages
92. Have the authorities taken new initiatives to create a forum as envisaged under
this undertaking?
No new initiatives have been taken by the Government to establish such a forum.

Measures that apply to more than one of the regional or minority languages
Participation and organisational development
National minorities and Sami are awarded annual grants via the national budget. Sámediggi
distributes the funds for Sami organisations.
The Ministry of Government Administration, Reform and Church Affairs administers the
grant scheme for national minorities. The aim of the grant scheme is to support activities that
contribute to active participation in society, and activities that ensure equal opportunities for
everyone and prevent discrimination. For further discussion of the scheme, please refer to the
third periodic report on the Council of Europe's Framework Convention for the Protection of
National Minorities, pages 6-7. NOK 5.841 million was appropriated for this purpose in 2011.
43

According to the circular that sets out the guidelines for the allocation of funds, basic support
can be provided to organisations whose purpose is to preserve and develop a minority's
culture and identity, language, traditions and heritage.
Transnational exchanges
Norway has also organised study tours to Sweden for the Minister and State Secretary with
responsibility for national minorities. This cooperation is useful because, on the whole, the
same groups are recognised as national minorities in these two countries. Some of the national
minority organisations have translational contacts with Sweden and have been able to utilise
part of the Government's support for the organisations for this purpose.

Part III
The Charter Part III - Implementation of the undertakings and initiatives to
follow up the Committee of Experts' recommendations
The Council of Europe requests that in Part III a description be provided of how the
undertakings under the Charter have been implemented, with a focus on new developments
since the previous report.
The Council of Europe requests additional information in relation to the undertakings about
which the Committee of Experts did not receive sufficient information in the previous round
to evaluate their implementation.
For undertakings that the Committee of Experts believes were not met, we would request that
the state indicate what measures have been taken to implement the provisions.
As far as the requests and so-called 'box recommendations' of the Committee of Experts are
concerned, the Council of Europe requests a detailed description of the legal and practical
measures the Government has implemented.
At a general level, the Committee of Experts asks the following questions:
134. The authorities are asked to provide information on the Ája Sami Centre’s
expansion to house a museum and a Sami library.

The Centre for Northern Peoples (formerly the Ája Sami Center) plays an important role in
the preservation and development of Sami culture. The extension of the centre, with premises
for a museum and Sami library, has been completed and was opened to the public in 2011.
The project received a total of NOK 22 million in the period 2007-2011. The project
framework includes expenses for exhibits and equipment.

44

140. The authorities are asked to report on the fulfilment of all undertakings with
regard to the coastal regions (see the fourth assessment report of the Committee of
Experts).

Few special assessments have been carried out in relation to the coastal areas when
implementing measures aimed at safeguarding Sami languages. Therefore, please refer to the
general discussion of the implementation of the relevant provisions that are relevant to the
Coastal Sami areas in the same way as for the other areas.
At the same time, we would also like to point out that of the municipalities included in the
administrative district for Sami language, Lavangen and Kåfjord are particularly regarded as
belonging to the coastal areas/Coastal Sami areas.
The Municipality of Lavangen was incorporated into the administrative district for Sami
language on 1 October 2009. A Sami language centre has been established in Lavangen,
which is funded by Sámediggi.
In 2004, the Municipality of Tromsø opened a Sami language centre in the Coastal Sami
village of Ullsfjord. The courses the language centre arranges include courses on Coastal
Sami cuisine and history.
Article 8 - Education
Please see the discussion of Sami in primary schools, lower secondary schools and upper
secondary schools, and in vocational training, Part II, article 7 Sami languages.
142. The authorities are asked to provide specific information on the fulfilment of all
undertakings in relation to education ratified by Norway in each of the municipalities
covered by the Sami Administrative District, especially the municipalities of
Porsanger, Tana, Nesseby and Kåfjord

In Budget recommendation no. 12 (2008-2009), a majority of the Standing Committee on
Education, Research and Church Affairs asked the Ministry of Education and Research to
assess the oversight of how the rights of Sami pupils are being met, including the availability
of teaching materials. In accordance with the allotment letter for the Norwegian Directorate
for Education and Training for 2009, the Directorate has set out a strategy for how the
oversight should be conducted and prepared instructions for the oversight. The county
governors of Nordland, Troms and Finnmark were involved in the work, and inspections were
carried out in four municipalities. The oversight revealed discrepancies in three of the four
municipalities. The discrepancies largely related to a lack of proper systems for the
municipalities' duty to provide Sami pupils with tuition in Sami. A lack of access to teaching
materials was also reported as a challenge for tuition in Sami. Given the small number of
inspections, it was difficult to assess the general situation in the sector with respect to the
fulfilment of the Sami pupils' rights under the Education Act.
Inspections were carried out in eight municipalities and one county authority in the spring of
2010. The oversight provided similar results to those in 2009. The oversight revealed
45

discrepancies in three municipalities. The results of the oversight in the spring of 2010 also
indicate that there may be instances where pupils entitled to tuition in Sami are not receiving
the correct number of hours in all subjects according to the Knowledge Promotion Reform's
framework regulating the distribution of periods and subjects. Practices appear to vary
between school owners with regard to the number of hours of Sami tuition. In the winter of
2011, a working group of representatives from Sámediggi, the Ministry of Education and
Research and the Norwegian Directorate for Education and Training presented a report on
measures aimed at meeting these challenges. The Ministry of Education and Research has
begun to consider the measures in the report.
143. The authorities are asked to clarify the number of students who are taking Sami
as a second language.

According to the School Information System (GSI), 1,145 primary school pupils were
receiving tuition in North Sami as a second language in the 2010/2011 school year. 68
students were receiving tuition in Lule Sami as a second language, and 72 in South Sami as a
second language. A total of 1,285 pupils.
At the upper secondary level, statistics from the Norwegian Directorate for Education and
Training/VIGO show that in the 2010/2011 school year, 185 pupils were receiving tuition in
Sami as a second language, of which 173 were receiving tuition in North Sami as a second
language.
The analysis group for Sami publishes “Samiske tall forteller” [Sami figures relate] every
year. In the fourth edition (2011), the analysis group points out that the clearest and most
important trend in the statistics for Sami languages in kindergarten and school for the
2010/2011 school year is the decrease in the number of pupils who choose Sami as a Second
Language in primary and lower secondary school. Sami as a Second Language has lost 38%
of its pupils since 2006.
The analysis group considers the figures for primary and lower secondary school dramatic and
has therefore conducted an analysis of these figures. The factors considered in the analysis are
general urbanisation, a general decline in the number of children born in a year, the
framework regulating the distribution of periods and subjects, discontinuation of the Sami
language and culture curriculum (2006) and the bilingual tuition model.

144. Have the Norwegian authorities taken steps to develop adequate teaching
materials in North Sami?

Sámediggi, which bears responsibility for the development and production of Sami teaching
materials, annually awards funds that, among other things, are used for teaching material
development for all three Sami languages. Sámediggi has allocated NOK 12-14 million
annually to this effort in recent years.

46

Please also see the discussion on the Committee of Ministers' third recommendation in Part I
concerning the working group on Sami teaching materials. The working group's report also
discusses proposals for North Sami teaching materials.

155. The Committee of Experts notes that the University of Tromsø teaches North
Sami as a foreign language, and that at the University of Oslo the teaching in North
Sami has been changed to first language tuition. Furthermore, the Sami University
College has recently merged with the Nordic Sami Institute, which encompasses
teacher training and research on different subjects. The Norwegian authorities are
asked to provide information about the results of this.

There has been a positive development and strengthening of Sami course provision at the
University of Tromsø.
Tuition is provided in the following Sami subjects at the University of Tromsø:
SAM-1030 North Sami for non-native speakers: Grammar I
SAM-1031 North Sami for non-native speakers: Practical usage and an introduction to
grammar
SAM-2015 Sami linguistics - North Sami: Morphosyntax and syntax
SAM-2016 Sami linguistics - North Sami: Writing course
SAM-2110 Sami literature - North Sami Indigenous literature
SAM-3010 Sami literature - Theory and methodology
SAM 3115 Sami text interpreting history and indigenous criticism
SAM-3900 Master's thesis in Sami language
SAM 3910 Master's thesis in Sami literature
SAM 3940 Master's thesis in Sami (first language)
SVF-6001
Sami cultural studies
It is too early to say anything about the results of the changes to which the Committee of
Experts refers in this question.
Article 8, para. 2
157. Have any measures been taken by the Norwegian government and Sámediggi to
collect reliable data on the number and distribution of speakers and the degree of
language competence?

The Ministry of Education and Research and Sámediggi will conduct a larger survey of the
use of the Sami languages. The survey was start in the autumn of 2011. See further discussion
of Part II, Article 7 in the answers to question 7.

158. The Norwegian authorities are asked to clarify if any progress has been made
with regard to accessibility to kindergartens in Oslo and Tromsø.
47

Grants are provided to Sami kindergartens. The goal is to ensure Sami children kindergarten
provision based on Sami language and culture. Sami will be the primary language in the Sami
kindergartens. Meanwhile, there are no pre-schools in Norway, but pre-school provision is
covered by kindergartens.

160. The Norwegian authorities are asked to clarify the situation of Sami education in
Oslo.
In Oslo, 27 students in primary and 2 secondary school pupils were receiving tuition in North
Sami as per 1 October in the 2010/2011 school year.
Pupils in primary and secondary school in Oslo seeking provision in North Sami receive
tuition organised by Kampen School. The provision is additional to the ordinary tuition.

Article 8, para. 1, subpara. i
The ombudsmen for children in Sweden, Finland and Norway presented a report in 2008
called "The right to participate and influence for Sami children and youth" (ISBN 978-9187448-52-2). The report illustrates what a sample of children and young people see as
problems and opportunities in their day-to-day lives in the three countries. The report
describes several factors that affect language development:
- School and education
- Recreation
- Mass media
The report provides contributions on how children and young people experience their
situation.
Article 9 - Legal authorities
Article 9, para. 1 Administration of justice in criminal and civil cases
The courts
Sis-Finnmárkku Family Counselling Services/Inner Finnmark District Court (Tana) were
established in 2004 due to a desire to strengthen the Sami dimension in the judicial system
and help increase knowledge about Sami languages, culture and legal culture, and increase the
use of Sami languages. When it comes to the use of Sami languages, a manual count at the
court shows that North Sami is partially or exclusively used in approx. one in every four court
cases.
The Norwegian Courts Administration has initiated a review of efforts to safeguard the Sami
people's interests. The goal is to gain more knowledge about the challenges in this work,
assess the current situation and propose measures. In the spring of 2010, the Norwegian
Courts Administration established a working group tasked with investigating various issues
related to the Sami dimension of the judicial system. The working group has been led by the
district recorder at Inner Finnmark District Court, Finn-Arne Schanche Selfors.
48

The working group presented its report on 14 January 2011. In accordance with its mandate,
the working group explained the legal obligations the courts and Norwegian Courts
Administration have with regard to the Sami population in Norway, and described the status
of these undertakings today. The working group also noted challenges and areas for
improvement, and formulated goals for the future work on the Sami dimension of the judicial
system.
The working group proposed concrete measures of a short-term and long-term nature to
achieve these objectives. The working group afforded priority to measures aimed at increasing
knowledge about Sami languages, culture and legal issues, as well as recruitment. The
working group also proposed measures related to the development of legal terms in Sami and
expertise with regard to Sami languages in the courts.
The report will be circulated to the concerned courts and relevant external parties. This will
form the basis for the Norwegian Courts Administration's further work on safeguarding the
Sami dimension in the judicial system, including assessing specific measures to strengthen
this dimension.
Article 9, para. 3 Translation
Translation of the text national statutes
The following new legal texts have been translated into North Sami since the last periodic
report:
• The Marine Resources Act
• The Planning and Building Act
• The Mineral Act and the regulations relating to the Mineral Act.
Translations are normally published on the Government's website: www.regjeringen.no and
www.lagat.no.
• Significant parts of the regulations relating to the Tax Act, Value Added Tax Act, tax
law and tax payment law is cited in provided in Sami in guidelines and the tax return
form. However, the actual legal texts have not been translated.

The Committee of Experts has the following questions in relation to article 9, para. 1
subpara. a.i; a.ii; a.iii; a.iv; b.i; b.ii; b.iii:
162-164. The Norwegian authorities are asked to report on the development of Sami
legal terminology and training of lawyers and judges in Sami languages and Sami
legal terminology.
Development of Sami legal terminology
See the discussion of "Sami legal language" and "Sami legal terminology" projects in the
response to questions 78 and 86 in Part II, Article 7.
Training of lawyers and judges in Sami languages and Sami legal terminology
49

Neither the Ministry of Justice nor the Norwegian Courts Administration have or know of
projects/continued education programmes for judges/executive officers or lawyers aimed at
improving competence in Sami languages and Sami terminology.

165-167 The Norwegian authorities are asked to provide information regarding the
use of Sami before Nord-Troms District Court, and particularly in Kåfjord.

The courts' case management system does not permit the registering of language usage in
each individual case. Therefore, there are no statistics on how many cases were conducted
using North Sami. However, in 2010 Nord-Troms District Court said there had been a limited
number of cases where there was a need for a North Sami interpreter. This also applies to
cases from the Municipality of Kåfjord.
Article 10 - Administrative authorities and public services
Article 10, para. 1 The Government's administrative areas
Article 10, para. 1, subpara. a Oral and written inquiries
The Norwegian Labour and Welfare Administration (NAV) in Finnmark
Sami speaking staff are employed at all five NAV offices in Finnmark, which are located in
the municipalities that are in the administrative district for Sami language. Four of these
offices have employees who also have a command of the written languages.
The customer centre in Kautokeino, Finnmark was established in June 2009. This is NAV's
telephonic front line in the county and consists of eight employees in Alta and three
employees in Kautokeino. The idea behind the department in Kautokeino is that it will be a
Sami language telephone service for the residents of the five municipalities in Finnmark
included in the administrative district for Sami language (Karasjok, Kautokeino, Tana,
Nesseby and Porsanger).
All three employees at the customer centre in Kautokeino are Sami speaking (North Sami)
and two of them have a command of the written language. They serve both Norwegian
speaking and Sami speaking users. The customer centre answers questions about all of NAV's
services.
NAV prioritises translations into North Sami, which is the Sami language that has made the
most progress in developing as a written language; North Sami is also the language spoken by
most Sami speakers.
The Norwegian Labour and Welfare Administration's user surveys in the administrative
district for Sami language
The Norwegian Labour and Welfare Administration will carry out local user surveys in the
administrative district for Sami language. The results will provide a basis for developing the
quality of services in the agency. In the second half of 2009, an online user survey of Sami
was conducted for the first time at NAV's offices in the administrative district for Sami in
Finnmark. The offices that participated were NAV Tana, NAV Kautokeino, NAV Karasjok,
50

NAV Porsanger and NAV Nesseby. The users were asked how accessible they perceive the
NAV offices to be with regard to contacting the NAV office in Sami and getting answers in
Sami.
The users responded that arranging a meeting with an advisor/executive officer who spoke
Sami was not hard. They also responded that they it was not difficult to call the NAV office or
contact the NAV office in Sami. They responded that it was harder to contact them and get
answers back in Sami via letter.
Sami user surveys are under development. The plan is that in the future these
will also cover NAV offices in the Lule and South Sami areas.
Tax helpline
Taxpayers can choose North Sami when contacting the tax helpline and will then be
transferred to a Sami speaking officer. Taxpayers who communicate in written North Sami,
will receive an answer in North Sami.
Article 10, para. 1, subpara. b Generally used administrative texts and forms
Information in Sami in the Norwegian Labour and Welfare Administration (NAV)
Sami terms within NAV's field are being developed gradually through the translation of texts.
Besides translating the information into North Sami, the Norwegian Labour and Welfare
Administration is helping pioneer language work in an field that has previously lacked Sami
words and concepts. To make the new terms as good and as accurate as possible, the agency
makes use of the development of Sami concepts that occurs in when Sami speaking staff and
Sami speaking users meet. A network of Sami speaking staff with broad expertise assists
translators and provides input regarding the terms that should be used in various areas.
The Norwegian Labour and Welfare Administration will strive to ensure the information most
often requested about the agency's services and users' rights is available in North Sami on its
website.The Norwegian Labour and Welfare Administration is in the process of translating its
main leaflets into North Sami.The Norwegian Labour and Welfare Administration also
translates various other materials into North Sami.
In the spring of 2009, a separate Sami menu point was introduced on the front page of nav.no.
The Sami pages contain factual information about NAV's benefits and services together with
the corresponding forms. From 2011, there will also be a Sami news service on the website in
which relevant expert information will be translated.
Translations in the Ministry of the Environment's area of responsibility
The circular putting into effect the new Planning and Building Act and the thematic guide for
reindeer husbandry has been translated into North Sami. So have 13 protection regulations for
Finnmark and the European Landscape Convention.
Translations for the kindergarten sector
The national curriculum for kindergartens has been translated into North Sami.

51

Translations within the tax field
The Tax Administration has translated the vast majority of those forms that are generally
widely used, and those which are considered particularly relevant for the Sami population,
into North Sami. Forms, guides and other information that have been translated into North
Sami are available on the Tax Administration's website: skatteetaten.no.
In 2011, the Tax Administration started to translate the contents of skatteetaten.no into Sami.
General guidelines that benefit the user have been given priority.
The ministries' website: regjeringen.no
All ministries have translated parts of their web pages into North Sami.
The Norwegian Competition Authority's website
The Norwegian Competition Authority has prepared a special strategy and activity plan for
the use of Sami languages. The Activity Plan includes both its website and other information
material.
The Competition Authority launched a Sami language edition of the Authority's website in
June 2010. In addition to general information about the Authority, the website provides
information about the Competition Act's prohibitions and the obligation to report mergers and
acquisitions to the Competition Authority. Selected press releases are also translated. In June
2011, the Competition Authority's electricity price overview (electricity price comparison
website) was made available in Sami by translating fixed texts (titles, legends, options and
buttons on forms, etc.). The language used is North Sami.
Translations within the health sector
There is an increasing tendency to translate population-oriented campaigns, brochures, DVDs
and similar information materials in the health sector into North Sami. However, it cannot be
said that information from the central health authorities is systematically translated into North
Sami.
Translations within the fisheries field
A summary of the recommendations of the Coastal Fishing Committee for Finnmark was
translated into North Sami and included in the recommendations (NOU 2008:5 The right to
fisheries in the sea outside of Finnmark). A short brochure was also produced in North Sami
about the main features of the proposals from the Coastal Fishing Committee.
Translations within commerce
Sami place names and the Sami names for various reindeer grazing districts and pastures are
used documents related to the value creation programme for reindeer husbandry (VSP
reindeer), which is run by Innovation Norway. (Innovation Norway offers services within
funding, expertise, advice, networking and promotion.)
The agreement between Sámediggi and Innovation Norway, which lasted until 1 January
2011, was available in Sami.
Innovation Norway has a North Sami version of its name - Innovašuvdna Norga.
Translations within the cultural field
An Information brochure on The Cultural Diversity Year 2008 was published in North Sami.
52

Translations within the transport sector
The Norwegian Public Roads Administration's Region North has translated a 'sight board' into
North Sami, which is used for vision tests in driving tests, etc., and also some campaign signs
('Stop and sleep' and 'Remember, seat belt'). Region North has also hired a driving test
examiner who has a command of North Sami.

Article 10, para. 2 Local and regional authorities

The Committee of Experts has the following question in relation to article 10, para. 2
subpara. a, b, e, f, g:
181. The Norwegian authorities are asked to provide information on North Sami
language and culture courses, as requested by the West Finnmark Police Authority
for their employees, in particular whether the course took place, the number of
officers, etc.

West Finnmark Police Authority has not held a course in Sami languages and culture. The
Police Authority contacted the Sami University College in 2007/2008 about buying an
agency-tailored course in Sami languages and culture. A meeting was held in which an
example of the curriculum was presented, and after which the Police Authority subsequently
prepared an overview of police-related issues. The course was intended for operational
managers and police officers with ethnic Norwegian backgrounds in the Police
Authority/districts where Sami languages are afforded equal importance to Norwegian. The
Police Authority recognises the importance of courses in this area, but unfortunately the work
seems to have come to a halt at the Sami University College.
The Committee of Experts has the following question in relation to article 10, para. 4,
subpara. a:
189. The Norwegian authorities are asked to report on the measures and results of the
new strategy adopted to attract students to training programmes for professional
interpreters.

In 2010, the Ministry of Education and Research allocated NOK 200,000 to each of the Sami
recruitment initiatives at the University of Nordland, University of Tromsø, Sami University
College and Nord-Trøndelag University College. In addition, NOK 1 million was allocated to
collaborative efforts for the development of Sami interpreter training.
The Sami University College, University of Nordland, Nord-Trøndelag University College,
and Oslo University College have on behalf of the Ministry of Education and Research
developed a model for interpreter training in Sami languages. The report from the joint
venture was presented on 1 March 2011.
53

25 people completed the 30 credit, Norwegian/North Sami interpreter training between 19942008. Of these, 22 students completed their interpreter training at the Sami University College
and 3 students completed their interpreter training at Oslo University College. Oslo University
College is offering interpreter training in Norwegian/North Sami in 2011. Four students have
been admitted to the course.

Article 10, para. 5 Use and introduction of last names

The Committee of Experts has the following question in relation to article 10, para. 5:
193. (box) Can the Norwegian authorities guarantee that national population registers
and other public institutions accept Sami names in their original form?
(box) Can the Norwegian authorities guarantee that national population registers and
other public institutions accept Sami names in their original form?
Sami last names in public records
The Government has, through a reference directory for IT standards in the public sector,
instructed that computer systems and records in the state sector must support Sami characters.
It is a requirement that when new systems are developed or major changes made to older
systems, full support for Sami characters must be implemented. Since the report in 2008, this
requirement will also include Norwegian municipalities from 2011. Having support means
that the systems and registers can receive, store and send Sami characters.
The transition to international character sets, so that the systems are able to exchange data
containing Sami characters, may result in costly system changes and will therefore take some
time. Older, existing systems still use a character set that contains 6 North Sami characters in
large and small representations (large and small letters).
We do not have an overview of what the status is when it comes to public records today.
However, we know that the largest and most important registers do not support Sami
characters today. This means that Sami names are not correctly represented in these registers.
In practice, the Sami characters are replaced by other available characters (the characters
differ from register to register).
This applies to the National Population Register and the Brønnøysund Register Centre. These
systems cannot automatically exchange data containing Sami characters. This means that it is
not possible to deliver, for example, tax returns in Sami in electronic form. The Tax
Administration has adopted a new character set so that Kven and Sami characters can be used
in the National Population Register. The new character set means screens and printouts from
the register display the characters correctly.
According to the Agency for Public Management and eGovernment (DIFI), the most widely
used Sami characters are now used in the National Population Register and it is estimated that
about 95% of the names that contain Sami characters can be written correctly.

54

We estimate that it will still take some years before the Norwegian authorities can guarantee
full implementation, as the Committee of Experts has asked about, but the regulations that
have been adopted ensure a gradual transition to full support as new solutions are developed.
Article 11 - Media
Article 11, para. 1, subpara. a, iii
Radio and television programmes in Sami and about Sami issues
The Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation (NRK) is a state-owned, public broadcasting
service that is licence fee funded. With fourteen radio stations and three television channels, it
is Norway's largest broadcasting institution. NRK Sápmi (formerly NRK Sami Radio), which
is organised as a special unit, produces programmes for the Sami population.
According to NRK's mandate, which was incorporated into NRK's governing document in its
entirety in June 2009, the Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation shall help to strengthen the
Norwegian and Sami languages, identities and cultures, and broadcast regular programmes for
children and young people in Sami. The mandate does not distinguish between the various
Sami languages, but refers to the Sami population and Sami languages as a whole. NRK is
free, from an editorial point of view, to decide how this requirement will be met.
The licensing conditions for the Norwegian commercial public service broadcasters Radio
Norway (radio) and P4 (radio) contain a specification of requirements concerning their
programming. Long-term programming plans must include a wide range of programmes
suitable for both larger and smaller audiences, including the Sami population and other
minority groups. The licensing terms for P4 require at least two daily news broadcasts in
Sami. In addition, the licensing requirements for Radio Norway stipulate a requirement for
daily news broadcasts in Sami, as well as daily items in Norwegian analysing or commenting
on Sami issues.

Article 11, paragraph 1, subparagraph c, ii
Radio and television broadcasts
In 2009, NRK Sami Radio produced a total of 248 hours of television broadcasts and 1,631
hours of radio broadcasts. The programming volume has increased significantly for television.
Sami Radio also broadcasts on the digital radio network (DAB). From 1 January 2011, NRK
Sami Radio changed its name to NRK Sápmi.
In 2007, NRK Sami Radio moved its internet services over to nrk.no. The number of users has
grown rapidly since the service was relaunched in March 2007. Average usage per month
increased from less than 14,000 individual users to over 37,000 unique visitors a month in
2009.
The radio station Radio Norway broadcast 32 hours of programmes for the Sami speaking
population in 2009. The radio channel P4 broadcast 649 news broadcasts in Sami in 2009,
which adds up to about 20 hours.

55

Article 11, paragraph 1, subparagraph e, i
Support schemes for newspapers
A support scheme for Sami newspapers was established in 1978. In 2011, support totalling
NOK 23 million was provided. The funding increased by NOK 9.2 million, or more than
60%, between 2007 and 2011. The aim has been to contribute to the establishment of Sami
daily newspapers. This increase has made it possible for the two Sami newspapers to increase
to five issues per week (the Sami language newspaper Ávvir and the Norwegian language
Sami newspaper Sagat).
According to the scheme's current regulations, the grants go to newspapers whose main target
group is the Sami population. The purpose of the grants is to "facilitate democratic debate,
opinion formation and language development in the Sami community". The scheme is
administered by the Norwegian Media Authority, an administrative body organised under the
Ministry of Culture.
Article 11, paragraph 1, subparagraph f, ii
Audiovisual productions
The rules for support for audiovisual productions ensure Norwegian and Sami languages
equal status in all grant schemes administered by the Norwegian Film Institute.
The Sami International Film Centre (ISF) in Kautokeino has received state subsidies since
2009. The state funds for the film centre are intended to go towards the development and
production of short films and documentaries, upgrading skills, and initiatives for children and
young people. The subsidy amounted to NOK 2.5 million in 2011, an increase of NOK 1
million since its inception in 2009. ISF is tasked with promoting Sami filmmaking and Sami
films in Norway, Sweden, Finland and Russia.
Before ISF was established, the North Norwegian Film Centre bore particular responsibility
for encouraging and supporting Sami film. The film centre is a regional organisation that
provides support for the development and production of short films and documentaries in
Northern Norway, as well as skills upgrading, and initiatives for children and young people.
The North Norwegian Film Centre actively cooperates with ISF.
Applications can also be submitted to the Sami Culture Fund for funding for Sami film
productions. The fund is managed by Sámediggi.
Article 11, paragraph 1, subparagraph g
The Sami University College offers courses in environmental journalism in a Sami
perspective, Sami journalist training, Sami languages and presenting Sami culture and society.
These academic courses are aimed at training Sami media personnel.

56

Article 12 - Cultural activities and cultural facilities
Culture Promotion II
Sami culture is one of 17 points in Culture Promotion II, which presents the Government's
cultural policy initiatives up to 2014: "Sami culture shall be preserved and developed further.
Implement a Sami cultural lift by increasing the cultural appropriation to Sámediggi. Sami
languages shall be strengthened. "
The appropriation in the Ministry of Culture's budget for Sami cultural activities is intended to
cover grants for the following purposes: Sami music, Sami scholarships and scholarship
committee fees, exhibition fees for Sami art institutions, Beaivváš Sami Teáhter, the place
names service, Sámediggi's library and mobile library service, the journal Nuortanaste and
Sami museums.
These objectives are of central importance in preserving and developing both Sami languages
and culture.
In 2011, the appropriation for Sámediggi for cultural purposes amounted to NOK 67.4
million. The appropriation is transferred to and distributed by Sámediggi.
Appropriations to Sámediggi for cultural purposes in the years 2008-2011:
2008
NOK 53.5 million

2009
NOK 62 million

2010
NOK 65.4 million

2011
NOK 67.4 million

Sami archives
The operating costs of the Sami archives are covered by the annual appropriation to the
National Archives of Norway. In 2009, the Sami archives moved into new premises in the
Sami research building in Kautokeino. In connection with the relocation, the state budget for
2010 included an increase in funding for the National Archives of Norway of NOK 2.2
million for operations and NOK 1.1 million for investments in equipment for the Sami
archives.
The Sami bibliography
The Sami bibliography is a catalogue of literature in Sami and Norwegian, and other
languages when the topic is relevant to Sami. The National Library of Norway is responsible
for the Sami bibliography, which in 2010 was moved to BIBSYS. (BIBSYS is a state agency
that provides easy access to library resources through multiple search capabilities and userfriendly loan and order functions). The Sami bibliography was until 2010 collated using a
separate system, with quarterly updates on the internet. Registration now takes place directly
in BIBSYS and it is updated continuously. The documents that are registered depend on what
is delivered under the provisions of the Legal Deposit Act.
The Riddu Riððu Festival - an international indigenous people's festival
In 2009, the international indigenous people's festival, the Riddu Riððu Festival, was granted
the status of a hub festival. This means it is funded 70%/30% by the state/region. The
57

Government grant in 2011 amounted to NOK 1.596 million. Its mission as a hub festival also
means that the festival has a responsibility to develop the genre, work with other players, etc.
Criteria have been developed for assessing and evaluating hubs.
The Riddu Riððu Festival is held every year in July in Kåfjord in Troms. The festival was
established in 1991 by Gaivuona Sámenuarat (Kåfjord Sami Youth) under the name of Jagi
Vai Beaivvi (Saami Cultural Days). Its establishment was described as the result of a Coastal
Sami youth rebellion against the hiding away of Sami culture. The festival's purpose is to
"promote and develop Coastal Sami culture in the encounter with itself and other cultures...".
In addition to a comprehensive music programme, every year the festival presents projects in
the performing arts, film and literature. Training courses are provided in traditional and
contemporary indigenous traditions and seminars held on current issues affecting indigenous
people within politics, history, science, etc. The festival has experienced good audience
growth in recent years. Further information about the festival is provided on its website
http://www.riddu.no/.

Article 13 - Economic and social life
Article 13, para. 2 subpara. c
207. (box) What steps have been taken to ensure that social care facilities offer in
practice the possibility for patients to communicate in Sami with health personnel?

We refer to the discussion in Part I on the first recommendation of the Committee of
Ministers concerning ensuring that social services and health care institutions within the
administrative district for Sami language provide services in North Sami.
Article 14 - Transnational contacts
Cultural centre for northern indigenous peoples
In 2010, the Riddu Riððu Festival and the Centre for Northern Peoples received a grant of
NOK 200,000 via the national budget's chapter 314, post 72 Cultural Cooperation in the
North, for the establishment of a cultural center in Moscow for northern indigenous peoples.
The project is a collaboration with the Russian umbrella organisation for indigenous peoples
in Russia, RAIPON.
We also refer to the description of the action plan: "Region of opportunity – an action plan for
cultural cooperation in the High North" in Part I, sub-chapter on policy, legislation and
practice - changes.
Transnational cooperation
Tana has received funding for a transnational cooperation project on Sami languages and
culture in schools and kindergartens in the Tana Valley. The collaboration is between the
schools in Sirma and Utsjoki, which are on the Norwegian and Finnish sides of the border,
58

respectively. Contact and opportunities for sharing experiences, and inspiring pupils to
develop their language and culture, are considered valuable.

APPENDICES
1. The Action Plan for Sami Languages
2. Cultural preservation related to Sami culture and cultural projects related to Kven culture
that received grants from the Arts Council Norway between 2008-2010
3. Performing arts - grants for projects related to Sami culture from the Arts Council Norway
between 2008-2010
4. Grants for Kven purposes
5. A list of the consultative bodies and a list of the national minority organisations that were
invited to the oral public hearing on the draft report

59

Appendix 2
Cultural preservation - museums and cultural preservation projects related to Sami culture
that received grants from the Norwegian Archive, Library and Museum Authority between
2008-2010:

Year

Recipient

2008

Helgeland Museum, Vefsn Branch

2008

2008

2009
2009

2009
2009
2010

2010

Project

A female
perspective on
Helgeland's Sami
history
World Heritage Rock Art Centre Differences and
Alta Museum
similarities
between Sami and
Norwegians (The
Cultural
Rucksack)
RiddoDuottarMuseat/Nordvestsamisk Sami identity - a
museumssiida
minority in a
national context
Eastsami Museum
Skoltelandet then
and now
Árran - lulesami center
Workshop in
connection with
new exhibition
RiddoDuottarMuseat
Diversity and
culture in Sápmi
Saemien Sijte
Sami youth
World Heritage Rock Art Centre We and the others
Alta Museum
in museum
communication
(dialogue project)
RiddoDuottarMuseat/Nordvestsamisk The lives and
museumssiida
work of women in
reindeer
husbandry

Total grant
NOK
145,000

28,000

100,000

200,000
90,000

200,000
85,000
348,000

80,000

Cultural projects related to Kven culture that received grants from the Arts Council Norway
between 2008-2010:

General cultural
purposes
2008

Applicant

Title

Total

The Norwegian
Kven Association

Information material Kven history and

750,000
60

2008

2009
2009
2009

Free performing
arts - dance
2008

culture
Siivet Grenseløse
Åitin sanat/Mother's
Bilder
words - a documentary
about the Kven author
Alf Nilsen-Børsskog
Municipality of
The Kven Culture
Nordreisa
Festival Baaski 2009
Børselv
The Kippari Festival
Kvenfestivalforening 2009
Halti
Paaskiviikko — Kven
Kvenkultursenter
culture days in NordTroms 2010

150,000

80,000
80,000
110,000

Anstein Mikkelsen Siivet

Kven dance that does
not exist

200,000

Literature (other
literary projects)
2008

Idut Forlag

28,000

2008

Idut Forlag

2010
2010

Ruijan Kaiku
Ruija Forlag

Publication of
collection of Kven
poems by Alf NilsenBørskog
Publication of Kven
novel by Alf NilsenBørskog
Ruijan Kaiku
Kven children's book
by Agnes Eriksen:
"Spøkelse og
stjernegutt 1 og 2"

Ruija Forlag
Ruijan Kaiku
Ruijan Kaiku

Ruijan Kaiku
Ruijan Kaiku
Ruijan Kaiku

782,000
1,000,000
750,000

Ruija Forlag

CD release:
50,000
Hans Bjerke sings
Kven songs and psalms
Purchase of
75,000
phonogram
documenting living
Kven tradition in
Norway

Literature
(funding for
weekly and
monthly
newspapers)
2008
2009
2010
Music
2008

2009

Etnisk Musikklubb
AS

100,000

250,000
50,000

Cultural
preservation
61

2008

Lakselv Landowners
Association

2008

Siivet Grenseløse
Bilder AS

2009

Siivet Grenseløse
Bilder AS

2010

Lightsource Film
Productions

Place names associated
with Lakselva preservation of Kven
place names in the
river valley
Åitin sanat/Mother's
words - a documentary
about the
Kven author Alf
Nilsen-Børsskog
Five to twelve - video
documentation of the
last carriers of the
original Kven culture
Documentary: The
Secret Language

30,000

150,000

150,000

200,000

62

Appendix 3
Performing arts - Grants for projects related to Sami culture between 2008-2010 from the
Arts Council Norway
2008
Script development
07/06040

Applicant
Cecilie Mosli
Saami Teather
Searvi/Samisk
teaterforbund

08/02749

Mette Brantzeg

Title
Mora di er
same
Course in
writing scripts
for the stage in
Sami
Arktisk hysteri

Sami

Total in NOK
25,000

Sami

200,000

Sami

50,000

2009
Choreography
development
09/01864

Johanne Eltoft

Reindans Boazudánsa

Sami

50,000

Script
development
09/3605

Kristina Junttila

Hos Leena
Pedersen 30/51993

Sami

75,000

2010
Other
performing arts
projects
10/3775

Åarjelhsaemien
Theatre laboratory
Teatere/Sydsamisk /workshops
Teater

Free performing
arts - dance
10/5173
Elle Sofe
Henriksen
10/409

Johanne Eltoft

South
Sami

75,000

Beatnaga ii galgga gulgii
geahccat/En skal ikke
skue hunden på hårene

Sami

150,000

Reindans - Boazudánsa

Sami

100,000

63

Appendix 4
Grants for Kven purposes
2008:
Siivet Grenseløse Bilder AS
The Norwegian Kven
Association
Varanger Museum
Municipality of Nordreisa
Municipality of Nordreisa
Trevland AS
Trevland AS
Trevland AS

Documentary about Alf Nilsen Børsskog

NOK

70,000

Information film about the Kvens
Other Voices project- ethnographic film project
of the Kvens in Northern Norway
Networking with the minority language speakers
from Tornedalen
Information about the Kven immigration
Translation of children's book
Development of audio book in Kven
Publication of Kven cartoons

NOK

40,000

NOK

20,000

NOK
NOK
NOK
NOK
NOK

10,000
20,000
10,000
10,000
20,000

NOK
NOK

144,000
140,000

NOK
NOK
NOK
NOK

70,000
100,000
60,000
56,200

Founding capital - Ruijan Kaiku

NOK

74,800

Older Kvens relate

NOK

10,000

Workshop and concert in connection with Uuet
laulut - Odda lavlagat - new songs, music project
for young people who want to sing in minority
languages.
Kven Christmas booklets
Project to collate Kven grammar

NOK
50,000

2009:
The Kvenland Federation
Municipality of Porsanger
Municipality of Storfjord
Varanger Museum
Varanger Museum
Municipality of Porsanger
The Norwegian Kven
Association
2010:
Sølvi Sollie
2011:
The Kven Institute

Čalliidlágádus
The Kven Institute

Expanding cooperation between Kven and FinnoUgric minorities
Strengthening of trilingual work
Working group - user development work
in language and culture.
Establishment of a Kven language centre
Kven names on the web and map
Trilingual songbook

NOK
50,000
NOK
100,000

64

Appendix 5
A list of consultative bodies that received the draft report
Ministries
Sámediggi, Department of Education, Language and Culture, N-9730 Karasjok
Samisk språk- og kultursenter, Kirkevn. 28, N-9700 Lakselv
Samisk språksenter, Postboks 74, N-9148 Olderdalen
Centre for Northern Peoples, N-9144 Samuelsberg
Árran - lulesami center, N-8270 Ájluokta/Drag
Várdobáika samisk senter, N-8536 Evenes
Isak Saba guovddáš, N-9840 Varangerbotn
Tana samiske språksenter, Postboks 7, N-9846 Tana
Gáisi Giellaguovddáš, Rådhuset, Postboks 6900, N-9299 Tromsø
Aajege Samisk språk- og kompetansesenter, Sundveien 12, N-7374 Røros
Álttá Sámi Giellaguovddáš, Nøkkelstien 2, N-9510 Alta
Lavangen språksenter, Servicebygget, Nessveien 7, N-9357 Tennevoll
Storfjord språksenter, Hatteng, N-9046 Oteren
Kainun institutti – The Kven Institute, PL160, N-9716 Pyssyjoki/Børselv
Halti Kvenkultursenter IKS, N-9151 Storslett
University of Oslo, Department of Linguistics and Scandinavian Studies, Postboks 1102
Blindern, N-0317 Oslo
Norwegian Centre for Human Rights, Postboks 6706, St Olavs plass, N-0130 Oslo
University of Tromsø, Centre for Sami Studies, N-9037 Tromsø
University of Bergen, Department of Linguistic, Literary and Aesthetic Studies, Postboks
7800, N-5020 Bergen
University of Stavanger, Faculty of Arts and Education, Postboks 8002 Forus, N-4068
Stavanger
Sámi University College, Hannoluohkka 45, N-9520 Kautokeino
Bodø University College, N-8049 Bodø
Nord-Trøndelag University College, Faculty of Social Sciences, Postboks 2501, N-7729
Steinkjer
Oslo and Akershus University College, NAFO - National Centre for Multicultural Education,
Postboks 4 St
Olavs plass, N-0130 Oslo
Gáldu - Resource Centre for the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, Bredbuktnesveien 50, 9520
Kautokeino
NSI/SI - Nordic Sami Institute/Sámi Instituhtta, Bredbuktnesveien 50, N-9520
Kautokeino
The Language Council of Norway, Postboks 8107 Dep, N-0032 Oslo
The Equality and Anti-Discrimination Ombud, Postboks 8048 Dep, N-0030 Oslo
Norwegian Ombudsman for Children, PO Box 8889 Young, N-0028 Oslo
Glomdalsmuseet, Museumsveien 15, N-2406 Elverum
The Norwegian Bar Association, The Human Rights Committee, Kr. August Gate 9, N-0164
Oslo
Norwegian Judges Association (NJ-D, The Human Rights Committee), Kr. Augustsgate 9,
N-0164 Oslo
The Norwegian Helsinki Committee, Kirkegata 5, N-0153 Oslo
Det Europeiske Wergelandsenteret (The European Wergeland Centre), Stensberggt. 25,
N-0170 Oslo
65

The Falstad Centre, N-7620 Skogn
Gáldu - Resource Centre for the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, Hannoluohkka 45, N-9520
Kautokeino
UNESCO, Postboks
8119 Dep, N-0032 Oslo
Samerådet, Seitatie 45, F-99980 Ohcejohka
The Center for Studies of Holocaust and Religious Minorities in Norway (Holocaust Center),
Postboks
1168 Blindern, N-0318 Oslo
The Norwegian Human Rights House , Tordenskioldsgate 6 b, N-0160 Oslo
Det Mosaiske Trossamfund, Postboks 2722, N-0131 Oslo
Det Mosaiske Trossamfunn i Trondheim, Pb 3563 Hospitalsløkken, N-7419 Trondheim
The Norwegian Kven Organisation/Ruijan Kveeniliitto, Hansjordnesgt 9, N-9009 Tromsø
The Kvenland Federation (Kvenlandsforbundet), c/o Bjørnar Seppola, N-9143 Skibotn
Norsk-Finsk Forbund, c/o Nils Petter Pedersen, Nyborgveien 53, N-9800 Vadsø
Network for Forest Finn interests in Norway (Skogfinske Interesser i Norge), c/o Terje Audun
Bredvold, N-2283 Åsnes Finnskog
International Romani Union's representative in Norway, c/o Raya Bielenberg,
Kjelsåsveien 28F, N-0488 Oslo
Den Norske Rom-forening, c/o Andreas Muller, Nordalsv. 19A, N-0580 Oslo
Norsk Rom-befolkning, c/o Alex Karoli, Oslogata 17, N-0192 Oslo
Romani Kultura, c/o Jan Jansen, Innspurten 4B, N-0663 Oslo
Taternes Landsforening (Taters‟Association of Norway), Glommengata 29, N-2211
Kongsvinger
Landsorganisasjonen for Romanifolket, c/o Bjørn Jansen, c/o SO, Postboks 9535
Grønland, N-0135 Oslo
Foreningen Romanifolkets Kystkultur (FRK), Postboks189, N-4330 Ålgård
Romanifolkets kulturforening, Postboks 20, N-1592 Våler i Østfold
Kventunet, N-9716 Børselv
Nordisk Romanoråd, c/o Linda Aleksandersen, Postboks 2052, N-4668 Kristiansand
Romanifolkets Riksorganisasjon, Postboks 701, N-1599 Moss
Samenes Landsforbund, Kirkemo, N-9876 Sirma
Samenes Folkeforbund, c/o Odd-Roar Strømme, Nordmoveien 236, N-8530 Bjerkvik
Sárahkka, c/o Kirsti S. Suongir, Holmsund, N-9845 Deatnu/Tana
Sámi NissonForum, Postboks 110, N-9730 Karasjok
Østsamene i Neiden, N-9930 Neiden
Skoltene i Norge, c/o Mikit Ivanowitz, N-9930 Neiden
Norske Samers Riksforbund, Postboks 173, N-9521 Kautokeino
A list of the national minority organisations that were invited to the oral public hearing on
the draft report
The Norwegian Kven Organisation/Ruijan Kveeniliitto, Hansjordnesgt 9, N-9009 Tromsø
The Kvenland Federation (Kvenlandsforbundet), c/o Bjørnar Seppola, N-9143 Skibotn
Norsk-Finsk Forbund, c/o Nils Petter Pedersen, Nyborgveien 53, N-9800 Vadsø
Network for Forest Finn interests in Norway (Skogfinske Interesser i Norge), c/o Terje Audun
Bredvold, N-2283 Åsnes Finnskog
International Romani Union's representative in Norway, c/o Raya Bielenberg,
Kjelsåsveien 28F, N-0488 Oslo
66

Norwegian Roma Association (Den Norske Rom-forening), c/o Andreas Muller, Nordalsv.
19A, N-0580 Oslo
Norwegian Roma Population ( Norsk Rom-befolkning), c/o Alex Karoli, Oslogata 17, N-0192
Oslo
Romani Kultura, c/o Jan Jansen, Innspurten 4B, N-0663 Oslo
Taternes Landsforening ((Taters‟Association of Norway), Glommengata 29, N-2211
Kongsvinger
Landsorganisasjonen for Romanifolket, c/o Trond Rehn, Postboks 9535, Grønland,
N-0135 Oslo
Landsorganisasjonen for Romanifolket, c/o Svein Eriksen, Kuliaveien 6,
N-7618 Kristiansand
Foreningen Romanifolkets Kystkultur (FRK), Postboks189, N-4330 Ålgård
Romanifolkets Riksorganisasjon, Postboks 701, N-1599 Moss

67

