Strasbourg, 31 May 1999

MIN-LANG/PR (99) 5

THE EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR R EGIONAL OR MINORITY L ANGUAGES

Initial Periodical Report
presented to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe
in accordance with Article 15 of the Charter

NORWAY

THE EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES
(ETS 148)
PERIODICAL REPORT

PART I
1 Implementation provisions
-

-

-

Article 110 a of the Constitution of Norway
Section 11 of Act of 18 May 1990 No. 11 relating to Place Names, Regulations of 5 July
1991 No. 456 laid down pursuant to section 12 of the Act
Act of 12 June 1987 No. 56 relating to the Sameting (the Sami parliament) and other
Sami legal matters (the Sami Act), Chapter 3 concerning the Sami language, Regulations
of 30 January 1992 No. 79 regarding the language provisions of the Sami Act, laid down
pursuant to sections 3-2, 3-3, 3-7, 3-10 and 3-12 of the Sami Act, Regulations of 31
March 1992 No. 204 laid down pursuant to section 3-8 of the Sami Act
Act of 13 June 1969 No. 24 relating to primary and lower secondary education,
Regulations of 16 July 1997 No. 791 relating to the National Curriculum for primary and
lower secondary education, Regulations of 17 November 1989 No. 1184 relating to
primary and lower secondary education
Act of 17 July 1998 No. 61 relating to education, which will come into force on 1 August
1999 pursuant to Royal Decree of 17 November 1998, with certain exceptions

2

Regional or minority languages

-

Sami
Kven/Finnish

3

Number of users

Sami
All persons who make a declaration to the effect that they consider themselves to be Sami,
and who either have Sami as their domestic language, or who have or have had a parent,
grandparent or great-grandparent with Sami as his or her domestic language, or is the child of
a person who is or has been registered in the Sami electoral register, may, pursuant to section
2-6 of the Sami Act, demand to be included in a separate register of Sami electors in their
municipality of residence. In 1997, 5575 persons were regis tered in the Sami electoral
register in Finnmark County, 1602 persons in Troms County and about 550 persons in
Nordland County.
The number of persons who speak Sami is far higher than the number of persons
registered in the Sami electoral register. It is estimated that some 40,000 Sami live in Norway
and that the number of persons who speak Sami is slightly lower.

Kven/Finnish
No censuses have been carried out recently of Kvens as an ethnic group, and there are
therefore no statistics showing the number of persons who speak Kven. However, the number
of Kven speakers is presumed to be low.
4

Non-territorial languages

-

Romanes
Romani

There is no statistical data on speakers of Romanes and Romani. The number of speakers is
presumed to be low.
5

Formally established body responsible for the protection and development of regional or
minority languages.

Sami Language Council
Hánnoluohkká 45
N-9520 Guovdageaidnu-Kautokeino
Norway
The Sami Language Council is a body which serves in an advisory capacity to the Sameting
and other public bodies in issues relating to the Sami language in Norway. Pursuant to section
2 of the Regulations relating to the language provisions of the Sami Act, the Sami Language
Council is responsible for developing and protecting the Sami language in Norway. Among
other things, the Council shall safeguard the cultural heritage embodied in the Sami language,
both written and spoken, develop Sami terminology, determine the spelling of Sami words,
advise and provide information on Sami language issues, maintain a list of qualified
translators and interpreters and promote and participate in national and Nordic cooperation on
Sami language issues.
The Sami Language Council prepares an annual report to the Sami Assembly on the situation
as regards the Sami language in Norway.
The Sami Language Council allocates public grants for activities related to the Sami
language. These include grants to municipalities and county municipalities to promote
bilingualism, educational grants for Sami boys and girls and a grant to a Sami word data
bank. In 1997 these grants totalled NOK 18,600,000.
6 The Sami Language Council submitted its annual reports for 1997 and 1998, which
include a description of a language survey conducted by the Council in 1998.
In 1998 the Sami Language Council undertook a survey of the use of Sami in public bodies
which are subject to the language provisions of the Sami Act. The Council concluded that the
use of Sami in these agencies may appear to be less extensive than might be expected
pursuant to the language provisions. According to the Council, cf. page 22 of the Sami
Language Council’s Annual Report for 1998, possible reasons for this are “a) insufficient
knowledge and understanding of the rules, b) few employees with a knowledge of the Sami
language and c) a lack of routines in the promotion of linguistic equality.”

7

Measures to promote a broader knowledge of the rights and duties deriving from the
implementation of the Charter’s provisions in Norwegian law

The State has published a brochure in Sami and Norwegian on the language provisions of the
Sami Act.
PART II
Examples of measures that the Norwegian authorities have implemented in relation to
regional and minority languages, as well as non-territorial languages, as defined in Article 1
of the Charter, to comply with the obligations that follow from Article 7 of the Charter.
Support for the Kvæntunet Centre
For 1999 the State has granted NOK 550,000 for the development of Kvæntunet, a centre for
Kven language and culture in Porsanger in the county of Finnmark. The centre also received
a grant of NOK 300,000 in 1998.
Finnish library service
The Aust-Finnmark County Library is responsible at national level for Finnish library
services, and has received state support since 1984. The object is to provide good library
services to all persons wishing to read works in Finnish and to provide information on
Finnish literature.
Statutory right to Finnish tuition in school
Section 2-7 of the new Education Act provides for a statutory right to Finnish tuition if at
least three pupils of Kven-Finnish background attending a primary and lower secondary
school in Troms and Finnmark request such tuition.
Use of Finnish place names
Section 3, second paragraph, in the Act relating to Place Names provides that Sami and
Finnish names normally used by the local population shall be used by the public authorities
on maps, signs, in registers, etc. Section 4, first paragraph, provides that the spelling of the
place name shall be based on the traditional local pronunciation of the name. It also states
that the spelling shall comply with current orthographic principles for Norwegian and Sami.
The spelling of Finnish place names in North-Norway shall comply with current Finnish
orthographic principles.

University principles
The University of Tromsø offers a semester course in Kven, in addition to a programme of
Finnish studies up to graduate degree level.

PART III
1 Language: Sami
2

Articles

Article 8 Education
a) Paragraphs and sub-paragraphs:
Paragraph 1:
sub-paragraph a, iii)
sub-paragraph b, iv)
sub-paragraph c, iv)
sub-paragraph d, iv)
sub-paragraph e, ii)
sub-paragraph f, ii)
sub-paragraph g
sub-paragraph h
sub-paragraph i
Paragraph 2
b) Measures:
Section 3-8 of the Sami Act provides that any person is entitled to receive Sami tuition and
that the rules in and pursuant to the Act relating to Primary and Lower Secondary Education
and the Act relating to Upper Secondary Education shall apply to tuition in and through the
medium of Sami in primary, lower and upper secondary schools. Pursuant to this provision,
Regulations of 31 March 1992 No. 204 were laid down regarding the right to Sami tuition.
The language provisions of the Sami Act apply in the Sami administrative district, cf. the
definition set out in section 3-1, subsection no. 1, of the Sami Act.
paragraph 1:
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages
are used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the
teaching of the official language(s) of the State,

sub-paragraph a (concerning pre-school education), iii to apply one of the measures provided
for under i and ii above at least to those pupils whose families so request and whose number
is considered sufficient.
On page 32 of Report No. 41 (1996-97) to the Storting (Norwegian parliament) on
Norwegian Sami policy, it states that Sami day-care centres receive a special operating
subsidy, in addition to the ordinary operating subsidy provided by the State. This subsidy is
intended “to cover the extra expenses entailed by the provision of Sami day-care services,
thereby ensuring that Sami children in the day-care centres have an opportunity to develop
and strengthen their Sami language and cultural background.”
sub-paragraph b (concerning primary education), iv to apply one of the measures provided for
under i to iii above at least to those pupils whose families so request and whose number is
considered sufficient;
Section 40 a, subsection 1, of the Act relating to Primary and Lower Secondary Education
provides that children in Sami districts are entitled to receive tuition in or through the
medium of Sami. Furthermore, section 40 a, subsection 3, provides for a statutory right to
Sami tuition if at least three Sami-speaking pupils at a school outside Sami districts request
such tuition.
The State has established grant schemes intended to cover the additional expense of
providing Sami tuition in primary and lower secondary schools.
Section 6-2 of the new Education Act lays down that the right to tuition in Sami also applies
to Sami pupils of primary and lower secondary school age outside the Sami districts.
sub-paragraph c (concerning secondary education), iv to apply one of the measures provided
for under i to iii above at least to those pupils who, or where appropriate whose families so
wish, in a number considered sufficient
The current Act of 21 June 1974 No. 55 relating to upper secondary education contains no
provision regarding the right to upper secondary education in Sami.
However, the State provides full funding for certain schools which offer upper secondary
education in Sami. State grants are also provided for Sami language tuition in upper
secondary schools.
Section 6-3 of the new Education Act contains provisions regarding Sami upper secondary
education. The first paragraph of this provision lays down that “Sami persons in upper
secondary school are entitled to Sami tuition.”
sub-paragraph d (on technical and vocational education), iv to apply one of the measures
provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils who, or where appropriate whose
families, so wish in a number considered sufficient.
In Report No. 41 (1996-97) to the Storting on Norwegian Sami Policy, it states on page 43
that “Sami constitutes the first or second language in both general subjects courses and
vocational training courses.”

sub-paragraph e, ii to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and
higher education subjects
The University of Tromsø offers courses in Sami language, literature and culture up to
graduate degree level. At the Tromsø Museum (University of Tromsø), research is conducted
on Sami history, archaeology and ethnography. The University of Tromsø has also
established a centre for Sami studies which is responsible for prioritising and coordinating
research and education that has relevance for Sami society.
The Saami College is a research and educational institution established particularly with a
view to meeting the educational needs of the Sami population.
sub-paragraph f, ii to offer such languages as subjects of adult and continuing education
Section 1 of the Regulations laid down pursuant to section 3-8 of the Sami Act states that
Sami tuition for adults shall be in compliance with the provisions currently in force in the
Adult Education Act. Furthermore, section 2, first paragraph, states that such tuition shall be
arranged by an educational organization that is entitled to state funding, an educational
association and/or a distance learning institution that is entitled to state funding. Pursuant to
the second paragraph, the State shall provide full funding for courses completed at the
primary and lower secondary school level.
sub-paragraph g to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture
which is reflected by the regional or minority language
Courses in Sami culture and history will be an integral part of the Sami teaching that is
offered at all levels.
sub-paragraph h to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to
implement those of paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party
The Saami College offers general teacher training, which is normally a 4-year programme,
and pre-school teacher training, which is normally a 3- year programme.
sub-paragraph i to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the
measures taken and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional
or minority languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be
made public.
The Sami Educational Council, which was established by Royal Decree of 8 December 1975,
is placed directly under the Ministry of Education, Research and Church Affairs. Report
(1996-97) No. 41 to the Storting on Norwegian Sami policy states on page 39 that this
council is to be responsible for tuition measures for the Sami population, preparing and
adapting study programmes within the Council’s sphere of responsibility, approving
textbooks, providing guidance for persons working in day-care centres, primary and lower
secondary schools, upper secondary schools and adult education programmes, following up
these efforts with written guidelines, monitoring continuing education and providing expert
advice to school authorities at all three administrative levels.

Paragraph 2
With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the regional
or minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of
a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of
the regional or minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.
Pursuant to section 40 a, subsection 3 of the Primary and Lower Secondary Education Act, if
there are at least three Sami-speaking pupils at a school outside a Sami district, they may
demand tuition in Sami.
Section 6-2 of the new Education Act prescribes that the right to tuition in Sami also applies
to Sami pupils of primary and lower secondary school age outside Sami districts.
ARTICLE 9 – J UDICIAL AUTHORITIES

a) Paragraphs and sub-paragraphs:
Paragraph 1:
sub-paragraph a, i):
sub-paragraph a, ii):
sub-paragraph a, iii):
sub-paragraph a, iv):
sub-paragraph b, i):
sub-paragraph b, ii):
sub-paragraph b, iii):
sub-paragraph d:
Paragraph 2:
sub-paragraph a
Paragraph 3:

b) Measures:
Section 3-4 of the chapter relating to the Sami language in the Sami Act lays down rules for
the use of Sami in the judicial system. These rules apply to courts of law whose jurisdiction
comprises all or part of the Sami administrative district, cf. section 3-1, subsection 1, to

police and prosecuting authorities whose jurisdiction comprises all or part of the same district
and to prison institutions in Troms and Finnmark.
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents
using the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to
the situation of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded
by the present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration
of justice:
sub-paragraph a in criminal proceedings, i to provide that the courts, at the request of one of
the parties, shall conduct the proceedings in the regional or minority languages
Pursuant to section 3-4, subsection 4, the president of the court may decide that the language
in which the proceedings are conducted shall be Sami when one party so requests.
Discretionary judgement must be exercised in the light of the obligation under international
law laid down in Article 9, section 1, subsection a, which requires that legal proceedings are
conducted in the regional or minority language at the request of one of the parties.
sub-paragraph a, ii to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or minority
language
Pursuant to section 3-4, subsection 3, every person has the right to speak Sami in legal
proceedings.
sub-paragraph a, iii to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not
be considered inadmissible Solely because they are formulated in a regional or minority
language;
Pursuant to section 3-4, subsection 1, every person has the right to submit written pleadings
with appendices, written evidence or other written applications in Sami.
sub-paragraph a, iv to produce, on request, documents connected with legal proceedings in
the relevant regional or minority language
The obligation pursuant to this sub-paragraph is also deemed to be fulfilled by section 3-4,
subsection 1.
sub-paragraph b in civil proceedings, i to provide that the courts, at the request of one of the
parties, shall conduct the proceedings in the regional or minority languages
The obligation pursuant to this sub-paragraph is also deemed to be fulfilled by section 3-4,
subsection 4.
sub-paragraph b, ii to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that
he or she may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring
additional expense

The obligation pursuant to this subsection is deemed to be fulfilled by the provision in section
3-4, subsection 3.
sub-paragraph b, iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or
minority languages
The obligation pursuant to this subsection is deemed to be fulfilled by the provision in section
3-4, subsection 1.
sub-paragraph d to take steps to ensure that the application of sub-paragraphs i and iii of
paragraphs b and c above and any necessary use of interpreters and translations do not
involve extra expense for the persons concerned.
This obligation is deemed to be fulfilled in so far as courts have an obligation to conduct
legal proceedings in Sami in certain cases and to allow written pleadings, etc. to be submitted
in Sami.
Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake:
sub-paragraph a not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State Solely
because they are drafted in a regional or minority language
Norwegian authorities do not deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State
Solely because they are drafted in a regional or minority language.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or minority languages the most
important national statutory texts and those relating particularly to users of these languages,
unless they are otherwise provided
The obligation to make available in Sami the most important national statutory texts and
those relating particularly to users of Sami is fulfilled through section 3-2, first paragraph, of
the Sami Act which provides that statutes and regulations of “particular interest” to all or
parts of the Sami population shall be translated to Sami.
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
a) Paragraphs and sub-paragraphs
Paragraph 1:
sub-paragraph a (iii)
sub-paragraph b
sub-paragraph c

Paragraph 2:
sub-paragraph a
sub-paragraph b
sub-paragraph c
sub-paragraph d
sub-paragraph e
sub-paragraph f
sub-paragraph g
Paragraph 3:
sub-paragraph b
Paragraph 4:
sub-paragraph a
Paragraph 5
b) Measures
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users
of regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the
situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
sub-paragraph a, iii to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or
written applications and receive a reply in these languages
Pursuant to section 3-10 of the Sami Act, it may be determined that the provisions of the
Sami Act relating to the Sami language, which are limited in application to local or regional
public bodies in the Sami administrative district, cf. the definitions in section 3-1, shall
wholly or partly also apply to other public bodies or private legal persons when they make
decisions on behalf of the State or a municipality. Under section 6 of the Regulations laid
down pursuant to the language provisions of the Sami Act, the rules in section 3-2, section 33, first paragraph, section 3-7 and section 3-11 shall also apply to the Sameting, the Sami
Language Council, the Directorate of Reindeer Husbandry, the Saami College and state Sami
schools. These provisions also apply to the Directorate for Nature Management and the
University of Tromsø.

This means that these national institutions have an obligation to reply in Sami to both oral
and written applications.
sub-paragraph b to make available widely used administrative texts and forms for the
population in the regional or minority languages or in bilingual versions
The obligation to make available “widely used administrative texts and forms” is deemed to
be fulfilled by the provisions of section 3-2, second and third paragraphs, of the Sami Act.
Section 3-2, second paragraph, provides that “announcements by public bodies which are
particularly addressed to all or parts of the Sami population shall be made in both Sami and
Norwegian.”
Section 3-2, third paragraph, provides that “forms to be used in connection with a local or
regional public body”, cf. the definitions in section 3-1, “shall be available in both Sami and
Norwegian”.
sub-paragraph c to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in a regional or
minority language
The Norwegian authorities allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in Sami.
Paragraph 2:
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents
who are users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified
below, the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
sub-paragraph a the use of regional or minority languages within the framework of the
regional or local authority
Norwegian authorities allow and encourage such use of regional or minority languages.
sub-paragraph b the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or
written applications in these languages
Pursuant to the provision in section 3-3, first paragraph, any person who makes an application
in Sami to a “local public body”, cf. the definition in section 3-1, subsection 3, cf. subsection
2, in the Sami “administrative district”, cf. the definition in section 3-1, subsection 1, is
entitled to a reply in Sami.
Pursuant to section 3-3, second paragraph, any person who makes a written application in
Sami to a “regional public body”, cf. the definition in section 3-1, subsection 4, cf. subsection
2, in the Sami “administrative district”, cf. the definition in section 3-1, subsection 1, is
entitled to a written reply in Sami.
sub-paragraph c the publication by regional authorities of their official documents also in the
relevant regional or minority languages

sub-paragraph d the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in the
relevant regional or minority languages
Norwegian authorities allow and encourage the publication of such documents in Sami.
sub-paragraph e the use by regional authorities of regional or minority languages in debates
in their assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the
State
Norwegian authorities allow and encourage such use of Sami.
sub-paragraph f the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in
their assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State
Norwegian authorities allow and encourage such use of Sami.
sub-paragraph g the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official
language(s), of traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or minority
languages
Section 3, second paragraph, of the Act relating to Place- names provides that Sami and
Finnish names that are ordinarily used among the local population shall be used by the public
authorities on maps, signs, in registers, etc. Section 4, first paragraph, provides that the
spelling of the place- name shall be based on the basis of the traditional local pronunciation. It
also provides that the spelling shall comply with current orthographic principles for
Norwegian and Sami.

Paragraph 3:
With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other persons
acting on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the t erritory in which regional or
minority languages are used, in accordance with the situation of each language and as far as
this is reasonably possible,
sub-paragraph b to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request and
receive a reply in these languages
The provision in section 3-5 of the Sami Act concerns the right to use Sami in the health and
social sector. Pursuant to this provision, any person wishing to use Sami to protect his or her
own interests in respect of local and regio nal public health and social institutions in the
administrative district, cf. the definition in section 3-1, subsection 1, is entitled to be served in
Sami.
Pursuant to the provision in section 3-6, any person is entitled to receive individual church
services in Sami in the congregations of the Church of Norway in the administrative district,
cf. the definition in section 3-1, subsection 1.

Paragraph 4:
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraph 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them,
the Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
sub-paragraph a translation or interpretation as may be required
The language provisions of the Sami Act provide for a statutory right to use Sami in certain
circumstances. Correspondingly, this means that obligations are imposed on the bodies that
are subject to the language provisions of the Sami Act. These obligations may be fulfilled by
employees having an adequate knowledge of Sami or by the use of interpreters and
translators.
The Sami Language Council is responsible for allocating state funds for Sami interpretation
services. The Council also keeps a list of qualified interpreters and translators, in addition to
which it serves in an advisory capacity to public bodies in connection with issues regarding
the Sami language.
Furthermore, funds are granted each year to the county governor of Finnmark to cover
additional expenses incurred in connection with the language provisions of the Sami Act.
These funds are used for translation, announcements and interpretation.
Paragraph 5
The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or
minority languages, at the request of those concerned.
Norwegian authorities allow the use of Sami family names.

Article 11 – Media
a) Paragraphs and sub-paragraphs
Paragraph 1:
sub-paragraph a, iii)
sub-paragraph b, i)
sub-paragraph c, ii)
sub-paragraph e, i)
sub-paragraph f, ii)
sub-paragraph g
Paragraph 2

b) Measures
Paragraph 1:
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the
territories in which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language,
to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or
play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the
media:
sub-paragraph a, i to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:
sub-paragraph a, iii to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer programmes in the
regional or minority languages
The Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation, which is a state-owned company, broadcasts radio
and television programmes in Sami through Sámi Radio. In 1997 Sámi Radio, cf. page 28 of
the Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation’s annual report for 1997, broadcast for a total of
1359 hours, including 134 hours of programmes for national broadcasting.
sub-paragraph b, i to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one radio station in
the regional or minority languages
On page 28 of the National Broadcasting Corporation’s annual report for 1997, it states that
“a report on a joint Nordic Sami radio channel was presented to the Directors General of
YLE, SR and NRK (the Finnish, Swedish and Norwegian broadcasting services), who have
adopted a decision in principle to the effect that the channel shall be inaugurated by 2005.”
sub-paragraph c, ii to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes
in the regional or minority languages on a regular basis
The Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation’s Sámi Radio produces television programmes in
Sami.
sub-paragraph e, i to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least
one newspaper in the regional or minority languages
Regulations of 17 March 1997 No. 248 lay down rules regarding state grants for Sami
newspapers. In 1999 funding for Sami newspapers will total approximately NOK 8,000,000.
sub-paragraph f, ii to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audio-visual
productions in the regional or minority languages
In 1994 the Norwegian authorities established an audio- visual production fund which, among
other things, provides funding to cover operating costs, for the production of programmes and
for measures to upgrade local broadcasting expertise. On page 16 of Report No.18 (1997-98)
to the Storting, Supplement to Report No. 41 (1996-97) to the Storting regarding Norwegian
Sami policy, there is an excerpt from the fund’s guidelines for grants for local broadcasting
activities: “In allocating funds for local radio activities, particular account shall be taken of

applications from radios with limited opportunities of obtaining revenues from advertising
and applications from ethnic and linguistic minority groups.”
sub-paragraph g to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using regional
or minority languages
At present there are no educational programmes in Sami for journalists and other media staff.
The Saami College is examining the possibility of establishing a 2-year programme in
journalism and media.
paragraph 2
The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a
regional or minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to
ensure that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of
information in the written press in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional
or minority language. The exercise of the above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it
duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or
penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests
of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or
crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of
others, for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining
the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
Norway fulfils the obligations pursuant to this paragraph.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
a) Paragraphs and sub-paragraphs
Paragraph 1:
sub-paragraph a
sub-paragraph d
sub-paragraph e
sub-paragraph f
sub-paragraph g
sub-paragraph h
Paragraph 2

Paragraph 3
a) Measures
Paragraph 1:
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural
centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and
film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries,
including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent,
have power or play a role in this field
sub-paragraph a to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or
minority languages and foster the different means of access to works produced in these
languages
Examples of state grants for Sami culture
-

Beivvás Sámi Teáhter, a Sami theatre

Beivvás Sámi Teáhter is wholly financed by the State. This theatre presents performances in
Sami, thereby contributing towards strengthening the Sami language.
-

a Sami music festival

This festival, which is held annually, comprises a range of cultural activities such as Sami
music and joik, theatre performances and concerts.
-

a specialised Sami library and other library services

The specialised Sami library is responsible for the purchase, storage and dissemination of
books written in Sami and about matters relating to the Sami people. The institution is
entirely funded by the State.
The State also provides funding to cover operating costs and investments for mobile libraries
in Sami districts.
Furthermore, the Rana Branch of the National Library of Norway is responsible for building
up a Sami bibliography.
-

a Sami archive

The purpose of the Sami archive is to protect, conserve and make available private Sami
archive materials. The archive is dependent on state grants to cover its operating costs.
-

Sami museums

The State contributes towards the financing of a number of Sami museums. Moreover, the
State has provided investment grants in connection with new buildings.

-

a scholarship for Sami artists

-

support for the press

-

assistance for subtitling films in Sami

-

assistance for the production of Sami films

-

assistance for literature, pictorial art and duodji (Sami arts and crafts)

sub-paragraph d to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural
activities of various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and
use of regional or minority languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or
for which they provide backing
The Sameting is responsible for administering a number of state grants in the cultural sector.
sub-paragraph e to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or
supporting cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of the
regional or minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest of the
population
This consideration is deemed to be taken into account by the transfer to the Sameting of
responsibility for administering support schemes.
sub-paragraph f to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given
regional or minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities
The State encourages the participation of users of the Sami language in the cultural sector by
providing financial support for Sami cultural activities, such as investment grants for
buildings to be used for cultural purposes.
sub-paragraph g to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible
for collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the regional
or minority languages
The Rana Branch of the National Library of Norway is responsible for building up a Sami
bibliography. The State also provides funding for Sami library services. The Sami Cultural
Council, which is placed under the Sameting, administers state support for literature, which
includes funding for publishers of Sami literature.
sub-paragraph h if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and
terminological research services, particularly with a view to maintaining and developing
appropriate administrative, commercial, economic, social, technical or legal terminology in
each regional or minority language
The Sami Language Council administers state funding aimed at promoting bilingualism. In
1998 the Council provided funds for the development of terminology.

Paragraph 2
In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are
traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority
language justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and
facilities in accordance with the preceding paragraph.
The Norwegian authorities have provided financial assistance for cultural activities outside
the municipalities which constitute the Sami administrative district pursuant to the language
provisions of the Sami Act. Examples of such cultural activities include the Árran Lule Sami
Centre in Tysfjord which receives state funding for museums via Nordland county
municipality, a library project in Tysfjord and a mobile library project which is funded by the
Norwegian Directorate for Public Libraries.

Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make adequate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad,
for regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.
On page 98 of Report No. 41 (1997-98) to the Storting, it states that in its efforts to present
Norwegian art and culture abroad, the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs places
emphasis on “highlighting the Sami dimension of Norwegian society and on communicating
Sami forms of cultural expression to an international public.” It also states that the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs “considers it a priority to integrate informa tion on Sami issues and to make
active use of Sami art and culture in cultural interchanges and efforts to disseminate
information on Norway abroad. An important objective in this connection is to emphasise the
distinctive Sami culture and identity as key elements in presenting the diversity of Norwegian
art and culture as a whole.” Specific measures include the drafting of articles and audiovisual material on the Sami people for use in respect of foreign media, the provision of
information on Sami literature to educational institutions abroad which teach Sami, and
assistance for Sami children’s literature and for the purchase and dissemination of Sami
anthologies abroad.
Article 13 – Economic and social life
a) Paragraphs and sub-paragraphs:
Paragraph 2:
sub-paragraph c
sub-paragraph e
b) Measures:
Paragraph 2:

With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the public
authorities are competent, within the territory in which the regional or minority languages
are used, and as far as this is reasonably possible:
sub-paragraph c to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and
hostels offer the possibility of receiving and treating in their own language persons using a
regional or minority language who are in need of care on grounds of ill-health, old age or
for other reasons
The provision in section 3-5 of the Sami Act concerns the right to use Sami in the health and
social sector. It provides that any person wishing to use Sami to protect his or her own
interests vis-à-vis local and regional public health and social institutions in the administrative
district, cf. the definition in section 3-1, subsection 1, is entitled to be served in Sami.
sub-paragraph e to arrange for information provided by the competent public authorities
concerning the rights of consumers to be made available in regional or minority languages.
The State has published a brochure containing a Sami translation of the most important
consumer legislation.
Article 14 – Transfrontier exchanges
a) Paragraphs and sub-paragraphs:
sub-paragraph b
b) Measures:
The Parties undertake:
sub-paragraph b: for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or
promote co-operation across borders, in particular between regional or local authorities in
whose territory the same language is used in identical or similar form
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs considers applications from the Sameting for support for
international activities.
A Nordic committee of senior government officials dealing with Sami issues which consists
of representatives from the relevant ministries in Norway, Sweden and Finland, examines
issues and problems of relevance to the Sami as a people. The purpose is to ensure that
national frontiers do not create obstacles to the protection and further development of Sami
culture.
One example of a transfrontier cultural exchange is the tour of Sami districts in Norway,
Sweden and Finland by the Beivvvás Sámi Teahtér, which receives State funding.

