MIN-LANG/PR (2010) 9 Annexe no. 4
List of selected legal provisions included in bilateral contracts

CONTRACTS CONCLUDED WITH THE REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
The Treaty between the Republic of Poland and the Republic of Belarus on Good
Neighbourhood and Friendly Cooperation,
signed in Warszawa on 23 June 1992
(Official Journal of 1993 No. 118, item 527)
Article 13
The Contracting Parties undertake to respect international rules and standards concerning the
protection of the right of national minorities, in particular included in the International Pacts
of Human Rights, the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, the
Document of the Copenhagen Meeting on the Human Dimension and the Charter of Paris for
a New Europe.
Article 14
1. The Contracting Parties confirm that the people who belong to the Polish minority in the
Republic of Belarus and the Byelorussian minority in the Republic of Poland have the right,
individually or together with other members of their group, to the free preservation,
development and expression of their ethnic, cultural, language and religious identity, without
any discrimination and in the conditions of full equality before the law.
2. The Contracting Parties confirm that membership of a national minority is a matter of an
individual choice made by people and no negative repercussions for them can result
therefrom.

Article 15
The Contracting Parties certify that the people mentioned in Article 14 are in particular
entitled, individually or together with other members of their group, to:
- the free use of the native language in private and public life, access to information in
this language, its dissemination and exchange, and also the use of their names and
surnames in the form appropriate for the native language,
- the establishment and maintenance of the their own educational, cultural and other
institutions, organisations or associations which can apply for voluntary financial or
another aid as well as for State aid, in accordance with the national law, use the access
to the media and also participate in activities of international non-governmental
organisations,
- profess and practise their religion, including: acquire and use religious materials and
conduct educational religious activities in the native language,
- establish and maintain uninterrupted contacts among themselves on the territory of
their State as well as cross-border contacts with citizens of other countries with whom
they are connected through joint ethnic or national descent, cultural heritage or
religious beliefs,

Page 1 of 14

-

use legal measures provided in national legislation of the State of residence for the
enforcement and protection of their rights.

Article 16
1. The Contracting Parties shall develop constructive cooperation within the protection of the
rights of people who belong to national minorities treating them as a factor of the
enhancement of the mutual understanding and good-neighbourly relationships between the
Polish and Byelorussian nations.
2. The Contracting Parties, during the implementation of the regional development shall
consider social and economic interests of the people mentioned in Article 14 and their
organisations or associations.
3. The Contracting Parties shall strive to provide the people specified in Article 14 with
suitable possibilities of teaching them the native language or teaching them in this language in
educational units, and also, if possible and necessary, of using the native language towards
public authorities. The teaching programmes of educational units attended by the foregoing
people shall include, within larger scope, history and culture of national minorities.
4. The Contracting Parties shall respect the right of the people specified in Article 14 to
participate in public matters in particular concerning the protection and enhancement of their
identity, and also if it is necessary, carry out consultations with organisations or associations
of these people.
Article 17
The Contracting Parties agree that the people specified in Article 14 should comply with the
law of the State of their residence.

The Contract between the Government of the Republic of Poland and the Government
of the Republic of Belarus on Cooperation in the Field of Culture, Science and
Education, made in Warszawa on 27 November 1995
(Official Journal of 1996 No. 76, item 365)
Article 13
The Contracting Parties shall provide people who belong to the Polish national minority in the
Republic of Belarus and the Byelorussian national minority in the Republic of Poland the
conditions favourable to the preservation, development and expression of their national,
ethnic, cultural, language and religious identity without any discrimination and under the
conditions of full equality before the law. The Contracting Parties shall within their national
legislation comprehensively support the activities of social, educational and cultural
organisations of the foregoing people and create the conditions for acquiring by them material
assistance from the territories of the State of the other Contracting Party.
Article 14
Each Contracting Party, in accordance with its national legislation, shall create on the territory
of its State the conditions for teaching the native language for people specified in Article 13
of this contract. For this purpose, each Contracting Party:
- shall provide the interested people on a voluntary basis with access to the learning of
the native language and the learning in the native language in kindergartens, primary
schools and secondary education schools, in the educational systems of the Republic of

Page 2 of 14

-

-

Poland and the Republic of Belarus, and shall also strive to create the possibility of
teaching in the native language on the level of university education,
shall create favourable conditions for teaching and increasing the level of teaching the
language, history and culture of the other Contracting Party on all levels of education
outside the state system of education,
shall provide teachers of national minority schools with adequate preparation and
development,
shall provide, by mutual consent, teachers sent to schools by the other Contracting
Party with the opportunity to work.

Article 29
The Contracting Parties shall support cooperation in the field of radio, including:
- exchange of information,
- realisation of programmes and their broadcasting for national minorities.

CONTRACTS CONCLUDED BETWEEN THE CZECH AND SLOVAK FEDERAL
REPUBLIC (APPLIED IN THE RELATIONS WITH THE CZECH REPUBLIC
AND WITH THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC)
The Contract between the Republic of Poland and the Czech and Slovak Federal
Republic on Good Neighbourhood, Solidarity and Friendly Cooperation,
made in Kraków on 6 October 1991
(Official Journal of 1992 No. 59, item 296)
Article 8
1. The Contracting Parties shall confirm that people who belong to the Czech and Slovak
national minority in the Republic of Poland and people who belong to the Polish national
minority in the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic have the right, individually and together
with other members of their group, to the free expression, preservation and development of
their ethnic, cultural, language and religious identity and to the development of their culture in
all directions without any attempts of its assimilation against their will.
The Contracting Parties shall respect the rights and fulfil the obligations concerning national
minorities in accordance with the international standards, in particular with the European
ones.
2. The Contracting Parties declare that the people mentioned in section 1 of this Article are
entitled, individually and together with other members of their group:
- to the free use of their native language in private and public life and apart from the
need of a command of the official language or official languages of the particular
State – to use the native language before state authorities, in accordance with
the national law;
- to have access to information in the native language, to spread and exchange it;
- to have suitable possibilities of teaching their native language and learning in their
native language;
- to establish and maintain their own economic, educational, cultural and religious
institutions, organisations and associations.
3. Membership of a national minority is a matter of an individual choice of every citizen.
From this choice there cannot result any negative consequences.

Page 3 of 14

4. Membership of a national minority does not release a citizen from the obligation of a loyal
attitude towards their State, complying with its legal provisions and using their rights in
accordance with the national law.

The Contract between the Government of the Republic of Poland and the Government
of the Slovak Republic on Cultural, Educational and Scientific Cooperation,
made in Bratislava on 23 March 2000

(Monitor Polski of 2002 No. 6, item 123)
Article 21
The Contracting Parties shall comprehensively support people who belong to the Polish
minority in Slovakia and to the Slovak minority in Poland in the actions aimed at the
cultivation of their national language, tradition and culture.
The Contracting Parties shall create on their state territories for people who belong to the
Polish minority in Slovakia and to the Slovak minority in Poland suitable possibilities of
teaching them the national language and also learning in this language. For this purpose:
a) they shall provide the possibility of teaching the language of the Polish minority and in
this language in Slovakia as well as the language and in the language of the Slovak
minority in Poland in public schools enabling – in accordance with the existing needs –
to employ in them teachers from the country of the other Contracting Party,
b) shall provide substantive and methodological care during the modernisation,
improvement and extension of the programmes of teaching the Polish language in
Slovakia and the Slovak language in Poland, as native languages,
c) shall support the proprietary cooperation in the preparation for national minorities,
Polish in Slovakia and Slovak in Poland, of textbooks, didactic materials and aids within
the scope of teaching their language, literature, culture, history and geography.
The Contracting Parties shall support publications in the language of the Polish minority in
Slovakia and the Slovak minority in Poland as well as the cooperation of Polish and Slovak
associations and institutions which run the publishing activities in the languages of these
minorities.
Each Contracting Party every year shall admit people who belong to the national minority
from the country of the other Contracting Party to full-time or part-time studies as well as to
doctoral studies.

The Contract between the Government of the Republic of Poland and the Government
of the Czech Republic on Cooperation in the Field of Culture, Education and Science,
signed in Prague on 30 September 2003

(Official Journal of 2004 No. 244, item 2449)

Article 11
The Contracting Parties shall provide people who belong to the Polish minority inhabiting the
territory of the Czech Republic and people who belong to the Czech minority inhabiting the

Page 4 of 14

territory of the Republic of Poland with favourable conditions for the preservation,
development and expression of their national, religious, cultural and language identity within
the provisions in force in the States of the Contracting Parties.

CONTRACTS CONCLUDED WITH THE REPUBLIC OF LITHUANIA

The Treaty between the Republic of Poland and the Republic of Lithuania on Friendly
Relations and Good-Neighbourly Cooperation,
made in Vilnius on 26 April 1994
(Official Journal of 1995 No. 15, item 71)

Article 13
1. The Contracting Parties undertake to respect the international rules and standards
concerning the protection of the rights of national minorities, in particular included in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, International Pacts of Human Rights, in appropriate
documents of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, and also in the
European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, along
with the additional protocols adopted by the two Parties.
2. People who belong to the Polish minority in the Republic of Lithuania i.e. people who have
Lithuanian nationality, who are of Polish descent or who declare to belong to Polish
nationality, culture or tradition and regard the Polish language as their native language and
also people who are members of the Lithuanian minority in the Republic of Poland i.e. people
who have Polish nationality, who are of Lithuanian descent or who declare to belong to
Lithuanian nationality, culture or tradition and regard the Lithuanian language as their native
language, have the right, individually or together with other members of their group, to the
free expression, preservation and development of their national, cultural, language and
religious identity without any discrimination and in the conditions of full equality before the
law.
3. The Parties confirm that membership of a national minority is a matter of an individual
choice made by the person and that no negative consequences can result from it for such a
person. Nobody can be forced to prove their nationality or to its renunciation.

Article 14
The Contracting Parties declare that the people specified in Article 13 section 2 are in
particular entitled to:
- the free use of the language of a national minority in private and public life,
- access to information in this language, to spread and exchange it and to have their own
mass media,
- learn the language of their national minority and learn in this language,
- establish and maintain, in accordance with the national law, their own institutions,
organisations or associations in particular cultural, religious and educational, including
schools on all levels which can apply for voluntary financial contributions and other,
from the country and from abroad, as well as for public aid, and participate in
international non-governmental organisations,

Page 5 of 14

-

-

-

-

profess and practise their religion, including: acquire, possess and use religious
materials and conduct educational religious activities in the language of a national
minority,
establish and maintain uninterrupted contacts among themselves within the territory of
their country as well as cross-border contacts with citizens of other countries with
whom they are connected through joint national descent,
use their names and surnames in the form of the language of a national minority;
detailed regulations concerning the spelling of names and surnames shall be defined in
a separate contract,
participate in public life, directly or through the freely selected representatives, on the
level of the state and local authorities and be permitted to the public service on a par
with other citizens.

Article 15
The Contracting Parties shall, on their territories, protect national, cultural, language and
religious identity of the people defined in Article 13 section 2 and create conditions for its
development.
The Parties in particular:
- shall consider to authorise the use of the languages of national minorities in contacts
with their authorities, but particularly in such administrative and territorial units where
a national minority accounts for a large part of the population,
- shall provide national minorities with access to the mass media,
- shall ensure appropriate possibilities of teaching the language of a national minority
and learning in this language in kindergartens, primary and secondary education
schools,
- shall take suitable measures concerning the protection of the identity of a national
minority after appropriate consultation including contacts with organisations or
associations of the groups mentioned in Article 13 section 2,
- shall consider history and culture of the groups mentioned in Article 13 section 2 with
relation to the teaching of history and culture in educational units,
- shall refrain themselves from any actions which may result in the assimilation of
members of a national minority against their will and in accordance with the
international standards shall refrain from actions which would lead to national changes
on the territories inhabited by national minorities.
Article 16
1. None of the provisions laid down in Article 14 can be interpreted as giving the right to
conduct any activities or take any actions against the Charter of the United Nations, the rules
of the international law, in particular against the rule of respecting the territorial integrity of
the country and the documents of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
2. Any person who belongs to the Polish national minority in the Republic of Lithuania and
Lithuanian in the Republic of Poland should be, as every citizen, loyal to the state of their
residence acting in accordance with the obligations resulting from the legislation of this state.

Page 6 of 14

The Contract between the Government of the Republic of Poland and the Government
of the Republic of Lithuania on Cooperation in the Fields of Culture, Education and
Science, made in Vilnius on 17 December 1998
(Monitor Polski of 2002 No. 31, item 491)
Article 9
The Contracting Parties shall create for people who belong to the Polish minority in the
Republic of Lithuania and people who belong to the Lithuanian minority in the Republic of
Poland favourable conditions for the preservation, development and expression of their
national, religious and language identity.
For this purpose, each Contracting Party shall on its state territory support activities of
educational and cultural institutions as well as social organisations of national minorities, and
shall also create favourable conditions for the preservation of their cultural links with
compatriots inhabiting the state territory of the other Party.
The Contracting Parties, each on its state territory, shall provide the foregoing people with
access to the mass media, and also on voluntary bases, access to education in the native
language on the level of kindergarten, primary and secondary education.
The Contracting Parties shall ensure education and development of teachers for minority
schools, the possibility of employing in minority schools teachers sent by the other Party, the
possibility of popularising knowledge of the native language, history, geography and native
culture as well as of increasing their teaching level. The Contracting Parties shall cooperate
within the preparation of teaching programmes and textbooks for the learning of the Polish
language and literature, history and geography of Poland for primary and secondary education
schools with Polish as the language of instruction in Lithuania, as well as teaching
programmes and textbooks for the learning of the Lithuanian language and literature, history
and geography of Lithuania for primary and secondary education schools with Lithuanian as
the language of instruction in Poland.

The Contract between the Government of the Republic of Poland and the Government
of the Republic of Lithuania on the Polish-Lithuanian Youth Exchange Fund,
signed in Płock on 1 June 2007
(Monitor Polski of 2007 No. 91, item 990)
Article 2
1. The Fund’s objective is to support the cooperation between the Polish and Lithuanian
young people for the purpose of building friendly cooperation between the People of Poland
and Lithuania.
2. The Fund implements its objectives through supporting and financing:
1) Polish and Lithuanian youth exchanges;
2) projects prepared and conducted by organisations inspiring the exchanges and other
initiatives of Polish and Lithuanian young people, within this Contract;
3) events, meetings and other initiatives of Polish and Lithuanian young people;
4) information projects aimed at inspiring the cultural cooperation, promoting tolerance, a
better understating and acquaintance between Polish and Lithuanian youths;

Page 7 of 14

5) projects aimed at sharing and promoting examples of good practice between organisations
which implement the youth policy and which work with young people;
6) publications aimed at making the relationship between the People of Poland and Lithuania
closer.
CONTRACTS CONCLUDED WITH THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY
The Treaty between the Republic of Poland and the Federal Republic of Germany on
Good Neighbourhood and Friendly Cooperation,
signed in Bonn on 17 June 1991
(Official Journal of 1992 No. 14, item 56)
Article 20
1. Members of the German minority in the Republic of Poland i.e. people who have Polish
nationality, who are of German descent or declare to be users of the German language and
members of German culture or tradition and also people in the Federal Republic of Germany
having German nationality, who are of Polish descent or declare to be users of the Polish
language and members of Polish culture or tradition, have the right, individually or together
with other members of their group, to the free expression, preservation and development of
their ethnic, cultural, language and religious identity without any attempt of assimilation
against their will. They have the right to the full and efficient use of human rights and
fundamental freedoms without any discrimination and in the conditions of full equality before
the law.
2. The Contracting Parties implement the rights and obligations in accordance with the
international standards concerning minorities, particularly in accordance with the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights of the United Nations of 10 December 1948, the European
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms of 4 November
1950, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination of 7 March
1966, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights of 16 December 1966, the Final
Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe of 1 August 1975, the
Document of the Copenhagen Meeting on the Human Dimension of the Conference on
Security and Cooperation in Europe of 29 June 1990, and also the Charter of Paris for a New
Europe of 21 November 1990.
3. The Contracting Party declare that the people mentioned in section 1 are in particular
entitled, individually or together with other members of their group:
- to the free use of the native language in private and public life, to access to
information in this language, to spread and exchange it,
- to establish and maintain their own educational, cultural and religious institutions,
organisations or associations which can apply for voluntary financial contributions and
other, as well as for public assistance, in accordance with the national law and which
possess equal access to the mass media of their region,
- to profess and practise their religion, including: to acquire, posses and use religious
materials and to conduct educational religious activities in the native language,
- to establish and maintain uninterrupted contacts among themselves on the territory of
their State as well as cross-border contacts with citizens of other countries with whom

Page 8 of 14

they are connected through joint ethnic or national descent, cultural heritage or
religious beliefs,
- to use their names and surnames in the form of the native language,
- to establish and maintain organisations or associations within the territory of their
State and to participate in international non-governmental organisations,
- to use, on a par with others, efficient legal measures for the implementation of their
rights, in accordance with the national law.
4. The Contracting Parties confirm that membership of the groups specified in section 1 is a
matter of an individual choice of the person and no negative consequences can result from it.
Article 21
1. The Contracting Parties shall on their territories protect ethnic, cultural, language and
religious identity of the groups mentioned in Article 20 section 1 and create conditions for the
support of this identity. They appreciate the special importance of the enhanced constructive
cooperation in this field. This cooperation should strengthen the peaceful relations and good
neighbourhood of Polish and German nations and contribute to the agreement and
reconciliation between them.
2. The Contracting Parties shall in particular:
- within the Acts in force mutually enable and facilitate to take actions for supporting
members of the groups mentioned in Article 20 section 1 or their organisations,
- despite the necessity of learning the official language of the State concerned, strive, in
accordance with relevant provisions of the national law, for providing members of the
groups mentioned in Article 20 section 1 with suitable possibilities of teaching them
the native language or in the native language in public educational units, as well as,
where it is possible and necessary, using it before public authorities,
- consider history and culture of the groups mentioned in Article 20 section 1 with
relation to the education of history and culture in educational units,
- respect the right of members of the groups mentioned in Article 20 section 1 to the
efficient participation in public matters along with the participation in matters
concerning the protection and support of their identity,
- take necessary measures for this purpose after appropriate consultation in accordance
with the procedure of taking decisions in the particular State, along with contacts with
organisations or associations of the groups laid down in Article 20 section 1.
2. The Contracting Parties shall apply the provisions of Article 3 with relation to the matters
specified in this Article and in Articles 20 and 22.
Article 22
1. None of the provisions resulting from Articles 20 and 21 can be interpreted as entailing the
right to engage in any activities or carry out any actions against the aims and rules of the
Charter of the United Nations, other commitments resulting from the international law or
against the provisions of the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in
Europe, together with the rule of the territorial integrity of the countries.
2. Any person who belongs in the Republic of Poland or in the Federal Republic of Germany
to the groups mentioned in Article 20 section 1 is, according to the foregoing provisions,
obliged, as every citizen, to act loyally towards the State concerned, in accordance with the
obligations resulting from the legislation of this State.

Page 9 of 14

The Contract between the Government of the Republic of Poland and the Government
of the Federal Republic of Germany on Cultural Cooperation,
made in Bonn on 14 July 1997
(Official Journal of 1999 No. 39, item 379)

Article 4
1) The Contracting Parties shall strive for enabling all those interested to have wide access
to culture, language, literature and history of the other country. For this purpose they shall
support state and non-state initiatives and institutions.
The Contracting Parties shall use their best endeavours aimed to enable, extend and facilitate
actions for the support, in their own country, of education and for the promotion of the
language of the other country in higher education schools, in schools and other educational
units and also within extracurricular forms of teaching the language.
The Contracting Parties shall encourage to create bilingual classes and schools, in particular
in border regions.
The Contracting Parties shall use their endeavours to extend the possibilities of Polish and
German studies in higher education schools of the two countries.
2. The Contracting Parties shall enable and facilitate, in their own country, the
implementation of appropriate supporting actions of the other Party, in particular such as:
a) delegation of teachers, lectors and advisers-consultants,
b) participation of teachers and students in training and developing courses organised by
the other Party, as well as the exchange of experience within modern methods and
technologies of teaching foreign languages,
c) making textbooks and didactic materials available and cooperation during the
preparation of textbooks,
d) use of the possibilities created by radio and television for the purpose of learning and
promoting the language of the other Contracting Party.

Article 5
Within the cooperation, the Contracting Parties shall strive for achieving such presentation of
history, geography and culture of the other country in their textbooks which shall foster a
better mutual understanding and knowing; they shall encourage at the same time to consider
recommendations of the independent Polish and German Commission for School Textbooks.

Article 6
The Contracting Parties shall support the cooperation in all forms and at all levels, in the field
of science, educational system and education, in particular in the sphere of higher education
schools and scientific organisations, general and vocational secondary education schools,
organisations and units of extra-curricular education and vocational development of adults,
administration of educational system and vocational training as well as other educational and
scientific institutions.
The Parties shall encourage institutions operating in these areas in their countries to:
1) cooperate in all fields being the subject of the common interest;
2) partner relations among higher education schools and other scientific and educational
units of the two countries;
3) the implementation of joint educational and research actions;

Page 10 of 14

4) the mutual sending of delegations and people for the purpose of exchanging information
and experience and participating in conferences and scientific symposia;
5) the exchange of scientists, PhD students, administrative employees of higher education
schools, teachers, instructors, students, school children within scientific, training, study
and information stays;
6) the exchange of scientific, pedagogical and didactic literature, didactic, explanatory and
information materials as well as films for didactic and scientific purposes, and also the
organisation of appropriate specialist exhibitions.
Article 12
The Contracting Parties shall support direct contacts between social groups and associations
such as trade unions, cultural associations, creative unions, churches, denominational
communities, and also non-governmental foundations and organisations in order to reinforce
the cooperation and shall encourage to implement the actions pursuing the objectives of this
contract.
CONTRACTS CONCLUDED WITH THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION
The Treaty between the Republic of Poland and the Russian Federation on Friendly
and Good-Neighbourly Cooperation,
made in Moscow on 22 May 1992
(Official Journal of 1993 No. 61, item 291)
Article 16
1. The Parties shall follow the generally accepted international standards concerning the
guarantee of complying with human rights and rights of national minorities, in particular
included in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, International Pacts of Human Rights
and in the Documents of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, first of all in
the field of the human dimension.
2. The Parties shall regard the freedom of religion as one of the fundamental human rights and
shall follow this rule guaranteeing, in accordance with their legislation, citizens of the
Republic of Poland who come from Russia and citizens of the Russian Federation of Polish
descent, regardless of their nationality and denomination, the right to possess the free access
to religious objects and sites, and also the right to religious upbringing and education.
3. The Parties shall create favourable conditions for citizens of the Republic of Poland who
come from Russia and citizens of the Russian Federation of Polish descent for the purpose of
the preservation and promotion of ethnic identity, their own culture and for teaching the
native language on the kindergarten and school education levels.

The Contract between the Government of the Republic of Poland and the Government
of the Russian Federation on Cooperation in the Field of Culture, Science and
Education,
made in Warszawa on 25 August 1993
(Official Journal of 1994 No. 36, item 133)

Page 11 of 14

Article 13
The Parties shall support the activities aimed at the preservation and development of national,
cultural, religious and language identity of the Polish people inhabiting Russia and
representatives of ethnic nations and groups of the Russian Federation inhabiting Poland.
For this purpose they shall support the preservation of cultural links of minorities with their
ethnic homeland, the preservation of tradition ensuring the possibility of free contacts
including travels to the ethnic homeland. The Parties shall provide comprehensive support for
the activities of social and cultural organisations of national minorities and within the national
legislation shall enable them to obtain material assistance from their ethnic homeland.

The Agreement between the Minister of National Education of the Republic of Poland
and the Minister of Education and Science of the Russian Federation on Cooperation in
the Field of Education, signed in Moscow on 28 October 2005
(Monitor Polski of 2006 No. 10, item 132)

Article 1
The Parties shall cooperate in the following main fields:
- exchange of information on the systems of education, plans of their development and
directions of reforms,
- education and improvement of qualifications of educational staff within specialities
being the subject of mutual interest,
- developing, supporting and increasing the level of teaching the Polish language and
literature in the Russian Federation and the Russian language and literature in the
Republic of Poland on all levels of education,
- supporting cooperation between higher education schools of the States-Parties in the
field of science and in particular joint research on the history of the relations between
Poland and Russia,
- conducting joint scientific events, conferences, symposia and also Olympiads and
contests for school children and students,
- development of direct contacts and cooperation between all types of educational units
of the States-Parties.
Article 4
The Parties shall support the development and increase of the level of teaching the Polish
language and literature in educational units of the Russian Federation and the Russian
language and literature in educational units of the Republic of Poland.
For this purpose, every year the Parties shall organise:
1) courses aimed at increasing teachers’ qualifications – Poland for teachers of the Polish
language from the Russian Federation and Russia for teachers of the Russian language
from the Republic of Poland,
2) summer language courses in the Polish language in the Republic of Poland and in the
Russian language in the Russian Federation for students and PhD students.
Duration of stay, conditions of accepting candidates and their number within the present
Article shall be agreed by the Parties annually.

Page 12 of 14

AGREEMENTS CONCLUDED WITH UKRAINE
The Treaty between the Republic of Poland and Ukraine on Good Neighbourhood,
Friendly Relations and Cooperation,
made in Warszawa on 18 May 1992
(Official Journal of 1993 No. 125, item 573)

Article 11
1. The Parties, in accordance with the generally applied international standards concerning the
protection of national minorities, recognise the right of members of the Polish minority in
Ukraine and the Ukrainian minority in the Republic of Poland, individually or together with
other members of the particular minority, to preserve, express and develop their ethnic,
cultural, language and religious identity, without any discrimination and in the conditions of
full equality before the law. The Parties shall take necessary actions in order to implement this
right, in particular the right to:
- teach and learn the native language and in the native language, the free use of the
language, access, spread and exchange information in this language,
- establish and maintain their own educational, cultural and religious institutions and
associations,
- profess and practise their religion,
- use names and surnames in the form appropriate for the native language,
- establish and maintain uninterrupted contacts among themselves within the territory of
the state of residence as well as cross-border contacts.
2. The Parties confirm that membership of a national minority is a matter of an individual
choice of the person and no negative consequences for them can result therefrom. Each Party
shall protect on its territory national identity of the minority of the other Party against any
actions endangering this identity and create conditions for its growth.
3. Each person who belongs to the Polish minority in Ukraine and the Ukrainian minority in
the Republic of Poland is obliged, as every citizen, to be loyal to the State of their residence
following the legislation of this State.

The Contract between the Government of the Republic of Poland and the Government
of Ukraine on Cooperation in the Field of Culture, Science and Education,
made in Kiev on 20 May 1997
(Official Journal of 2000, No. 3, item 29)
Article 12
The Contracting Parties undertake to ensure people who belong to the Ukrainian minority
inhabiting the territory of the Republic of Poland and people who belong to the Polish
minority inhabiting the territory of Ukraine favourable conditions for the preservation,
development and expression their national, religious, cultural and language identity, without
any discrimination and under the conditions of full equality.
Each Contracting Party shall on its state territory comprehensively support activities of
national and cultural associations of the above-mentioned people, provide them with the
possibility of obtaining material assistance from their ethnic homeland and shall also create

Page 13 of 14

favourable conditions for the preservation of cultural links of these people with compatriots
inhabiting the state territory of the other Party.
Article 13
Each Contracting Party shall ensure on its territory for the people mentioned in Article 12 of
the present contract the possibility of teaching them the native language and learning in this
language taking into account history and culture of their ethnic homeland.
For this purpose each Party:
- shall provide these people with access to the learning in the native language and the
learning of this language as well as native history and culture in kindergartens,
primary and secondary education schools within the state educational systems of
Poland and Ukraine and shall enable the increase of the level of teaching these
subjects,
- shall ensure suitable preparation and development of educational staff for educational
institutions teaching the minority language or in the minority language,
- shall provide teachers sent to schools on the basis of the agreement of the Parties with
the possibility of employment.

Article 23
The Contracting Parties shall support cooperation within television and radio which shall
be conducted within the agreements concluded between competent institutions of the two
countries and shall also support the exchange of materials and information at the same time
complying with the norms of the copyright, the creation and broadcasting of programmes for
national minorities inhabiting the territory of the other Contracting Party.

Page 14 of 14

