Strasbourg, 19 June 2012

ECRML (2012) 3

EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES

APPLICATION OF THE CHARTER IN ROMANIA

1st monitoring cycle

A.

Report of the Committee of Experts on the Charter

B.

Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers of the
Council of Europe on the application of the Charter by
Romania

2

The European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages provides for a control mechanism to evaluate how
the Charter is applied in a State Party with a view to, where necessary, making Recommendations for
improvements in its legislation, policy and practices. The central element of this procedure is the Committee
of Experts, established in accordance with Article 17 of the Charter. Its principal purpose is to examine the
real situation of the regional or minority languages in the State, to report to the Committee of Ministers on its
evaluation of compliance by a Party with its undertakings, and, where appropriate, to encourage the Party to
gradually reach a higher level of commitment.
To facilitate this task, the Committee of Ministers has adopted, in accordance with Article 15, paragraph 1, an
outline for the periodical reports that a Party is required to submit to the Secretary General. The report shall
be made public by the government concerned. This outline requires the State to give an account of the
concrete application of the Charter, the general policy for the languages protected under its Part II and in
more precise terms all measures that have been taken in application of the provisions chosen for each
language protected under Part III of the Charter. The Committee’s first task is therefore to examine the
information contained in the periodical report for all the relevant regional or minority languages on the territory
of the State concerned.
The Committee’s role is to evaluate the existing legal acts, regulations and real practice applied in each State
for its regional or minority languages. It has established its working methods accordingly. The Committee
gathers information from the respective authorities and from independent sources within the State, with a
view to obtaining a just and fair overview of the real language situation. After a preliminary examination of a
periodical report, the Committee submits, if necessary, a number of questions to the Party concerned on
matters it considers unclear or insufficiently developed in the report itself. This written procedure is usually
followed up by an “on-the-spot" visit of a delegation of the Committee to the respective State. During this visit
the delegation meets bodies and associations whose work is closely related to the use of the relevant
languages, and consults the authorities on matters that have been brought to its attention.
Having concluded this process, the Committee of Experts adopts its own report. This report is submitted to
the Committee of Ministers, together with suggestions for recommendations that the latter may decide to
address to the State Party.

3

Contents
A.

Report of the Committee of Experts on the application of the Charter in Romania...............................4

Chapter 1 – Background information ..................................................................................................................4
1.1. The Charter’s ratification by Romania .....................................................................................................4
1.2. The work of the Committee of Experts....................................................................................................4
1.3. Presentation of the regional or minority language situation in Romania .................................................4
1.4. General issues arising in the evaluation of the application of the Charter in Romania ...........................7
Chapter 2 – The Committee of Experts' evaluation in respect of Part II and Part III of the Charter ...................9
2.1. Evaluation in respect of Part II of the Charter .........................................................................................9
2.2. Evaluation in respect of Part III of the Charter ......................................................................................18
2.2.1. Bulgarian....................................................................................................................................18
2.2.2. Croatian......................................................................................................................................32
2.2.3. Czech .........................................................................................................................................44
2.2.4. German ......................................................................................................................................57
2.2.5. Hungarian...................................................................................................................................74
2.2.6. Russian ......................................................................................................................................91
2.2.7. Serbian.....................................................................................................................................104
2.2.8. Slovak ......................................................................................................................................117
2.2.9. Turkish .....................................................................................................................................130
2.2.10. Ukrainian................................................................................................................................144
Chapter 3 Findings of the Committee of Experts in the initial monitoring cycle..............................................158
Appendix I: Instrument of Ratification.........................................................................................................160
Appendix II: Comments by the Romanian authorities ................................................................................168
B.
Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on the application of the
Charter by Romania........................................................................................................................................198

4

A.

Report of the Committee of Experts on the application of the Charter in Romania

Chapter 1 – Background information
1.1. The Charter’s ratification by Romania
1.
Romania signed the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages (hereafter referred to as
“the Charter”) on 17 July 1995. The instrument of ratification was deposited with the Council of Europe on 29
January 2008. The Charter entered into force in Romania on 1 May 2008.
2.
Article 15, paragraph 1 of the Charter requires States Parties to submit three-yearly reports in a form
1
prescribed by the Committee of Ministers . The initial periodical report by Romania, which was due on 1 May
2009, was submitted to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe on 26 October 2010. It has also been
made public by the Romanian authorities.
3.
The Committee of Experts wishes to express its gratitude to the Romanian authorities for the
transparent and inclusive approach they have adopted when preparing ratification of the Charter. The
Romanian authorities have consulted the minority associations with regard to the instrument of ratification
and have kept the Council of Europe informed about the progress. At the time of ratification, several events
were organised, with the participation of the Council of Europe, to raise awareness among minority
associations of the Charter. The Romanian authorities have also printed and distributed information material
about the treaty. The Committee of Experts also notes that the minority associations have been invited to
contribute to the drafting of the periodical report which it considers best practice. In addition, the co-operation
with the authorities and minority associations during the on-the-spot visit was exemplary.
1.2. The work of the Committee of Experts
4.
This initial evaluation report is based on the information obtained by the Committee of Experts from
the initial periodical report of Romania and through interviews held with representatives of the speakers of all
20 minority languages, as well as the Romanian authorities during the on-the-spot visit, which took place from
14 to 17 March 2011. In January 2011, the Committee of Experts received a shadow report from the
association “Civic Engagement Movement” which is legally established in Romania as required in Article 16
paragraph 2 of the Charter. This shadow report deals with the application of the Charter regarding the
Hungarian language in the area of Târgu Mureș/ Marosvásárhely/Neumarkt.
5.
The present report reflects the policies, legislation and practice prevailing at the time of the on-thespot visit. Any later developments will be taken into account in the next report of the Committee of Experts
concerning Romania.
6.

This report was adopted by the Committee of Experts on 30 November 2011.

1.3. Presentation of the regional or minority language situation in Romania
7.
Romania applies the Charter to 20 regional or minority languages. Ten languages are covered by Part
II only: Albanian, Armenian, Greek, Italian, Macedonian, Polish, Romani, Ruthenian, Tatar, and Yiddish.
Furthermore, another ten languages are covered by both Parts II and III: Bulgarian, Croatian, Czech,
German, Hungarian, Russian, Serbian, Slovak, Turkish and Ukrainian.
Albanian
8.
The presence of the Albanian language on the territory of present Romania was first certified in a
document of 1595. In the census of 2002, Albanian belonged to the group of “other languages”. According to
the state report, the number of Albanian speakers is estimated at 500. They are concentrated in Constanța
and Bucharest. Albanian is covered by Part II of the Charter.
Armenian
9.
The Armenian language has had a traditional presence going back to the migration of Armenians to
Moldova, the Romanian Principalities and Transylvania around the 14th century. According to the 2002
census, there are 1 780 Armenians in Romania of whom 694 speak Armenian. The Armenian language is
covered by Part II of the Charter.

1

MIN-LANG (98) 7 Outline periodical reports as adopted by the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on 10 November
1998.

5

Bulgarian
10.
According to the 2002 census, 8 092 persons belong to the Bulgarian minority of whom 6 747
declared the Bulgarian language as their mother tongue. The Bulgarian minority has been compactly settled
in the Timiş and Arad counties since the 18th century. In the south of Romania and especially along the
Danube, the Bulgarians are dispersed. Bulgarian is covered by Parts II and III of the Charter.
Croatian
11.
According to the 2002 census, 6 807 persons belong to the Croat minority of whom 6 304 declared
the Croatian language as their mother tongue. The Croat minority is concentrated in the Caraş-Severin and
Timiş counties. Croatian is covered by Parts II and III of the Charter.
Czech
12.
According to the 2002 census, 3 941 persons belong to the Czech national minority of whom 3 306
have Czech as their mother tongue. The Czech minority has been concentrated in the Counties of Caraş2
Severin (Sfânta Elena/Svatá Helena , Gârnic/Gernik, Șumița/Šumice, Ravensca/Ravenska and Bigăr/Biger)
and Mehedinţi (Eibenthal/Eibentál) since the 19th century. Czech is covered by Parts II and III of the Charter.
German
13.
German has had a traditional presence in Romania for more than 850 years. According to the 2002
census, 59 764 persons belong to the German minority of whom 42 014 declared German to be their mother
tongue. The German minority comprises several geographical groups: the Transylvanian Saxons, Landler
(near Sibiu/Hermannstadt), Zipser Germans (northern Transylvania), Sathmar Swabians (Satu Mare), Banat
Swabians, Banater Berglanddeutsche (Germans of the Banat mountain region in/around Reșița), Bukovina
Germans, Dobruja Germans, and urban communities (Bucharest, Iaşi, Craiova and others). German is
covered by Parts II and III of the Charter.
Greek
14.
The Greek language has an old traditional presence in Romania. Over the centuries, there have been
several waves of Greek immigration, in particular during the Ottoman Empire. Romania was the place where
Greeks took refuge from Bulgaria (1913), Asia Minor (1922) or from Greece during the civil war (1943-1949).
According to the 2002 census, there are 6 513 Greeks in Romania of whom 3 208 speak Greek. Greek is
covered by Part II of the Charter.
Hungarian
15.
According to the 2002 census, 1 434 377 persons (6.6% of the total population of Romania) belong to
the Hungarian minority, the most numerous minority of the country, and 1 397 906 persons speak Hungarian.
The Hungarian minority comprises the group of the Szeklers (583 persons according to the state report) and
Csángó (1 370). It represents the majority of the population in the counties of Harghita/Hargita (84.6%) and
Covasna/Kovászna (73.8%). Significant proportions of Hungarians also live in the counties of Mureș/Maros
(39.3%), Satu Mare/Szatmárnémeti/Sathmar (35.2%), Bihor/Bihar (25.9%) and Sălaj/Szilágy (23.1%).
Hungarian is covered by Parts II and III of the Charter.
Italian
16.
Emigration from the territory of present-day Italy was substantial during the 17th century and early
19th century, especially in Banat and Transylvania. It continued in the second half of the 19th century until the
interwar period in all parts of Romania. In 2002, the census registered 3 288 Italians of whom 2 210 speak
Italian. The Italian language is covered by Part II of the Charter.
Macedonian
17.
The first documents about the existence of the Macedonian population in Romania date from around
1300. Massive immigration of Macedonians into Romanian territory took place during the 19th and 20th
centuries. In the census of 2002, Macedonian belonged to the group of “other languages” so that, according
to the state report, the number of Macedonian speakers is estimated at 100–200. Macedonian is covered by
Part II of the Charter.

2
In line with its practice, the Committee of Experts refers to place-names bilingually or trilingually if the place-name(s) in the respective
regional or minority language(s) are in official use, with the Romanian place-name appearing first. In case of trilingual references, the
order of the two co-official place-names in the regional or minority languages follows the local practice.

6

Polish
18.
The first distinct Polish community on Romanian territory was established in the late 18th century in
Bukovina. The Polish settlement in Bukovina led in time to the emergence of many towns populated mostly
by Poles. The number of Poles in Romania dropped dramatically after the Second World War. At present, the
villages of Soloneţu Nou/Nowy Sołoniec, Poiana Micului/Pojana Mikuli and Plesa/Plesza are Polish-speaking.
In Romania, according to the 2002 census, 3 671 people belong to the Polish minority of whom 2 604 speak
Polish. Polish is covered by Part II of the Charter.
Romani
19.
The first documents attesting the Roma minority date from the 14th century. According to the 2002
census, there are 235 346 Romani speakers in Romania. It is evident that large numbers of Roma do not
identify themselves as Roma and Romani speakers in censuses. Estimates of the number of Roma range
3
from 1.2 million to 2.5 million. Romani is covered by Part II of the Charter as a territorial language.
Russian
20.
According to the 2002 census, the Lippovan Russian minority in Romania counts 35 791 individuals,
of whom 28 334 declared the Russian language as their mother tongue. The Russian minority is
concentrated mainly in Dobruja, but is also present in Moldova and Wallachia. The Lippovan Russians
represent the majority of the population in a number of places (for instance in Tulcea county (Județ):
Sarichioi/Сарикёй, Carcaliu/Камень, Jurilovca/Журиловка, Slava Rusă/Русская Слава, Slava
Cercheză/Черкезская Слава; in Constanţa county: Ghindăreşti/Новенькое). Russian is covered by Parts II
and III of the Charter.
Ruthenian
21.
Ruthenian has had a century-old presence on the present territory of Romania. In the 2002 census,
Ruthenian belonged to the group of “other languages” so that, according to the state report, the number of
Ruthenian speakers is estimated at 100-200. Ruthenian is covered by Part II of the Charter.
Serbian
22.
According to the 2002 census, 22 561 persons belong to the Serbian minority of whom 19 948
declared the Serbian language as their mother tongue. The Serbian minority is concentrated in the following
counties: Arad, Timiş, Caraş-Severin, and Mehedinţi. Serbian is covered by Parts II and III of the Charter.
Slovak
23.
Slovak has had a traditional presence in Romania of approximately two centuries. According to the
2002 census, 17 199 persons belong to the Slovak minority of whom 16 108 persons declared Slovak as their
mother tongue. The Slovak minority is concentrated in the Arad, Bihor, Sălaj and Timiş counties. Slovak is
covered by Parts II and III of the Charter.
Tatar
24.
In the 13th century, the first Tatar communities appeared in Dobruja and after the Crimean War a
new wave of Tatar immigrants came to Dobruja. In the census of 2002, 23 935 people declared themselves
as Tatars. Of these, 21 171 people have stated that their mother tongue is Tatar. Tatar speakers live in the
counties of Constanța and Tulcea, and in Bucharest. Tatar is covered by Part II of the Charter.
Turkish
25.
According to 2002 census, 32 098 persons belong to the Turkish minority of whom 27 668 speak
Turkish. The Turkish minority is concentrated in Dobruja (Constanţa and Tulcea counties). Turkish is covered
by Parts II and III of the Charter.
Ukrainian
26.
According to the 2002 census, 61 098 persons belong to the Ukrainian minority of whom 56 116
declared the Ukrainian language as their mother tongue. Most Ukrainians live in Maramureş, Suceava,
Caraş-Severin, Timiş, Tulcea, Arad, Botoşani, and Satu Mare. Ukrainian is covered by Parts II and III of the
Charter.

3

See http://www.coe.int/t/dc/roma.

7

Yiddish
27.
Yiddish has a century-old presence on the territory of Romania. In 1930, 728 115 persons declared
themselves Jewish, of whom about 500 000 spoke Yiddish. Yiddish is spoken in Romania by part of the
members of the Jewish community, namely 951 people of the total of 5 785 people that declared themselves
of Jewish ethnicity in the 2002 census. According to estimates, there are about 1100 speakers. The Yiddish
language is covered by Part II of the Charter.
1.4. General issues arising in the evaluation of the application of the Charter in Romania
1.4.1

Information on the application of the Charter provisions by Romania

28.
The Committee of Experts regrets that the initial periodical report was submitted by Romania with a
delay of nearly 18 months and that it does not provide comprehensive information on the application of the
Charter provisions. The report does not contain any information on the practical application of Articles 9 and
13 of the Charter and only partial information on Article 10. Furthermore, the information provided concerning
Articles 8, 11 and 12 is clustered and not assigned to the individual undertakings with the consequence that
the information is frequently too general to permit the Committee of Experts to reach a conclusion on the
fulfilment of each undertaking. As the absence of comprehensive information severely hampers the efficiency
of the monitoring, the Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to include in their second
periodical report concrete practical and, where still required, legal information on the application of all
undertakings in respect of each regional or minority language.
29.
The absence of information about the implementation of a considerable number of undertakings as
well as misunderstandings about the scope of certain undertakings indicate that there exists no structured
approach for the application of each of the obligations entered into by Romania under the Charter. During the
on-the-spot visit and in light of statements received from representatives of the minority language speakers, it
also appears that in some cases the information provided by the State to the responsible local authorities
regarding the obligations arising from the Charter is insufficient. The Committee of Experts considers that the
Romanian authorities should define concrete steps and a time-frame to implement each undertaking, in cooperation with the associations of the national minorities as well as local authorities.
The Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to adopt a structured approach for
the implementation of each undertaking under the Charter, in co-operation with the representatives
of the minority language speakers.
1.4.2 Percentage thresholds hampering the application of Article 10
30.
Romanian legislation limits the application of several provisions of Article 10 to municipalities where
20% of the population belong to a national minority. The Committee of Experts observes that this creates
problems for the application of the Charter.
31.
With regard to oral and written relations by minority-language speakers with the administrative
authorities, Article 120.2 of the Constitution states that "[i]n those territorial-administrative units where citizens
belonging to national minorities have a significant proportion, it shall be ensured that the national minority
language is used in written and oral relations with local government authorities and the decentralized public
services, as provided by the organic law." The concept of “significant proportion” of the citizens belonging to
national minorities is defined in Article 19 of the Law on Local Government no. 215/2001: "In the territorialadministrative units where citizens belonging to national minorities have a share of over 20% of residents, the
local government authorities and public institutions subordinated to them shall ensure their use of
decentralized public services in their mother tongue, according to the Constitution, the present law and
international treaties to which Romania is party."
32.
Concerning place-names, Articles 4.1 and 11.1 of Government Decision 1206/2001 stipulate that the
authorities shall ensure that the place-name in a language used by a national minority constituting more than
20% of the local population is also displayed on the place-name signs at the entry and exit of the place.
However, place-names in minority languages are to be used only on such signs and not in the official
correspondence or documents of the local authority concerned. Furthermore, place-names other than the
names of villages/municipalities (for example names of streets or geographical features) are not covered by
the aforementioned provision. Romanian legislation does also not allow counties to use or adopt placenames in a minority language.

8

33.
During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed that local authorities have the
possibility to voluntarily install bi- or multilingual place-name signs if minorities do not reach the 20%threshold. However, in their replies to the questionnaire submitted to them by the Committee of Experts, the
Romanian authorities specified only two examples (concerning German and Hungarian:
Brașov/Kronstadt/Brassó and Sibiu/Hermannstadt). The Committee of Experts is hence not in a position to
assess how effective this voluntary approach is in general and asks the Romanian authorities to include a
complete overview in the next periodical report. In addition, the Committee of Experts asks the authorities to
inform about any measures taken by them to promote such voluntary approaches. In general, the Committee
of Experts notes that the adoption and use of additional place-names is a relatively simple promotional
measure with a nevertheless considerable positive effect for the prestige and public awareness of a regional
4
or minority language.
5

34.
With regard to the use of minority languages in local councils, the Romanian legislation provides that
citizens belonging to national minorities have the right to use their mother tongue in the local or county council
meetings if the councillors belonging to the national minority constitute at least one third of their total number.
During working meetings, the minority language may be used if the councillors belonging to the national
minority represent at least one fifth of the total number. In these cases, interpretation will be provided.
35.
With regard to the 20%-percentage threshold in general, the Committee of Experts notes that limiting
the application of Article 10 to municipalities where 20% of the population belong to a national minority may
amount to a territorial reservation which is not allowed by the Charter. Besides, in light of the Committee of
Experts’ standing interpretation of the Charter, the 20%-threshold appears in any case too high as it deprives
minority languages whose speakers do not attain it in a single municipality, or only in some municipalities, of
full protection under Article 10. In fact, speakers of several minority languages are traditionally present, and
constitute a relevant number for the purpose of Article 10, in areas other than those where the 20%-threshold is
met.
36.
With respect to the specific case of local council meetings, the Committee of Experts wishes to
emphasise that the application of a threshold of even one third regarding the share of councillors
representing a national minority is against the spirit of the Charter as it unduly limits the application of Article
10.2.f.
37.
Considering the formal and practical problems created by both thresholds, the Committee of Experts
concludes that Article 10 applies also to those local State authorities as well as local authorities
(municipalities, counties) where the minority language speakers do not attain the thresholds of one-fifth and
one-third respectively, but represent nevertheless a sufficient number of speakers for the purpose of the
respective undertakings. The implementation of Article 10 inevitably presupposes that the Romanian authorities
6
reconsider both thresholds.
The Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to lower the general thresholds in the
field of administrative authorities in order to make them compatible with the Charter as well as to
encourage local authorities to voluntarily apply the Charter irrespective of thresholds.
1.4.3 Provision of minority-language education
38.
Chapter III of the Education Law requires that for minority-language education to be provided, 12
parents or pupils (at primary and lower secondary levels) and 15 students (at upper secondary and vocational
levels) must demand it. However, Romania has ratified those options of Article 8.1.a-d which put an
obligation on the state party to provide minority-language education without the need for prior demand by
7
parents or students. The provision of minority-language education on the basis of prior demand is foreseen
only by the options contained in Articles 8.1.a.iii, b.iv, c.iv and d.iv.

4

See for example 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts on Croatia, ECRML (2005) 3, paragraph 152.
Article 42.1-2 of the Law on Local Administration no. 215/2001, Articles 3 and 6.1-2 of Government Decision no. 1206/2001.
See for example 1st Report of the Committee of Experts on the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2007)1, paragraphs 592-593.
7
Articles 8.1.a.i, a.ii; b.i, b.ii, b.iii; c.i, c.ii, c.iii; d.i, d.ii, d.iii.
5
6

9

39.
The set minimum number of pupils may seem too high in the context of minority language education.
According to the authorities, classes may be set up also with fewer pupils than the legal minimum number,
but this practice is limited to “well grounded cases” requiring the approval by the Ministry of Education
according to Law 84/1995. The Committee of Experts is unsure of the practical consequences of this
minimum number and asks the Romanian authorities to provide information about this aspect in the next
periodical report.
40.
In the initial periodical report, the Romanian authorities refer to primary education (grades I-IV),
gymnasium education (grades V-VIII) and high school education (grades IX-XII/XIII) or vocational schools
after the eighth grade. These levels of education are provided by schools with grades I-IV, schools with
grades I-VIII and high schools (grades IX-XII/XII, grades V-XII or grades I-XII) or vocational schools. The
Committee of Experts has analysed gymnasium education and high school education under “secondary
education”.

Chapter 2 – The Committee of Experts' evaluation in respect of Part II and Part III of the Charter
2.1. Evaluation in respect of Part II of the Charter
Article 7
41.
In its evaluation of Part II, the Committee of Experts will deal with Part III languages only with regard
to areas that are not covered by the Part III provisions applying to the language concerned.
Paragraph 1
In respect of regional or minority languages, within the territories in which such languages are used
and according to the situation of each language, the Parties shall base their policies, legislation and
practice on the following objectives and principles:
a

the recognition of the regional or minority languages as an expression of cultural
wealth;

42.
In their replies to the questionnaire submitted to them by the Committee of Experts, the Romanian
authorities state that ratification of the Charter represents a form of recognition of the regional or minority
languages as an expression of cultural wealth. The Committee of Experts notes in this context that the
Romanian instrument of ratification also mentions all languages that are covered by Part II only, including
those that have very few speakers. Furthermore, the fact that 19 national minorities have each a reserved
seat in parliament also represents an indirect form of recognition of the language groups concerned.
b

the respect of the geographical area of each regional or minority language in order to
ensure that existing or new administrative divisions do not constitute an obstacle to
the promotion of the regional or minority language in question;

43.
As far as the languages covered by Part II are concerned, this provision may be of relevance for the
Polish and Tatar languages whose speakers are locally concentrated. However, the Committee of Experts
has not been made aware by the representatives of these minorities of any problems relevant under this
provision. For the other languages covered by Part II only, this provision is currently not relevant due to the
dispersed settlement of their speakers.
44.
With regard to languages that are also covered by Part III, the Committee of Experts takes note of the
ongoing debate in Romania about a reorganisation of the administrative divisions of the country. One of the
proposals under discussion aims at the integration of the counties of Harghita/Hargita (84.6% Hungarian
population), Covasna/Kovászna (73.8%) and Mureș/Maros (39.3%) into a larger unit, which would change the
current linguistic composition at the expense of the Hungarian speakers. The Committee of Experts
encourages the Romanian authorities to ensure that new administrative divisions do not constitute an
obstacle to the promotion of Hungarian.

10

c

the need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in order to
safeguard them;

45.
Romania has no special law on the promotion of regional or minority languages or the protection of
national minorities. The Romanian authorities – with the Department for Interethnic Relations as a coordinator – provide financial assistance to the umbrella associations of the national minorities which carry out
many promotional activities relevant for the application of the Charter.
Nevertheless, there seems to exist an acute danger that measures taken by the Government in response to
the financial crisis may disproportionately affect the promotion of minority languages. In some areas like local
administration and health care, the shrinking of resources allocated to the authorities concerned has already
diminished their capacity to take care of the needs of minority language speakers.
46.
As far as Romani is concerned, the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage includes in its structures
the National Centre for the Culture of the Roma, with the central objective of preserving and promoting the
Roma culture and language. Furthermore, Romania has adopted a Government Strategy for Roma (GD
522/26 of April 2006), which is relevant inter alia for all educational activities concerning the Romani
language. The Committee of Experts welcomes this strategy and considers the adoption of a structured
policy for the promotion of a regional or minority language as resolute action in conformity with this provision.
47.
In 2009, the Romanian parliament adopted the law on the establishment of the Tatar Cultural Institute
of Romania “Sebat Husein” which aims to promote the culture of the Tatars in Romania. The Committee of
Experts welcomes this step.
48.
The Hungarian minority comprises the group of the Csángó (1 370 people according to the initial
periodical report). This group, which has its own Hungarian dialect, is geographically separated from the other
Hungarian speakers and lacks a developed infrastructure for the promotion of its culture. The Committee of
Experts asks the Romanian authorities to inform it, in the next periodical report, about the situation of the
language spoken by the Csángó, mainly with regard to education and culture.
d

the facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of regional or minority languages, in
speech and writing, in public and private life;

Albanian
49.
According to the initial periodical report, the encouragement of the use of Albanian in public life
concentrates on the cultural field. The League of Albanians Association runs a bilingual library comprising
books that are published by the association’s printing house “Privire” (Veshtrimi). The League of Albanians
Association publishes a cultural magazine which addresses the Albanian minority and the majority population.
Armenian
50.
According to the initial periodical report, the Romanian authorities provide financial support inter alia
to a network of small libraries for the Armenian minority. Furthermore, the Armenian Union of Romania has a
publishing house (“Ararat”) and publishes a magazine using Armenian (“Nor Ghiank”, bimonthly, eight pages
in Armenian and four pages in Romanian, with a circulation of 1 000 copies). There is also a project to
reopen, with state support, the Armenian museum in Gherla. In the media, the local radio station in
Constanța broadcasts the 30-minute weekly programme “The Armenian nation and civilization”. It is,
however, not clear in which language this programme is broadcast. The Committee of Experts asks the
Romanian authorities to clarify this aspect in the next periodical report.
Greek
51.
According to the initial periodical report, the Romanian authorities support Greek in public life by
providing financial support inter alia to a network of small libraries for the Greek minority, the annual “Festival
of Hellenism in Romania”, a theatre group, a choir, and the publication of books about the Greek minority. In
the media, the Greek minority has a quarterly magazine “Elpis”, a six-minute weekly show broadcast by
public television station TVR3, and a weekly 30-minute broadcast in Greek on Radio Constanța. It is,
however, not clear whether the programme on TVR3 uses Greek. The Committee of Experts asks the
Romanian authorities to clarify this aspect in the next periodical report. While there are no municipalities
where the Greek minority exceeds 20% of the population, Greek speakers may address local authorities in
the county of Tulcea orally or in writing in Greek and receive the answer in Romanian and Greek. The

11

Committee of Experts welcomes the fact that the Romanian authorities support various projects to the benefit
of Greek, especially in the media, and that the language can be used in dealings with the authorities.
Italian
52.
According to the initial periodical report, the Romanian authorities encourage the use of Italian in
public life by providing financial support inter alia to libraries of the Italian minority in Bucharest and Suceava,
the bilingual publication “Siamo di nuovo insieme”, and books published by the Association of Italians in
Romania "RO.AS.IT.". In the broadcast media, Radio Timişoara broadcasts a programme of one hour
duration in Italian, but its intervals are unclear. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to
clarify this aspect in the next periodical report. Although there are no municipalities where the percentage of
Italians exceeds 20% of the total population, the Prahova County Police Inspectorate employs six policemen
who know Italian and can provide the opportunity for Italian speakers to submit oral or written requests in this
language.
Macedonian
53.
According to the initial periodical report, the Romanian authorities encourage the use of Macedonian
in public life by providing financial support inter alia to four bilingual magazines, bilingual books, audio
productions in Macedonian, the Museum of Macedonian culture and folklore, a theatre group, a group of
Macedonian poets and writers, and a choir. Besides the general programmes about the national minorities in
Romania, there are no programmes broadcast in Macedonian. During the on-the-spot visit, representatives of
the Macedonian speakers expressed their satisfaction with the support provided by the Romanian authorities.
Polish
54.
According to the initial periodical report, the Union of Poles in Romania publishes, with funding from
the state budget, the monthly bilingual publication “Polonus” and a quarterly publication for children in Polish.
Furthermore, there are several libraries with books in Polish. Eight places (all in Suceava county) have
bilingual place-name signs (Romanian-Polish). The only municipality in Romania where the Polish minority
exceeds 20% of the population (Cacica/Kaczyka; 23%) has a Polish speaking employee. However, there are
no radio and television programmes broadcast in Polish.
55.
The Committee of Experts welcomes the support provided to the Polish language in the cultural field.
Given that the Polish minority is compactly settled in Suceava county, the Committee of Experts considers,
however, that a certain presence of the Polish language in the local broadcast media represents a realistic
option and should be explored with representatives of the speakers. Furthermore, the fact that there is only
one Polish speaking person employed by the local authorities in the Polish speaking area does not
adequately reflect the fact that the Poles are compactly settled, reaching up to 23% of the local population.
56.
The Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to explore, in co-operation with
representatives of the Polish speakers, how the Polish language could be promoted in the fields of the
broadcast media, local authorities, and economic and social life in the area where it is used.
Romani
57.
According to the initial periodical report, the Romanian Radio Broadcasting Corporation offers
programmes in Romani at regional radio stations, for example Radio Reșița (30 minutes weekly), Radio
Târgu Mureș (60 minutes weekly) and Radio Timişoara (30 minutes). In 2009, the first show in Romani with
subtitles in Romanian was aired on TVR3.
58.
In all counties with a significant Roma population, the Romanian police has recruited Romani
speakers to ensure the possibility for users of Romani to submit oral or written requests. In some of the
counties, Romani is regularly used by the administration. At the Cluj-Napoca and Dolj Regional Councils,
Romani speakers are employed to respond to requests made by Roma. The Sibiu/Hermannstadt and
Suceava County Councils communicate the agenda of their meetings in Romani. Both councils also publish
their decisions in Romani. A considerable number of local authorities have employed staff with a knowledge
of Romani who can respond to requests. During the on-the-spot visit, representatives of the Romani
speakers expressed their satisfaction with the use of their language in the administrative field.

12

59.
In the field of culture, the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage funded in 2009 a programme for
the protection, development and free expression of the Roma cultural identity, called “Roma - Together for
Europe”.
60.
The Committee of Experts welcomes the fact that the Romanian authorities support a high number of
projects to the benefit of Romani, especially in the media, and that the language can be used in dealings with
the authorities. Considering the high number of Romani speakers in Romania, the Committee of Experts
nevertheless asks the Romanian authorities to submit, in the next periodical report, information on how they
promote Romani in economic and social life, and to what extent Romani can be used in practice before
judicial authorities.
Ruthenian
61.
According to the initial periodical report, the Romanian authorities provide financial support inter alia
to a Ruthenian newspaper and magazine as well as books on the history of the Ruthenians in Romania.
Furthermore, the Cultural Union of Ruthenians of Romania runs a library.
Tatar
62.
According to the initial periodical report, the Romanian authorities provide financial support inter alia
to the monthly “Karadeniz” (in Tatar, Turkish and Romanian), the youth magazine “Caş”, and a magazine for
women (“Kadinlar Dunyasi”). In co-operation with the Turkish minority, Constanța “Radio T” broadcasts news
in Tatar. There is also a one-hour programme on Radio Constanța for the Tatars of Constanța. Furthermore,
TVR3 broadcasts a monthly 12-minute show in Tatar. The Tatar language appears to be absent from other
fields of public life (judicial authorities, administrative authorities, economic and social life).
63.
The Committee of Experts welcomes the fact that the Romanian authorities support several projects
to the benefit of Tatar, especially in the media. Considering the relatively high number of Tatar speakers in
Romania, the Committee of Experts nevertheless asks the Romanian authorities to provide information, in
the next periodical report, on how they promote Tatar in other fields of public life (judicial authorities,
administrative authorities, including the use of Tatar place names, economic and social life).
Yiddish
64.
According to the initial periodical report, the Romanian authorities provide financial support inter alia
to the Jewish State Theatre, research centres, libraries, museums having exhibitions in Yiddish, cultural
projects relating to Yiddish, documentaries on Yiddish, and choirs (Yiddish klezmer music). The most
important preserver and promoter of Yiddish in Romania is the Jewish State Theatre in Bucharest, one of the
few professional Yiddish theatres in Europe. It offers a variety of performances in Yiddish. The main
magazine of the Jewish community (“Jewish Reality”), with a circulation of 4 500 copies per week, contains
articles in Yiddish. In Bucharest, the Museum of the History of Jews from Romania covers the heritage of
Yiddish, and the Federation of Jewish Communities in Romania runs a library possessing thousands of
books in Yiddish. The publishing house “Hasefer” publishes translations of classical Yiddish literature. Yiddish
is not present in the broadcast media.
65.
The Committee of Experts welcomes the strong support provided by the Romanian authorities to the
promotion of Yiddish and considers especially the work of the Jewish State Theatre as an example of best
practice in minority language promotion in Europe.
Conclusion
66.
The Committee of Experts welcomes the fact that the Romanian authorities have enabled, for almost
all Part II languages, the creation and running of a basic infrastructure comprising associations, libraries,
cultural groups, publishing houses and print media.
e

the maintenance and development of links, in the fields covered by this Charter,
between groups using a regional or minority language and other groups in the State
employing a language used in identical or similar form, as well as the establishment of
cultural relations with other groups in the State using different languages;

13

67.
According to the initial periodical report, the Council of National Minorities in Romania contributes to
the maintenance of contacts between the national minorities. As a Government advisory body, the Council is
composed of three representatives of the 19 national minority organisations represented in Parliament.
Furthermore, the Romanian authorities support the annual festival “ProEtnica” in Sighișoara/Schäßburg, the
Minority Theatre Festival, and the National Minorities Day which bring together all national minorities.
f

the provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of regional
or minority languages at all appropriate stages;

Albanian
68.
According to the initial periodical report, Albanian is not taught in schools. The League of Albanians in
Romania offers Albanian language lessons.
Armenian
69.
According to the initial periodical report, Armenian is used in public pre-school education.
Furthermore, Armenian language and history is taught at primary and secondary levels, namely by the
Armenian School in Bucharest, the “New Armenian School” in Constanța and Pitești, the “Misakian Kesimian
School” in Bucharest (children up to grade 4 and students in grades 5-12), and the Armenian Sunday schools
in Bucharest, Constanța and Cluj-Napoca. The latter schools have programmes approved by the Ministry of
Education and teach in accordance with the National Curriculum. The teachers are paid from the state
budget. However, Armenian is not taught at university level.
70.
While welcoming the substantial offer of teaching of Armenian, the Committee of Experts asks the
Romanian authorities to inform it, in the next periodical report, about how many pupils learn Armenian at the
different levels of education and how many hours per week are devoted to teaching Armenian.
Greek
71.
According to the initial periodical report, Greek is used in pre-school education in the public education
system and at the kindergarten of the Greek Embassy in Bucharest. The Hellenic Union of Romania also
organises pre-school education in Greek. At grades 1-4 and 5-12, Greek is taught at schools in Bucharest,
Constanța, Brăila, Ploiești and Tulcea in accordance with the national differentiated school curriculum. The
teachers are sent to Romania from Greece. Also, a textbook for teaching Greek as a minority language has
been published. Regarding higher education, the University of Bucharest offers academic training in Greek
and the University of Iași has a lectureship in teaching Greek.
72.
While welcoming the comprehensive offer of teaching of Greek, the Committee of Experts asks the
Romanian authorities to inform it, in the next periodical report, about how many pupils learn Greek at the
different levels of education and how many hours per week are devoted to teaching Greek.
Italian
73.
According to the initial periodical report, Italian is used in pre-school education in the public education
system. Such kindergartens exist in Suceava and Bucharest. At the request of the Italian minority, Italian is
taught as a mother tongue at the Dante Alighieri Theoretical High School in Bucharest and can be learned at
high schools in Pucioasa and Târgoviște. Italian university studies are inter alia organised at the Universities
of Bucharest, Iași, Constanța, Craiova, Timişoara, Cluj-Napoca, at the Conservatories in Bucharest,
Brașov/Kronstadt/Brassó, Iași, and at the Academy of Economic Studies in Bucharest.
74.
While welcoming the comprehensive offer of teaching of Italian, the Committee of Experts asks the
Romanian authorities to inform it, in the next periodical report, about how many pupils learn Italian at the
different levels of education and how many hours per week are devoted to teaching Italian.

14

Macedonian
75.
According to the initial periodical report, Macedonian has been taught as a mother tongue in the
General School “Barbu Ionescu” in Urzicuta (Dolj county) since the 2007-2008 school year. Furthermore,
Macedonian can be studied at the Faculty of Foreign Languages at the University of Bucharest. The
Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to inform it, in the next periodical report, about how
many pupils learn Macedonian at the different levels of education and how many hours per week are devoted
to teaching Macedonian.
Polish
76.
According to the initial periodical report, Polish can be learned from kindergarten to university level.
Polish is taught as a mother tongue in Soloneţu Nou/Nowy Sołoniec, Pleşa/Plesza, Suceava, Cacica/Kaczyka
and Moara in close co-operation with the Union of Poles in Romania. Currently, 409 pupils learn Polish
(grades 1-12) in twelve schools in Suceava County where five kindergartens also use Polish. In the College
“Alexandru cel Bun” in Gura Humorului, Polish is used as a medium of instruction in some subjects in grades
9 and 10. The Committee of Experts welcomes this offer.
Romani
77.
According to the initial periodical report, Romani is taught in 41 of the 42 counties of Romania, with a
total of 460 Roma teachers. Roma can choose between schools with teaching in Romanian or Hungarian
(with 3-4 extra hours per week of Romani and literature and / or the history and traditions of Roma) and
education with full teaching in Romani. In 2008, the number of Roma students studying the language,
literature, history and traditions of Roma was 26 805. 380 pupils are enrolled in Romani-medium education.
Furthermore, bilingual teaching (Romanian-Romani) was introduced in 2005. Since 2000, the National
Competition of Romani is organised annually and attended by students from grades seven to twelve. Since
2008, a similar competition concerning the history and traditions of the Roma is also organised. During the
on-the-spot visit, representatives of the Romani speakers stated that about 30% of the Roma in Romania are
enrolled in schools that teach Romani or teach in Romani. They also confirmed the availability of bilingual
textbooks. The Committee of Experts welcomes the provision for the teaching of Romani and appreciates the
efforts and activities so far. However, it encourages the Romanian authorities to continue to develop a
comprehensive offer of Romani teaching, taking into account the needs and wishes of the speakers of
regional and local varieties of Romani.
Ruthenian
78.
According to the initial periodical report, Ruthenian is not taught in schools. However, the Cultural
Union of Ruthenians of Romania has set up study groups for Ruthenian.
Tatar
79.
According to the initial periodical report, pilot groups for the teaching of Tatar as a mother tongue in
kindergarten and primary schools were set up in Constanța in the 2008-2009 school year. These groups
aimed at testing curricula for the first grade and textbooks. With regard to the training of teachers, the Tatar
minority has initiated a partnership with the University of Constanța and the Technical and Pedagogical
University of Simferopol (Crimea/Ukraine). The Committee of Experts welcomes this development and
encourages the Romanian authorities to support the cultivation/extension of this cross-border co-operation as
an important contribution to counteract language loss among Tatar speakers.
80.
While welcoming the fact that pilot groups have started to teach Tatar, the Committee of Experts asks
the Romanian authorities to inform it, in the next periodical report, about how many pupils currently learn
Tatar at the different levels of education and how many hours per week are devoted to teaching Tatar. The
Committee of Experts also asks the Romanian authorities to report on further plans for implementing a
comprehensive educational model for the teaching of Tatar.
Yiddish
81.
According to the initial periodical report, Yiddish is not used in education at undergraduate level. At
the University of Iași, the Centre for Jewish History (Faculty of History) offers a master programme for
learning Yiddish to facilitate access to literature and historical documents.

15

Conclusion
82.
The Committee of Experts is pleased to note that, apart from Albanian, Ruthenian and Yiddish, all
Part II languages are taught in school. As regards the Albanian, Ruthenian and Yiddish languages, the
Committee of Experts is of course aware that their number of speakers is low and that the speakers are
dispersed. Nevertheless, the Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to explore, in cooperation with representatives of the speakers, how these languages can be strengthened in education.
g

the provision of facilities enabling non-speakers of a regional or minority language
living in the area where it is used to learn it if they so desire;

83.
According to the initial periodical report, the associations of the Albanian, Armenian, Greek, Italian,
Macedonian and Tatar minorities offer regular courses for their languages. Language courses for Polish are
offered in Bucharest, Bacau, and other cities, and Yiddish courses are organised by the centres for Jewish
studies at university level. Furthermore, minority language education in public schools is open also for
students who do not belong to the minorities concerned.
84.
The Committee of Experts has not received any specific information regarding the implementation of
this provision for Romani and Ruthenian and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such information in
the next periodical report.
h

the promotion of study and research on regional or minority languages at universities
or equivalent institutions;

85.
According to the initial periodical report, there are teachers and researchers specialised in Albanian
at the Faculty of Letters of the University of Bucharest. The Armenian Union of Romania arranges joint
research projects with universities and institutions in Armenia concerning the Armenian culture and
language. Various activities are conducted regarding the history and culture of Greek at the Department of
Classical and Neo-Greek Languages of Bucharest University and the Chair of Neo-Greek Studies at the
University of Iași. The Department of Italian Language and Literature of the Faculty of Foreign Languages
and Literature at the University of Bucharest provides courses in translation and language studies and carries
out research on Italian. It has also published numerous books in Italian. Studies and research on
Macedonian are promoted by the Department of Slavic Languages and Literature at the University of
Bucharest. The Department of Slavic Languages and Literature at Bucharest University carries out studies
and research on Polish literature. Romani can inter alia be studied at the Romani Language and Literature
Department of the Faculty of Foreign Languages and Literature at the University of Bucharest. The university
also runs a teacher training programme for Romani. The department of Turkish language at the University of
Constanța and the College “Kemal Atatürk” carry out research on the Tatar language and literature. Yiddish
language courses are offered for historians, philologists and translators at different universities. Also,
research is carried out on Jewish culture, civilization and literature, including the Yiddish language.
86.
According to the initial periodical report, there is no academic institution dealing with Ruthenian.
International congresses of linguists specialising in Ruthenian are to some extent used to compensate for this
deficiency. However, the Committee of Experts considers that a systematic approach is needed in this field. It
therefore encourages the Romanian authorities to explore, in consultation with the representatives of the
Ruthenian speakers, whether it is possible to conclude or initiate an agreement on academic co-operation on
Ruthenian with relevant institutions in other countries where this language is used (e.g. Serbia, Slovakia).
i

the promotion of appropriate types of transnational exchanges, in the fields covered
by this Charter, for regional or minority languages used in identical or similar form in
two or more States.

Albanian
87.
According to the initial periodical report, Romania and Albania have concluded agreements which
foster contacts between citizens of both countries. It is, however, not clear to the Committee of Experts to
what extent these exchanges are relevant for “the fields covered by this Charter”. Furthermore, there are
direct contacts of the League of Albanians in Romania with institutions and associations in Albania. The
Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to submit more specific information on the
implementation of this provision in the next periodical report.

16

Armenian
88.
The Armenian Union of Romania regularly participates in international congresses of the Armenian
diaspora. Furthermore, the 2006-2010 co-operation programme in culture, education and science signed by
Romania and Armenia has provided for co-operation in the fields of cinema and libraries.
Greek
89.
The Hellenic Union of Romania is represented in the World Council of the Greek Diaspora and the
World Union of Parliamentarians of Greek origin and co-operates with Greek organisations worldwide. The
bilateral co-operation of Romania and Greece covers inter alia scholarships for learning Greek in Greece and
university studies.
Italian
90.
The Association of Italians in Romania works directly with partners in Italy. The bilingual Dante
Alighieri High School participates in exchange programmes with Italy, and Romanian universities with Italian
departments as well as cultural institutions co-operate with similar institutions in Italy. In 2009, the Romanian
authorities launched the “Programme to promote Romanian and Italian cultural identities and values”.
Macedonian
91.
The Romanian and Macedonian authorities are implementing a programme on exchanges in the field
of minority protection (co-operation of book publishers and editorial boards of cultural journals, publication of
translations of literary works, co-operation between libraries, participation in events).
Polish
92.
The Union of Poles in Romania is a member of the Union of Polish communities in Europe and the
World Council of Poles in the Diaspora and participates in congresses, educational, scientific and cultural
programmes. It is, however, not clear to what extent the Romanian authorities contribute to these activities
and whether other relevant exchanges take place. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities
to clarify these points in the next periodical report.
Romani
93.
The Ministry of Education, Research, Youth and Sports, through its inspectors for Romani, facilitates
electronic communication in Romani between Romani speakers in Romania and in other countries.
Furthermore, the Romani Language and Literature Department at the University of Bucharest has received
since 2007 five Roma students from the Romani language department of the University of Veliko Tarnovo in
Bulgaria. Considering the limited scope of these activities, the Committee of Experts asks the Romanian
authorities to clarify, in the next periodical report, whether other relevant exchanges take place.
Ruthenian
94.
Transnational exchanges to the benefit of Ruthenian are achieved through the Ruthenian congresses
of linguistics held regularly in countries where Ruthenians live. Considering the limited thematical scope of
these congresses, the Committee of Experts considers that a more systematic approach is needed in the
field of transnational exchanges. It therefore encourages the Romanian authorities to explore, in consultation
with the representatives of the Ruthenian speakers, what other appropriate types of transnational exchanges,
in the fields covered by this Charter, could be promoted to the benefit of Ruthenian.
Tatar
95.
The association of the Tatar minority co-operates with Tatar organisations in Ukraine (Crimea),
Turkey, Bulgaria, Cyprus, the Russian Federation (Tatarstan), Macedonia, and Kazakhstan. Representatives
of the Tatars in Romania and Crimea have decided to form two working groups in Romania and in Crimea to
consider the scientific aspect of language differences and to propose measures for harmonisation. It is,
however, not clear to what extent the Romanian authorities contribute to these activities and whether other
relevant exchanges take place. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify these
points in the next periodical report.
Yiddish
96.
The Federation of Jewish Communities in Romania maintains links with Jewish communities and
organisations abroad and participates in various cultural exchanges. In addition to the tours abroad of the
Yiddish State Theatre and choirs, a Yiddish theatre festival was held in Iaşi in 2008 with the participation of
Yiddish theatres from Israel, Russia and France.

17

Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake to eliminate, if they have not yet done so, any unjustified distinction,
exclusion, restriction or preference relating to the use of a regional or minority language and
intended to discourage or endanger the maintenance or development of it. The adoption of special
measures in favour of regional or minority languages aimed at promoting equality between the users
of these languages and the rest of the population or which take due account of their specific
conditions is not considered to be an act of discrimination against the users of more widely-used
languages.
97.
In their replies to the questionnaire submitted to them by the Committee of Experts, the Romanian
authorities state that the authorities attempt to prevent any unjustified distinction, exclusion, restriction or
preference relating to the use of a regional or minority language through accurate public information about
the provisions of the Charter. The Committee of Experts, however, asks the Romanian authorities to report
on the legislative set-up guaranteeing non-discrimination.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to promote, by appropriate measures, mutual understanding between all the
linguistic groups of the country and in particular the inclusion of respect, understanding and
tolerance in relation to regional or minority languages among the objectives of education and
training provided within their countries and encouragement of the mass media to pursue the same
objective.
98.
The initial periodical report does not provide any specific information about the implementation of this
provision. Mutual understanding seems to be hampered by deficiencies in the teaching of the history and
culture of national minorities in mainstream education. In its last Opinion on Romania, the Advisory
Committee on the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities “remained concerned
about the limited presence in the common school curricula, and in the textbooks and educational material
designed for pupils belonging to the majority population, of information regarding the history and culture of the
8
country’s national minorities, even though the Education Act provides for such topics to be covered.” The
Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to submit, in the next periodical report, more
information about measures taken in education and in relation to the mass media to promote mutual
understanding between all the linguistic groups of the country.
Paragraph 4
In determining their policy with regard to regional or minority languages, the Parties shall take into
consideration the needs and wishes expressed by the groups which use such languages. They are
encouraged to establish bodies, if necessary, for the purpose of advising the authorities on all
matters pertaining to regional or minority languages.
99.
According to the initial periodical report, the Council of National Minorities in Romania advises the
Government on its policy regarding regional or minority languages. It is composed of three representatives
each of the 19 national minority organisations represented in Parliament and meets monthly. The Council has
specialised committees on education and youth and culture, religious denominations and media and was also
involved in the preparation of ratification of the Charter. The Committee of Experts considers that the
Council’s work represents best practice from the viewpoint of Article 7.4 of the Charter.
Paragraph 5
The Parties undertake to apply, mutatis mutandis, the principles listed in paragraphs 1 to 4 above to
non-territorial languages. However, as far as these languages are concerned, the nature and scope of
the measures to be taken to give effect to this Charter shall be determined in a flexible manner,
bearing in mind the needs and wishes, and respecting the traditions and characteristics, of the
groups which use the languages concerned.

8

Advisory Committee on the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities, Second Opinion on Romania
(ACFC/OP/II(2005)007), paragraph 138.

18

100. In its instrument of ratification, Romania did not designate non-territorial languages. The Committee
of Experts nonetheless observes that some of the Part II languages may qualify as non-territorial languages.
In its appreciation of the situation of these languages vis-à-vis paragraphs 1-4 of Article 7, the Committee of
Experts has kept in mind that those principles should be applied mutatis mutandis.
2.2. Evaluation in respect of Part III of the Charter
2.2.1.

Bulgarian

Article 8 – Education
General issues
101. With regard to the Bulgarian language, Romania has ratified Articles 8.1.a.ii, b.ii and c.iii which put an
obligation on the state party to provide minority-language education irrespective of prior demand by parents
or students. In practice, however, a minimum number of parents or pupils have to demand the provision of
minority-language education. The undertakings chosen oblige the Romanian authorities to provide an offer of
minority language education throughout the whole language area. This does not preclude the possibility of not
establishing specific classes in minority languages if there are too few pupils. The Committee of Experts
refers in this respect to its observations and recommendation under 1.4.3 above, which apply to Bulgarian
accordingly.
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are
used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of
the official language(s) of the State:
a

...
ii

to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant regional or
minority languages; or

102. According to the initial periodical report, Bulgarian is used in the kindergartens of Breştea/Брещa
(pre-school education in Bulgarian attended by 20 children) and in Dudeştii Vechi/Cmapa Бешеновa
(education provided partially in Bulgarian and attended by 40 children). The Committee of Experts welcomes
the fact that the provision of pre-school education in Bulgarian in Breştea/Брещa goes even beyond the
requirements of the present undertaking (bilingual pre-school education).
103.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
b

...
ii

to make available a substantial part of primary education in the relevant regional or
minority languages; or

104. According to the initial periodical report, Bulgarian is taught as a subject for three to four hours per
week in Vinga, Dudeştii Vechi/Cmapa Бешеновa and Breştea/Брещa. The general language of instruction of
the respective schools is Romanian. Teaching of Bulgarian is part of the framework curriculum and the
school timetable and is attended by a total of 146 pupils.
105. However, the Committee of Experts notes that the present undertaking requires that a substantial part
of primary education in the regional or minority language is made available. This implies the provision of
bilingual education with the regional or minority language as the language of instruction for several subjects.
Teaching Bulgarian only as a subject is not sufficient because this educational model is covered by the less
demanding undertaking under Article 8.1.b.iii that Romania has not ratified.
11

106. In light of the obligation entered into by Romania , the Committee of Experts considers this
undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian authorities to make available a substantial part of
primary education in Bulgarian.

19

c

...
iii to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

107. According to the initial periodical report, Bulgarian is taught as a subject for three to four hours per
week at the secondary school in Vinga (grades five to eight) and at high schools in Bucharest and Dudeştii
Vechi/Cmapa Бешеновa (grades five to twelve). Teaching of Bulgarian is part of the framework curriculum
and the school timetable and is attended by a total of 252 pupils.
108.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
d

i

to make available technical and vocational education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of technical and vocational education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or

iii

to provide, within technical and vocational education, for the teaching of the relevant regional
or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

iv to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils
who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered sufficient;
109. The initial periodical report does not contain any information about the implementation of this
provision for Bulgarian. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this
undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to provide information about its implementation in the next
periodical report.
e

...
ii

to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher
education subjects; or

110. According to the initial periodical report, the Bulgarian language and literature can be studied at the
Department of Slavonic Languages and Literature of the Faculty of Foreign Languages and Literature of
Bucharest University.
111.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
g

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is
reflected by the regional or minority language;

112. The Committee of Experts notes that the present undertaking concerns not only education for pupils
using a minority language, but also education for non-speakers about the specific history and traditions
related to the minority language spoken in the relevant territory. This normally entails including elements of
the history and culture which is reflected by the minority language in the national curriculum, or at least in the
9
curriculum for all pupils within the territories concerned.
113. According to the initial periodical report, schools that teach Bulgarian as a minority language also
teach the subject “The Bulgarian Minority of Romania - History and Traditions”. There exists a textbook
published by the “Bulgarian Union of the Banat – Romania”.

9

See for example 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of Croatia, ECRML2005(3), paragraph 100; 2nd Report of the
Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML2009(6), paragraph 322.

20

114. It is, however, not clear to the Committee of Experts to what extent also non-speakers of Bulgarian
benefit from the teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected by the Bulgarian language. In their
replies to the Committee of Experts’ questionnaire, the Romanian authorities refer to a new optional subject
“History of National Minorities” which is taught in the tenth grade at 40 high schools in Romania. Furthermore,
owing to the revision of the Law on National Education in 2011, new history and geography textbooks will be
published and reflect the history and traditions of the national minorities. The Committee of Experts
commends the Romanian authorities on these positive initiatives and looks forward to receiving additional
information in the next periodical report.
115. The Committee of Experts is currently not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this
undertaking. It asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information on
whether also non-speakers benefit from the teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected by the
Bulgarian language.
h

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of
paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;

116. According to the initial periodical report, the total number of staff teaching Bulgarian as a subject is
14, of whom one teacher has been recruited from Bulgaria. The further training of these teachers is carried
out by the school inspectorates of Timiş County and Bucharest. However, there is no information about the
provision of the basic training of Bulgarian teachers, including teachers able to teach in the minority language
at pre-school and primary school levels.
117. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking. It asks
the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information on how they organise
the basic and further training of teachers who are qualified to teach Bulgarian as a subject as well as to teach
other subjects in Bulgarian.
i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken
and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority
languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be made
public.

118. According to the initial periodical report, a teacher of teaching methods for Bulgarian has been
appointed within the Timiş County School Inspectorate with a view to monitoring Bulgarian language
education. However, it appears that no periodic report on the measures taken and progress achieved in
establishing or developing the teaching of Bulgarian has been drawn up. Furthermore, for each minority there
are national committees and working groups that co-operate with the authorities to develop the curricula and
teaching materials.
10

119. In light of the above, the Committee of Experts underlines that this undertaking requires a
supervisory body or bodies dedicated to looking into minority language education. This body can be an
existing body, or a newly established body covering one or several minority languages, which monitors the
measures taken and progress achieved in minority language education and produces and publishes periodical
reports.
120. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to provide additional information in the next periodical report.
Paragraph 2
With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the regional or
minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional
or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the regional or
minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.
121. According to the initial periodical report, this provision is not implemented because of the low number
of Bulgarian speakers living outside the traditional settlement areas, in particular in the cities of southern
Romania. However, the Committee of Experts notes that in fact there is a high school in Bucharest that
teaches Bulgarian. Bulgarian is not taught at other levels.

10

See e.g. 1st Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the United Kingdom, ECRML(2004)1, paragraph 131.

21

122. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to provide additional information on whether there are sufficient numbers of
Bulgarian-speaking children in areas outside Banat that would justify teaching in or of Bulgarian and to what
degree the needs of these children are taken care of in the educational system.
Article 9 – Judicial authorities
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents using
the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to the situation
of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the present
paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of justice:
a

in criminal proceedings:
...
ii

to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or minority language;
and/or

123. According to Article 128.2 of the Romanian Constitution, “Romanian citizens belonging to national
minorities have the right to express themselves in their mother tongue before the courts of law (…)”.
Furthermore, Article 14 of Law no. 304/2004 on the Judicial System stipulates the right of citizens belonging
to national minorities to express themselves in their own language before courts (paragraph 2). “Where one
or more parties require expressing themselves in their own language, the court shall provide, free of charge,
an authorised interpreter or translator” (paragraph 3). However, the Romanian authorities state in the initial
periodical report that they have no information about the implementation of this undertaking for Bulgarian in
practice.
124. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It asks the Romanian
authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information about its practical implementation
concerning Bulgarian.
a

iii to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not be considered
inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a regional or minority language;
and/or

125. According to Article 14.5 of Law no. 304/2004 on the Judicial System, “[a]pplications and procedural
provisions shall be made only in Romanian.” Furthermore, Article 128.1-2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
foresees the free use of an interpreter and the translation of documents only in cases where the party
concerned “does not speak Romanian”.
126. The Committee of Experts understands that “applications” in accordance with Article 14.5 of the Law
on the Judicial System cover “requests” within the meaning of this Charter provision, which makes requests
in a minority language inadmissible. In addition, written or oral evidence can only be delivered if the person
concerned does not master Romanian. However, Article 9.1.a.iii of the Charter applies irrespective of whether
a party speaks Romanian, especially since most persons belonging to national minorities in Romania do
speak the majority language. Limiting the possibility to deliver written or oral evidence to persons who do not
speak Romanian would render this undertaking meaningless in most cases. On the other hand, the
Committee of Experts observes that Romanian legislation does not contain this restriction with regard to the
right of the accused to use a minority language (see Article 9.1.a.ii above).
127. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify, in the next periodical report,
whether the legal set-up allows in practice that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, may be
produced in Bulgarian.
b

in civil proceedings:
...

22

ii

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she
may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional
expense; and/or
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

128. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.ii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
129. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It asks the Romanian
authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information about the practical implementation of
this undertaking for Bulgarian.
b

iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

130. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.iii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
131. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify, in the next periodical report,
whether the legal set-up allows in practice that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, may be
produced in Bulgarian.
c

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
...
ii

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she
may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional
expense; and/or
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

132. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.ii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
133. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It asks the Romanian
authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information about the practical implementation of
this undertaking concerning Bulgarian.
c

iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

134. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.iii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
135. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify, in the next periodical report,
whether the legal set-up allows in practice that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, may be
produced in Bulgarian.
d

to take steps to ensure that the application of sub-paragraphs i and iii of paragraphs b
and c above and any necessary use of interpreters and translations does not involve extra
expense for the persons concerned.

136. In light of the conclusions reached regarding sub-paragraph iii of paragraphs b and c above, the
Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking.

23

Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake:
a

not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because they
are drafted in a regional or minority language; or

137. The initial periodical report does not contain any information about the implementation of this
undertaking.
138. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information about its implementation.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or minority languages the most important
national statutory texts and those relating particularly to users of these languages, unless they are
otherwise provided.
139. According to the replies submitted by the Romanian authorities to the Committee of Experts’
questionnaire, this provision is only implemented for Hungarian.
140. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to make available in Bulgarian the most important national statutory texts and those relating
particularly to users of this language, unless they are otherwise provided.
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
141. The Committee of Experts has not received any detailed information concerning the demographical
situation of the Bulgarian national minority at local level, including about whether this minority reaches the
20%-threshold in certain localities. This has hampered the examination of the application of Article 10. The
Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to submit, in the next periodical report, a list of the
localities where the Bulgarian speakers live in numbers relevant for the purposes of Article 10, keeping in
mind its recommendation regarding the 20%-threshold (see under 1.4.2).
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of
regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the situation
of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

...
ii

to ensure that such of their officers as are in contact with the public use the regional
or minority languages in their relations with persons applying to them in these
languages; or

iii to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written
applications and receive a reply in these languages; or
iv to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written
applications in these languages; or
v

142.

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document
in these languages;

Article 10.1 concerns local branches of the central State authorities.

143. Provisions a.ii – a.v represent alternative options. As Romania has chosen option a.ii, the options a.iii,
a.iv and a.v become redundant. In line with its practice, the Committee of Experts will ex officio examine
option a.ii only.

24

144. The implementation of this undertaking is hampered by the 20%-threshold. The Committee of Experts
refers in this respect to the observations and recommendation that it has made above (see under 1.4.2).
145. With regard to the Bulgarian language, the initial periodical report states that police inspectorates
have recruited policemen who can speak Bulgarian. It is, however, not clear whether this is the result of a
specific human resources policy.
146. The Committee of Experts welcomes the information from the Romanian authorities on their efforts
undertaken in the police administration. The state report, however, does not contain any information on the
use of Bulgarian in the realm of other administrative bodies of the state administration. In order to conclude
on fulfilment or non-fulfilment, the Committee of Experts needs more information on the use of Bulgarian in
local branches of the state administration in Banat. It asks the Romanian authorities to provide such
information in the next periodical report.
Paragraph 2
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who are
users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below, the
Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
...
b

the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written
applications in these languages;

147. According to Articles 2.2 and 8.1-2 of Government Decision no. 1206/2001, citizens belonging to
national minorities have the right to address oral or written requests to local authorities and the local and
county councils and to receive an answer in Romanian and the minority language. Apart from the fact that the
exercise of this right is linked to the 20%-threshold, the Committee of Experts has no indications that it is
exercised in practice.
11

148. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to allow and encourage the possibility for users of Bulgarian to submit oral or written applications
in this language to local authorities.
c

the publication by regional authorities of their official documents also in the relevant
regional or minority languages;

149. According to the replies by the Romanian authorities to the questionnaire submitted to them by the
Committee of Experts, public administration in Romania is established only at the central and local levels.
However, in the perspective of the Committee of Experts the counties may qualify as regions in the sense of
the Charter. The Committee of Experts would welcome more information on the publication of documents of
the counties in Bulgarian.
d

the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in the relevant regional
or minority languages;
12

150. According to the Romanian legislation , citizens belonging to national minorities are entitled to be
informed, in their mother tongue, about the agenda of the local council meetings and of the normative and
individual decisions adopted by them. However, the implementation of this possibility is limited to
municipalities where the national minority in question reaches 20% of the population. In addition, the
Committee of Experts has no indications that it is exercised in practice.
13

151. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to allow and encourage the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in
Bulgarian.

11

See e.g. 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraphs 479-480.
Articles 39, 50 and 94.8 of the Law on Local Administration no. 215/2001; Articles 2.2 and 7.1-2 of Government Decision
no. 1206/2001 for approving the Rules for implementing the provisions concerning the right of citizens belonging to national minorities
to use their mother tongue in local government, contained in the Law on Local Administration no. 215/2001.
13
See e.g. 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraphs 482-483.
12

25

e

the use by regional authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

152. The Committee of Experts refers to its remarks under Article 10.2.c and asks the Romanian
authorities to submit more information in the next periodical report.
f

the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

153. With regard to the relevant percentage thresholds, the Committee of Experts refers to the
observations and recommendation that it has made above (see under 1.4.2).
154. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to allow and encourage the use by local authorities of Bulgarian in debates in their assemblies.
g

the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official language(s),
of traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or minority languages.

155. With regard to the 20%-threshold, the Committee of Experts refers to the observations and
recommendation that it has made above (see under 1.4.2).
156. As far as Bulgarian is concerned, the use of place-names in this language seems to be limited to the
place-name signs of Dudeştii Vechi/Cmapa Бешеновa and Breştea/Брещa. However, the Committee of
Experts underlines that the term “place-names” within the meaning of the present undertaking concerns not only
the name of the municipality, but all topographical names (“la toponymie” in the French version of the Charter)
of that municipality that can be officially used, for example in texts produced by the local authority (e.g.
documents, forms, public relations material, websites) or in the signage (e.g. street name signs, signposts and
14
public transport signs, inscriptions for tourists).
157. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It asks the Romanian authorities
to provide more information on the use of place-names in Bulgarian in the next periodical report.
Paragraph 3
With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting on
their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which regional or minority languages are
used, in accordance with the situation of each language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in the provision of the service;
or

b

to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request and receive a reply in
these languages; or

c

to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request in these languages.

158. Undertakings a, b and c represent alternative options. As Romania has chosen option a, the options b
and c become redundant. In line with its practice, the Committee of Experts will ex officio examine option a
only. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts wishes to emphasise that “public services” refers to services
provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting on their behalf (e.g. railway, urban transport,
electricity, water and gas, cleaning and sanitation, telephone services, refuse collection and disposal,
cemeteries, sporting facilities, entertainment venues).

14

See e.g. 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraph 232.

26

159. Article 19 of the Law on Local Government no. 215/2001 states that "[i]n the territorial-administrative
units where citizens belonging to national minorities have a share of over 20% of residents, the local
government authorities and public institutions subordinated to them shall ensure their use of decentralized
public services in their mother tongue, according to the Constitution, the present law and international treaties
to which Romania is party." It is not clear to the Committee of Experts whether the “public institutions
subordinated to” local authorities cover public services in conformity with the present Charter provision. Even
if they cover public services, the problem remains that the implementation is linked to the 20%-threshold (see
under 1.4.2 above). Besides, there are no indications that this provision has been applied to Bulgarian in
practice.
160.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled.

The Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to ensure that Bulgarian is used in
the provision of public services in practice and asks them to clarify the national legal basis for the
implementation of this provision.
Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the
Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
...
b

recruitment and, where necessary, training of the officials and other public service
employees required;

161. Local authorities and county councils with responsibility for a territorial administrative unit where more
than 20% of the population belong to a national minority must also employ staff speaking the minority
language concerned. However, there is no specific information about whether the Bulgarian language
qualifies for this and how this provision is implemented for Bulgarian in relevant municipalities where the
20%-threshold is not met. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to provide information
regarding measures taken in accordance with this provision.
c

compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a
knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that
language is used.

162. The initial periodical report does not contain any information about the implementation of this
undertaking regarding Bulgarian. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to provide
information regarding measures taken in accordance with this undertaking.
Paragraph 5
The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or minority
languages, at the request of those concerned.
163. The initial periodical report does not contain any information about the implementation of this
undertaking. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a position to conclude on its fulfilment and asks the
Romanian authorities to submit the relevant information in the next periodical report.
Article 11 – Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in
which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that the
public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this field, and
respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
a

to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:

27

...
iii to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer programmes in the regional or
minority languages;
164. According to the initial periodical report, the regional radio station of Timişoara broadcasts a
programme in Bulgarian with a duration of one hour per week. It is unclear what content this programme
covers and which age groups it addresses.
165. Moreover, the television channel TVR3, which is dedicated to national minorities, broadcasts a tenminute programme in Bulgarian. It is, however, unclear at what intervals this programme is broadcast, what
content it covers and which age groups it addresses.
166. The Committee of Experts welcomes the presence of the Bulgarian language on public radio and
television. It notes, however, that the duration of the radio programme of one hour per week is too short in light
15
of the number of Bulgarian speakers, which reduces the effectiveness and attractiveness of this broadcasting.
The Committee of Experts reiterates the great importance of the electronic media for the promotion of
minority languages in modern societies. In particular, a regular and predictable (e.g. weekly) presence of a
16
minority language on radio and television can enhance considerably its social prestige.
167. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled regarding radio. With regard to
television, the Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to submit more specific information in the
next periodical report.
b

...
ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;

168. It appears from the replies by the Romanian authorities to the questionnaire submitted to them by the
Committee of Experts that there are no private radio programmes in Bulgarian.
169. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to facilitate the broadcasting of private radio programmes in Bulgarian on a regular basis.
c

...
ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;

170. According to the replies by the Romanian authorities to the questionnaire submitted to them by the
Committee of Experts, TV Arad transmits twice per month a programme in Bulgarian. The programme covers
cultural topics, addresses all generations and lasts 25 minutes. Furthermore, Alfa Omega TV broadcasts a
cultural programme for one hour per week.
171.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
d

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in the regional or minority languages

172. The initial periodical report states that the television channel TVR 3 broadcasts, on a weekly basis, an
art film from Bulgaria with subtitling in Romanian. The exchange of movies has been agreed in the framework
of a co-operation agreement between the public television services of Romania and Bulgaria. Furthermore, it
is stated that the “Bulgarian Union of the Banat – Romania”, which receives financial assistance from the
state budget, has launched a website. Also, in the report’s section on Article 12, reference is made to the
possibility of receiving support from the Cinema Fund with a view to producing movies in minority languages.
Apart from the fact that the report does not specify whether the Bulgarian language has benefited from this
possibility, the Committee of Experts notes that the access to the Cinema Fund is open to producers of
movies in all languages.

15
16

See 2nd Evaluation Report on the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraph 800.
See 2nd Evaluation Report on Switzerland, ECRML(2004)6, paragraph 118.

28

173. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It asks the Romanian authorities
to submit, in their next periodical report, additional information about measures taken to encourage and/or
facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual works in Bulgarian.
e

i

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one
newspaper in the regional or minority languages; or

174. The Committee of Experts underlines that a “newspaper” in conformity with the present undertaking
17
has to be published at least weekly. According to the initial periodical report, the Romanian authorities
provide financial assistance to bilingual (Romanian-Bulgarian) magazines. However, neither of them is
published sufficiently often to qualify as a “newspaper”.
175. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one newspaper in
Bulgarian.
g

to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using regional or minority
languages.

176. The initial periodical report refers to training organised by TVR 3 for the journalists of the national
minority programmes as well as a yearly journalism course for the editors of national minorities’ periodicals
organised by the Department for Interethnic Relations. It is, however, not sufficiently clear whether these
measures have benefited journalists and other media staff using Bulgarian. The Committee of Experts, which
is currently not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking, asks the Romanian authorities to
clarify this in the next periodical report.
Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television broadcasts
from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority
language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from
neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure that no restrictions will
be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of information in the written press in a
language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of the
above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such
formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a
democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the
prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the
reputation or rights of others, for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for
maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
177. The initial periodical report refers to the European Union’s Audiovisual Media Services Directive
2007/65/EC which ensures freedom of reception and retransmissions of audiovisual media services from
other EU states. As regards the Bulgarian language, two TV channels from Bulgaria are retransmitted in
Dudeştii Vechi/Cmapa Бешеновa, a stronghold of the Bulgarian minority in Romania, by a local distributor.
178.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.

Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to ensure that the interests of the users of regional or minority languages are
represented or taken into account within such bodies as may be established in accordance with the
law with responsibility for guaranteeing the freedom and pluralism of the media.

17

See 1st Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of Serbia, ECRML(2009)2, paragraph 267; 2nd Report of the Committee of
Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraph 654.

29

179. The initial periodical report refers to the National Audiovisual Council of Romania as the autonomous
public authority in charge of the defence of the public interest in the broadcast media. However, there is no
specific information as to whether the interests of the Bulgarian speakers are represented or taken into
account by the Council, or whether there are other bodies in Romania performing tasks relevant under this
undertaking. Furthermore, the information available does not cover the print media. The Committee of
Experts, which is currently not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking, asks the
Romanian authorities to clarify these issues in the next periodical report.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural centres,
museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production,
vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries, including inter alia the
use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are
used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this
field:
a

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority languages
and foster the different means of access to works produced in these languages;

180. According to the initial periodical report, the Romanian authorities have provided financial support to
the publication of books in Bulgarian covering fiction, history and poetry, and to the participation of the
Bulgarian minority in book fairs. The state-funded “Bulgarian Union of the Banat – Romania” runs a network
of small libraries with books in Bulgarian. Furthermore, financial support has been provided to various cultural
events and performances by choirs of the Bulgarian minority taking place in Romania and abroad (including
Bulgaria).
181.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
b

to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in regional
or minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, postsynchronisation and subtitling activities;

182. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Bulgarian language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.
c

to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages
by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling
activities;

183. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Bulgarian language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.
d

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of
various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of
regional or minority languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for
which they provide backing;

184. Most cultural activities promoting the Bulgarian language are carried out by the state-funded
“Bulgarian Union of the Banat – Romania”. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
e

to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting
cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of the regional or
minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest of the population;

30

185. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination under Article 12.1.d, which applies accordingly.
The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
f

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or
minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

186. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination under Article 12.1.d, which applies accordingly.
The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
g

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for collecting,
keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the regional or
minority languages;

187. According to the replies by the Romanian authorities to the questionnaire submitted to them by the
Committee of Experts, the National Library of Romania keeps copies of documents of the national minorities.
The Committee of Experts notes, however, that the scope of this provision extends beyond the collection
activities usually carried out by national libraries. It asks the Romanian authorities to submit information
concerning audiovisual materials and publication of works in Bulgarian in the next periodical report.
h

if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and terminological
research services, particularly with a view to maintaining and developing appropriate
administrative, commercial, economic, social, technical or legal terminology in each
regional or minority language.

188. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information concerning the application of this
provision to the Bulgarian language.
189. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to submit the relevant information, especially commenting on any need to
develop necessary terminology in Bulgarian, in the next periodical report.
Paragraph 2
In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are traditionally
used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to
allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in accordance with the
preceding paragraph.
190. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Bulgarian language. Nevertheless, the Committee of Experts is aware
that the Romanian authorities regularly support several cultural activities which bring together some or all
national minorities. These activities include the annual festival “ProEtnica” in Sighișoara/Schäßburg, the
Minority Theatre Festival, the National Minorities Day, the Interethnic Film Festival, the documentary film
festival “Alternative” (in Târgu Mureș/Marosvásárhely/Neumarkt) and the rock music festival “Felsiget”
(ibidem). These events may be relevant under this provision if the Bulgarian language has benefited from
them and if the events have taken place outside the area where Bulgarian is traditionally used. The
Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify this in the next periodical report or to provide
information on other relevant activities.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for
regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.
191. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Bulgarian language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.

31

Article 13 – Economic and social life
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole country:
a

to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without justifiable
reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to economic or
social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical documents such as
instructions for the use of products or installations;

192. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Bulgarian language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.
b

to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of companies and private documents of
any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or minority languages, at least
between users of the same language;

193. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Bulgarian language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.
Article 14 – Transfrontier exchanges
The Parties undertake:
a

to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the States in
which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if necessary to seek to
conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster contacts between the users of the
same language in the States concerned in the fields of culture, education, information,
vocational training and permanent education;

194. The initial periodical report refers to the import of textbooks from Bulgaria for Bulgarian-language
education in Romania, the co-operation of a high school with a high school in Bulgaria (cultural activities,
exchanges of students and teachers) and the general contacts of the state-funded “Bulgarian Union of the
Banat – Romania” with Bulgaria. There is, however, no specific information about co-operation in the fields of
vocational training and permanent education and no information about co-operation in the field of the media.
195. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking. It asks
the Romanian authorities to submit, in the next periodical report, further information on the existence of a
bilateral agreement with Bulgaria and the use of such an agreement to foster contacts between Bulgarian
speakers in Romania and Bulgaria.
b

for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or promote co-operation
across borders, in particular between regional or local authorities in whose territory the
same language is used in identical or similar form.

196. According to the initial periodical report, a transborder programme between Romania (Constanţa,
Călăraşi and Giurgiu counties) and Bulgaria (Silistra) was implemented in 2009, targeting common traditions
and customs of Romanians and Bulgarians of these areas. In the framework of the “Romania–Bulgaria
Cross-Border Co-operation Programme 2007–2013”, common events for the promotion of culture, cooperation between educational institutions, school and university exchanges and the common promotion of
tourist attractions have been carried out. It is, however, not clear to what extent the Bulgarian language has
been promoted by these programmes. Furthermore, the Romanian authorities have published information
materials relating to various kinds of cross-border co-operation with Bulgaria in the Bulgarian language.

32

197. While considering this undertaking fulfilled, the Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities
to submit, in the next periodical report, more specific information about the promotion of the Bulgarian
language in the context of cross-border co-operation.
2.2.2. Croatian
Article 8 – Education
General issues
198. With regard to the Croatian language, Romania has ratified Articles 8.1.a.i, b.i and c.ii which put an
obligation on the state party to provide minority-language education irrespective of prior demand by parents
or students. In practice, however, a minimum number of parents or pupils have to demand the provision of
minority-language education. The undertakings chosen oblige the Romanian authorities to provide an offer of
minority language education throughout the whole language area. This does not preclude the possibility of not
establishing specific classes in minority languages if there are too few pupils. The Committee of Experts
refers in this respect to its observations and recommendation under 1.4.3 above, which apply to Croatian
accordingly.
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are
used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of
the official language(s) of the State:
a

i

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages;
or

199. According to the initial periodical report, pre-school education in Croatian is available in
Caraşova/Karaševo (Caraş-Severin county; attended by 25 children), Iabalcea/Jabalče (ten children),
Nermed/Nermič (unknown number), Vodnic/Vodnik (17 children), Clocotici/Klokotič (eleven children) and
Rafnic/Ravnik (33 children).
200.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
b

i

to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

201. According to the initial periodical report, primary education in Croatian is available in
Caraşova/Karaševo, which constitutes the cultural centre of the Croatian minority in Romania, and attended
by 53 children.
202.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
c

...
ii

to make available a substantial part of secondary education in the relevant regional or
minority languages; or

203. According to the initial periodical report, 121 students of the Croatian High School in
Caraşova/Karaševo study Croatian as a mother tongue for four hours per week.
204. However, the Committee of Experts notes that the present undertaking requires that a substantial part
of secondary education in Croatian is made available. This implies the provision of bilingual education with
Croatian as a medium of instruction for about half of the subjects. Teaching Croatian only as a subject is not
sufficient because this educational model is covered by the less demanding undertaking under Article 8.1.c.iii
that Romania has not ratified.
205. In light of the obligation entered into by Romania, the Committee of Experts considers this
undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian authorities to make available a substantial part of
secondary education in Croatian.

33

e

i

to make available university and other higher education in regional or minority languages; or

ii

to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher education
subjects; or

iii if, by reason of the role of the State in relation to higher education institutions, subparagraphs i and ii cannot be applied, to encourage and/or allow the provision of
university or other forms of higher education in regional or minority languages or of
facilities for the study of these languages as university or higher education subjects;
206. According to the initial periodical report, Croatian language (as a foreign language, not as a minority
language) and literature can be studied at the University of Bucharest. There were 21 students registered in
the 2008-2009 academic year. Furthermore, Croatian language and literature can be studied at the University
of Timişoara (15 students). At both universities, some courses are held in Croatian.
207.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
g

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is
reflected by the regional or minority language;

208. The Committee of Experts notes that the present undertaking concerns not only education for pupils
using a minority language, but also education for non-speakers about the specific history and traditions
related to the minority language spoken in the relevant territory. This normally entails including elements of
the history and culture which is reflected by the minority language in the national curriculum, or at least in the
18
curriculum for all pupils within the territories concerned.
209. The initial periodical report states that the textbook “History and Traditions of the Croatian Minority”,
which has been donated by the Croatian authorities, is used in Romania. It is, however, not clear to what
extent the Romanian authorities contribute to the fulfilment of this undertaking.
210. In addition, it is not clear to the Committee of Experts to what extent non-speakers of Croatian also
benefit from the teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected by the Croatian language. In their
replies to the Committee of Experts’ questionnaire, the Romanian authorities refer to a new optional subject
“History of National Minorities” which is taught in the tenth grade at 40 high schools in Romania. Furthermore,
owing to the revision of the Law on National Education in 2011, new history and geography textbooks will be
published and reflect the history and traditions of the national minorities. The Committee of Experts
commends the Romanian authorities on these positive initiatives and looks forward to receiving additional
information in the next periodical report.
211. The Committee of Experts is currently not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this
undertaking. It asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information on
whether non-speakers also benefit from the teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected by the
Croatian language.
h

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of
paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;

212. According to the initial periodical report, the Croatian authorities organise further training (teaching
methods) for the teaching staff of schools using Croatian in Romania. Furthermore, the Romanian authorities
approved funds for further training courses. However, there is no information about the provision of the basic
training of Croatian teachers, including teachers able to teach in the minority language at pre-school, primary
and secondary levels.
213. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking. It asks
the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information on how they organise
the basic and further training of teachers who are qualified to teach Croatian as a subject as well as to teach
other subjects in Croatian.

18

See for example 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of Croatia, ECRML2005(3), paragraph 100; 2nd Report of the
Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML2009(6), paragraph 322

34

i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken
and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority
languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be made
public.

214. There are no indications that the required body exists for Croatian. The Committee of Experts
19
underlines that this undertaking requires a supervisory body or bodies dedicated to looking into minority
language education. This body can be an existing body, or a newly established body covering one or several
minority languages, which monitors the measures taken and progress achieved in minority language education
and produces and publishes periodical reports.
215. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to set up a supervisory body responsible for monitoring the measures taken and progress
achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of Croatian and for drawing up public periodic reports of
its findings.
Paragraph 2
With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the regional or
minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional
or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the regional or
minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.
216. Apart from the possibility to study the Croatian language at the University of Bucharest, no teaching in
or of Croatian seems to take place outside the traditional settlement area.
217. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to provide teaching in or of Croatian at all the appropriate stages of education in territories other
than those in which this language is traditionally used.
Article 9 – Judicial authorities
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents using
the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to the situation
of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the present
paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of justice:
a

in criminal proceedings:
...
ii

to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or minority language;
and/or

218. According to Article 128.2 of the Romanian Constitution, “Romanian citizens belonging to national
minorities have the right to express themselves in their mother tongue before the courts of law (…)”.
Furthermore, Article 14 of Law no. 304/2004 on the Judicial System stipulates the right of citizens belonging
to national minorities to express themselves in their own language before courts (paragraph 2). “Where one
or more parties require expressing themselves in their own language, the court shall provide, free of charge,
an authorised interpreter or translator” (paragraph 3). However, the Romanian authorities state in the initial
periodical report that they have no information about the implementation of this undertaking for Croatian in
practice.
219. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It asks the Romanian
authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information about its practical implementation
concerning Croatian.

19

See e.g. 1st Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the United Kingdom, ECRML(2004)1, paragraph 131.

35

a

iii to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not be considered
inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a regional or minority language;
and/or

220. According to Article 14.5 of Law no. 304/2004 on the Judicial System, “[a]pplications and procedural
provisions shall be made only in Romanian.” Furthermore, Article 128.1-2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
foresees the free use of an interpreter and the translation of documents only in cases where the party
concerned “does not speak Romanian”.
221. The Committee of Experts understands that “applications” in accordance with Article 14.5 of Law on
the Judicial System cover “requests” within the meaning of this Charter provision, which makes requests in a
minority language inadmissible. In addition, written or oral evidence can only be delivered if the person
concerned does not master Romanian. However, Article 9.1.a.iii of the Charter applies irrespective of whether
a party speaks Romanian, especially since most persons belonging to national minorities in Romania do
speak the majority language. Limiting the possibility to deliver written or oral evidence to persons who do not
speak Romanian would render this undertaking meaningless in most cases. On the other hand, the
Committee of Experts observes that Romanian legislation does not contain this restriction with regard to the
right of the accused to use a minority language (see Article 9.1.a.ii above).
222. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify, in the next periodical report,
whether the legal set-up allows in practice that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, may be
produced in Croatian
b

in civil proceedings:
...
ii

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she
may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional
expense; and/or
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

223. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.ii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
224. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It asks the Romanian
authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information about the practical implementation of
this undertaking for Croatian.
b

iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

225. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.iii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
226. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify, in the next periodical report,
whether the legal set-up allows in practice that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, may be
produced in Croatian.
c

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
...
ii

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she
may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional
expense; and/or
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

36

227. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.ii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
228. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It asks the Romanian
authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information about the practical implementation of
this undertaking concerning Croatian.
c

iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

229. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.iii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
230. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify, in the next periodical report,
whether the legal set-up allows in practice that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, may be
produced in Croatian.
d

to take steps to ensure that the application of sub-paragraphs i and iii of paragraphs b
and c above and any necessary use of interpreters and translations does not involve extra
expense for the persons concerned.

231. In light of the conclusions reached regarding sub-paragraph iii of paragraphs b and c above, the
Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking.
Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake:
a

not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because they
are drafted in a regional or minority language; or

232. The initial periodical report does not contain any information about the implementation of this
undertaking.
233. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information about its implementation.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or minority languages the most important
national statutory texts and those relating particularly to users of these languages, unless they are
otherwise provided.
234. According to the replies submitted by the Romanian authorities to the Committee of Experts’
questionnaire, this provision is only implemented for Hungarian.
235. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to make available in Croatian the most important national statutory texts and those relating
particularly to users of this language, unless they are otherwise provided.
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
236. The Committee of Experts has not received any detailed information concerning the demographical
situation of the Croatian national minority at local level, including about whether this minority reaches the
20%-threshold in certain localities. This has hampered the examination of the application of Article 10. The
Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to submit, in the next periodical report, a list of the
localities where the Croatian speakers live in numbers relevant for the purposes of Article 10, keeping in mind
its recommendation regarding the 20%-threshold (see under 1.4.2).

37

Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of
regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the situation
of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

...
ii

to ensure that such of their officers as are in contact with the public use the regional
or minority languages in their relations with persons applying to them in these
languages; or

iii to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written
applications and receive a reply in these languages; or
iv to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written
applications in these languages; or
v

237.

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document
in these languages;

Article 10.1 concerns local branches of the central State authorities.

238. Provisions a.ii – a.v represent alternative options. As Romania has chosen option a.ii, the options a.iii,
a.iv and a.v become redundant. In line with its practice, the Committee of Experts will ex officio examine
option a.ii only.
239. The implementation of this undertaking is hampered by the 20%-threshold. The Committee of Experts
refers in this respect to the observations and recommendation that it has made above (see under 1.4.2).
240. As far as the Croatian language is concerned, the initial periodical report states that the CaraşSeverin Police County Inspectorate has recruited policemen who can speak Croatian. It is, however, not clear
whether this is the result of a specific human resources policy.
241. The Committee of Experts welcomes the information from the Romanian authorities on their efforts
undertaken in the police administration. The state report, however, does not contain any information on the
use of Croatian in the realm of other administrative bodies of the state administration. In order to conclude on
fulfilment or non-fulfilment, the Committee of Experts needs more information on the use of Croatian in local
branches of the state administration. It asks the Romanian authorities to provide such information in the next
periodical report.
Paragraph 2
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who are
users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below, the
Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
...
b

the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written
applications in these languages;

242. According to Articles 2.2 and 8.1-2 of Government Decision no. 1206/2001, citizens belonging to
national minorities have the right to address oral or written requests to local authorities and the local and
county councils and to receive an answer in Romanian and the minority language. The exercise of this right is
linked to the 20%-threshold.
243. As regards the Croatian language, the initial periodical report states that local authorities in CaraşSeverin county have replied in Croatian to applications submitted to them by persons belonging to the
Croatian minority.

38

244. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. Considering the problems related
to the 20%-threshold, the Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to allow and/or
encourage the possibility for users of Croatian to submit oral or written applications in this language to local
authorities.
d

the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in the relevant regional
or minority languages;
20

245. According to the Romanian legislation , citizens belonging to national minorities are entitled to be
informed, in their mother tongue, about the agenda of the local council meetings and of the normative and
individual decisions adopted by them. However, the implementation of this possibility is limited to
municipalities where the national minority in question reaches 20% of the population. In addition, the
Committee of Experts has no indications that it is exercised in practice.
21

246. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to allow and/or encourage the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in
Croatian.
f

the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

247. With regard to the relevant thresholds, the Committee of Experts refers to the observations and
recommendation that it has made above (see under 1.4.2).
248. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to allow and/or encourage the use by local authorities of Croatian in debates in their assemblies.
g

the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official language(s),
of traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or minority languages.

249. With regard to the 20%-threshold, the Committee of Experts refers to the observations and
recommendation that it has made above (see under 1.4.2).
250. As far as Croatian is concerned, the use of place-names in this language seems to be limited to the
place-name signs of Caraşova/Karaševo, Iabalcea/Jabalče, Nermed/Nermič, Vodnic/Vodnik,
Clocotici/Klokotič and Rafnic/Ravnik. However, the Committee of Experts underlines that the term “placenames” within the meaning of the present undertaking concerns not only the name of the municipality, but all
topographical names (“la toponymie” in the French version of the Charter) of that municipality that can be
officially used, for example in texts produced by the local authority (e.g. documents, forms, public relations
material, websites) or in the signage (e.g. street name signs, signposts and public transport signs, inscriptions
22
for tourists).
251. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It asks the Romanian authorities
to provide more information on the use of place-names in Croatian in the next periodical report.
Paragraph 3
With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting on
their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which regional or minority languages are
used, in accordance with the situation of each language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

20

to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in the provision of the service;
or

Articles 39, 50 and 94.8 of the Law on Local Administration no. 215/2001; Articles 2.2 and 7.1-2 of Government Decision no.
1206/2001 for approving the Rules for implementing the provisions concerning the right of citizens belonging to national minorities to
use their mother tongue in local government, contained in the Law on Local Administration no. 215/2001
21
See e.g. 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraphs 482-483
22
See e.g. 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraph 232

39

b

to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request and receive a reply in
these languages; or

252. Undertakings a and b represent alternative options. As Romania has chosen option a, option b
becomes redundant. In line with its practice, the Committee of Experts will ex officio examine option a only.
Furthermore, the Committee of Experts wishes to emphasise that “public services” refers to services provided
by the administrative authorities or other persons acting on their behalf (e.g. railway, urban transport, electricity,
water and gas, cleaning and sanitation, telephone services, refuse collection and disposal, cemeteries,
sporting facilities, entertainment venues).
253. Article 19 of the Law on Local Government no. 215/2001 states that "[i]n the territorial-administrative
units where citizens belonging to national minorities have a share of over 20% of residents, the local
government authorities and public institutions subordinated to them shall ensure their use of decentralized
public services in their mother tongue, according to the Constitution, the present law and international treaties
to which Romania is party." It is not clear to the Committee of Experts whether the “public institutions
subordinated to” local authorities cover public services in conformity with the present Charter provision. Even
if they cover public services, the problem remains that the implementation is linked to the 20%-threshold (see
under 1.4.2 above). Besides, there are no indications that this provision has been applied to Croatian in
practice.
254.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled.

The Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to ensure that Croatian is used in
the provision of public services in practice and asks them to clarify the national legal basis for the
implementation of this provision.
Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the
Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
...
b

recruitment and, where necessary, training of the officials and other public service
employees required;

255. Local authorities and county councils with responsibility for a territorial administrative unit where more
than 20% of the population belong to a national minority must also employ staff speaking the minority
language concerned. However, there is no specific information about whether the Croatian language qualifies
for this and how this provision is implemented for Croatian in relevant municipalities where the 20%-threshold
is not met. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to provide information regarding
measures taken in accordance with this provision.
c

compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a
knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that
language is used.

256. The initial periodical report does not contain any information about the implementation of this
undertaking regarding Croatian. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to provide
information regarding measures taken in accordance with this undertaking.
Paragraph 5
The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or minority
languages, at the request of those concerned.
257. The initial periodical report does not contain any information about the implementation of this
undertaking. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a position to conclude on its fulfilment and asks the
Romanian authorities to submit the relevant information in the next periodical report.

40

Article 11 – Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in
which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that the
public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this field, and
respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
a

to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:
...
iii to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer programmes in the regional or
minority languages;

258. According to the initial periodical report, Radio Reşiţa broadcasts a programme in Croatian (30
minutes per week). In Bucharest, an additional radio programme is broadcast in Croatian with a duration of
45 minutes, covering inter alia news. However, it is not clear how regular this programme is broadcast
(weekly, monthly, etc.).
259. Furthermore, TVR 3 broadcasts a television programme in Croatian which is produced by TVR
Timişoara. There is no further information about this programme (duration, broadcasting time, target
audience, topics covered, etc.).
260. On the basis of the information available, the Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on
the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit more specific information in the
next periodical report.
c

...
ii

261.

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;

It appears that there are no private television programmes in Croatian.

262. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of private television programmes in Croatian on a
regular basis.
d

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in the regional or minority languages

263. According to the initial periodical report, the television channel TVR 3 broadcasts, on a weekly basis,
an art film from Croatia with subtitling in Romanian. The exchange of movies has been agreed in the
framework of a co-operation agreement between the public television services of Romania and Croatia.
There is, however, no information about other audio and audiovisual works in Croatian and about how the
Romanian authorities have supported the production of such works. Also, in the report’s section on Article 12,
reference is made to the possibility of receiving support from the Cinema Fund with a view to producing
movies in minority languages. Apart from the fact that the report does not specify whether the Croatian
language has benefited from this possibility, the Committee of Experts notes that the access to the Cinema
Fund is open to producers of movies in all languages. This possibility is therefore covered by the nondiscrimination clause in Article 7.2 and does not represent an encouragement or facilitation as required by the
present provision.
264. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. Nevertheless, it asks the
Romanian authorities to submit, in their next periodical report, additional information about measures taken to
encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual works in Croatian.
e

i

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one
newspaper in the regional or minority languages; or

41

265. The Committee of Experts underlines that a “newspaper” in conformity with the present undertaking
23
has to be published at least weekly. According to the initial periodical report, a bilingual journal (CroatianRomanian) is published from the state budget (“Hrvatska Grancica” with the supplement “Supliment Hrvatska
Grancica”). There is, however, no additional information about this publication, including on how regularly it is
published and what topics it covers. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a position to conclude on
the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit the relevant information in the
next periodical report.
g

to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using regional or minority
languages.

266. The initial periodical report refers to training organised by TVR 3 for the journalists of the national
minority programmes as well as a yearly journalism course for the editors of national minorities’ periodicals
organised by the Department for Interethnic Relations. It is, however, not sufficiently clear whether these
measures have benefited journalists and other media staff using Croatian. The Committee of Experts, which
is currently not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking, asks the Romanian authorities to
clarify this in the next periodical report.
Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television broadcasts
from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority
language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from
neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure that no restrictions will
be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of information in the written press in a
language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of the
above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such
formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a
democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the
prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the
reputation or rights of others, for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for
maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
267. According to the initial periodical report, Article 75.1-2 of the Audiovisual Law No. 504/2002
guarantees free transmission of radio and television broadcasts from abroad. Furthermore, the European
Union’s Audiovisual Media Services Directive 2007/65/EC ensures freedom of reception and retransmissions
of audiovisual media services from other EU states. As regards the Croatian language, two television
channels from Croatia (HRT1 and HRT2) can be received in Caraş-Severin county.
268.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.

Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural centres,
museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production,
vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries, including inter alia the
use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are
used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this
field:
a

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority languages
and foster the different means of access to works produced in these languages;

269. The initial periodical report refers to the production of a folklore thesaurus on CD (with songs) and the
participation of Croatian speakers at the “ProEtnica Festival”. However, considering the wide scope of this
provision and the number of Croatian speakers in Romania, the Committee of Experts is of the view that
further measures are needed in order to fulfil this commitment.

23

See 1st Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of Serbia, ECRML(2009)2, paragraph 267; 2nd Report of the Committee of
Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraph 654

42

270. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to take additional steps with a view to encouraging types of expression and initiative specific to the
Croatian language and fostering the different means of access to works produced in this language.
b

to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in regional
or minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, postsynchronisation and subtitling activities;

271. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Croatian language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.
c

to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages
by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling
activities;

272. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Croatian language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.
d

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of
various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of
regional or minority languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for
which they provide backing;

273. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Croatian language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.
e

to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting
cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of the regional or
minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest of the population;

274. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Croatian language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.
f

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or
minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

275. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Croatian language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.
g

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for collecting,
keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the regional or
minority languages;

276. According to the initial periodical report, there are plans to establish a central ethnic documentation
museum for the Croats of Romania. It appears that this museum may in the future perform tasks relevant
under this provision, but it is not clear whether it has already been opened. The Committee of Experts would
need more specific information on this institution in order to reach a conclusion on the fulfilment of this
provision. It asks the Romanian authorities to submit this information in the next periodical report.
h

if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and terminological
research services, particularly with a view to maintaining and developing appropriate
administrative, commercial, economic, social, technical or legal terminology in each
regional or minority language.

43

277. The initial periodical report refers to linguistic research and related international conferences
organised by the “Union of Croats of Romania” with a view to preserving the Croatian linguistic thesaurus.
These activities may be relevant under this provision, but it is not clear whether they have actually covered
translation and terminological research services.
278. The Committee of Experts would need more specific information in order to reach a conclusion on the
fulfilment of this provision. It asks the Romanian authorities to submit this information in the next periodical
report.
Paragraph 2
In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are traditionally
used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to
allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in accordance with the
preceding paragraph.
279. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Croatian language. Nevertheless, the Committee of Experts is aware
that the Romanian authorities regularly support several cultural activities which bring together some or all
national minorities. These activities include the annual festival “ProEtnica” in Sighișoara/Schäßburg, the
Minority Theatre Festival, the National Minorities Day, the Interethnic Film Festival, the documentary film
festival “Alternative” (in Târgu Mureș/Marosvásárhely/Neumarkt) and the rock music festival “Felsiget”
(ibidem). These events may be relevant under this provision if the Croatian language has benefited from
them and if the events have taken place outside the area where Croatian is traditionally used. The Committee
of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify this in the next periodical report or to provide information
on other relevant activities.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for
regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.
280. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Croatian language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.
Article 13 – Economic and social life
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole country:
a

to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without justifiable
reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to economic or
social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical documents such as
instructions for the use of products or installations;

281. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Croatian language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.
b

to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of companies and private documents of
any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or minority languages, at least
between users of the same language;

282. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Croatian language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.

44

Article 14 – Transfrontier exchanges
The Parties undertake:
a

to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the States in
which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if necessary to seek to
conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster contacts between the users of the
same language in the States concerned in the fields of culture, education, information,
vocational training and permanent education;

283. According to the initial periodical report, Romania and Croatia have launched a “Dialogue on National
Minorities” which aims at promoting minority languages inter alia in education and media as well as
exchanging experience on good practice in the field of minority protection. Furthermore, both countries
signed the “Co-operation Agreement in Culture, Education and the Technical-Scientific Field” (1994) as well
as the “Interministerial Cultural Co-operation Protocol” (1999). The Croatian minority in Romania has
received textbooks from the Croatian authorities for Croatian-language education. The initial periodical report
also refers to exchanges of professors and students involving the universities of Bucharest, Timişoara and
Zagreb as well as the provision by the Croatian authorities of scholarships for study visits in Croatia. The
“Union of Croatians of Romania” also organises cross-border exchanges promoting contacts with
associations in Croatia, including those of the Czech, German, Hungarian, Italian, Serbian and Slovak
minorities in Croatia.
284.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
b

for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or promote co-operation
across borders, in particular between regional or local authorities in whose territory the
same language is used in identical or similar form.

285. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
co-operation across borders between regional or local authorities to the benefit of the Croatian language. The
Committee of Experts is therefore not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks
the Romanian authorities to submit such information in the next periodical report.
2.2.3. Czech
Article 8 – Education
General issues
286. With regard to the Czech language, Romania has ratified Articles 8.1.a.ii, b.ii and c.iii which put an
obligation on the state party to provide minority-language education irrespective of prior demand by parents
or students. In practice, however, a minimum number of parents or pupils have to demand the provision of
minority-language education. The undertakings chosen oblige the Romanian authorities to provide an offer of
minority language education throughout the whole language area. This does not preclude the possibility of not
establishing specific classes in minority languages if there are too few pupils. The Committee of Experts
refers in this respect to its observations and recommendation under 1.4.3 above, which apply to Czech
accordingly.
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are
used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of
the official language(s) of the State:
a

...
ii

to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant regional or
minority languages; or

45

287. According to the initial periodical report, pre-school education in Czech is provided in the
kindergartens of Sfânta Elena/Svatá Helena and Gârnic/Gernik (Caraș-Severin county) and attended by 24
children. Czech is also used, albeit on a more limited scale, in Baia Nouă/Nove Doly and Eibenthal/Eibentál
(Mehedinți county) whose kindergartens are attended by 17 Czech speaking children. The Committee of
Experts welcomes the fact that the provision of pre-school education in Czech in Sfânta Elena/Svatá Helena
and Gârnic/Gernik goes even beyond the requirements of the present undertaking (bilingual pre-school
education).
288.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
b

...
ii

to make available a substantial part of primary education in the relevant regional or
minority languages; or

289. According to the initial periodical report, primary education in Czech is provided in Sfânta Elena/Svatá
Helena, Gârnic/Gernik, Șumița/Šumice, Ravensca/Ravenska and Bigăr/Biger (Caraș-Severin county) and
attended by 42 pupils. It is not clear whether the primary schools concerned are bilingual (in conformity with
the present undertaking) or use Czech as the main medium of instruction, which would even go beyond the
requirements of Article 8.1.b.ii. In Mehedinți county, however, Czech is only taught as a subject for three
hours per week which does not constitute a “substantial part of primary education” in accordance with this
provision.
290. While considering this undertaking fulfilled, the Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian
authorities to investigate whether a substantial part of primary education in Czech could be provided in
Mehedinți county as well.
c

...
iii to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

291. According to the initial periodical report, 76 students learn Czech at secondary schools in the CarașSeverin and Mehedinți counties. It is, however, not clear whether Czech is taught as an integral part of the
curriculum. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this
undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to clarify this aspect in the next periodical report.
d

i

to make available technical and vocational education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of technical and vocational education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or

iii

to provide, within technical and vocational education, for the teaching of the relevant regional
or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

iv to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils
who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered sufficient;
292. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information concerning the use of Czech in
technical and vocational education. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a position to conclude on
the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such information in the next
periodical report.
g

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is
reflected by the regional or minority language;

46

293. The Committee of Experts notes that the present undertaking concerns not only education for pupils
using a minority language, but also education for non-speakers about the specific history and traditions
related to the minority language spoken in the relevant territory. This normally entails including elements of
the history and culture which is reflected by the minority language in the national curriculum, or at least in the
24
curriculum for all pupils within the territories concerned.
294. According to the initial periodical report, the subject “History and traditions of the Czech minority” is
taught in Czech at grades one to eight at schools teaching (in) Czech. The textbooks for this subject have
been elaborated by the “Democratic Union of Slovaks and Czechs of Romania”.
295. It is, however, not clear to the Committee of Experts to what extent also non-speakers of Czech
benefit from the teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected by the Czech language. In their
replies to the Committee of Experts’ questionnaire, the Romanian authorities refer to a new optional subject
“History of National Minorities” which is taught in the tenth grade at 40 high schools in Romania. Furthermore,
owing to the revision of the Law on National Education in 2011, new history and geography textbooks will be
published and reflect the history and traditions of the national minorities. The Committee of Experts
commends the Romanian authorities on these positive initiatives and looks forward to additional information
in the next periodical report.
296. The Committee of Experts is currently not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this
undertaking. It asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information on
whether also non-speakers benefit from the teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected by the
Czech language.
i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken
and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority
languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be made
public.

297. According to the initial periodical report, a teacher of teaching methods for Czech has been appointed
within the School Inspectorate of Caraş-Severin county with a view to monitoring Czech language education.
Furthermore, for each minority in Romania there are national committees and working groups that co-operate
with the authorities to develop the curricula and teaching materials. It appears, however, that no periodic
report on the measures taken and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of Czech has
been drawn up.
25

298. In light of the above, the Committee of Experts underlines that this undertaking requires a
supervisory body or bodies dedicated to looking into regional or minority language education. This body can
be an existing body, or a newly established body covering one or several minority languages, which monitors the
measures taken and progress achieved in regional or minority language education and produces and publishes
periodical reports.
299. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to provide additional information in the next periodical report.
Paragraph 2
With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the regional or
minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional
or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the regional or
minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.
300. According to the initial periodical report, this provision is not implemented because the low number of
Czech speakers living outside the traditional settlement areas would not justify such measures. Given that
Romania has ratified this undertaking, the Committee of Experts nonetheless considers that the Romanian
authorities should, in co-operation with the representatives of the Czech speakers, take steps with a view to
achieving at least a certain level of fulfilment.

24
See for example 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of Croatia, ECRML2005(3), paragraph 100; 2nd Report of the
Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML2009(6), paragraph 322.
25
See e.g. 1st Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the United Kingdom, ECRML(2004)1, paragraph 131.

47

301. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to provide information on whether it is feasible to provide teaching in or of Czech also in areas
where this language has not been traditionally used.
Article 9 – Judicial authorities
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents using
the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to the situation
of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the present
paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of justice:
a

in criminal proceedings:
...
ii

to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or minority language;
and/or

302. According to Article 128.2 of the Romanian Constitution, “Romanian citizens belonging to national
minorities have the right to express themselves in their mother tongue before the courts of law (…)”.
Furthermore, Article 14 of Law no. 304/2004 on the Judicial System stipulates the right of citizens belonging
to national minorities to express themselves in their own language before courts (paragraph 2). “Where one
or more parties require expressing themselves in their own language, the court shall provide, free of charge,
an authorised interpreter or translator” (paragraph 3). However, the Romanian authorities state in the initial
periodical report that they have no information about the implementation of this undertaking for Czech in
practice.
303. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It asks the Romanian
authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information about its practical implementation
concerning Czech.
a

iii to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not be considered
inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a regional or minority language;
and/or

304. According to Article 14.5 of Law no. 304/2004 on the Judicial System, “[a]pplications and procedural
provisions shall be made only in Romanian.” Furthermore, Article 128.1-2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
foresees the free use of an interpreter and the translation of documents only in cases where the party
concerned “does not speak Romanian”.
305. The Committee of Experts understands that “applications” in accordance with Article 14.5 of Law on
the Judicial System cover “requests” within the meaning of this Charter provision, which makes requests in a
minority language inadmissible. In addition, written or oral evidence can only be delivered if the person
concerned does not master Romanian. However, Article 9.1.a.iii of the Charter applies irrespective of whether
a party speaks Romanian, especially since most persons belonging to national minorities in Romania do
speak the majority language. Limiting the possibility to deliver written or oral evidence to persons who do not
speak Romanian would render this undertaking meaningless in most cases. On the other hand, the
Committee of Experts observes that Romanian legislation does not contain this restriction with regard to the
right of the accused to use a minority language (see Article 9.1.a.ii above).
306. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify, in the next periodical report,
whether the legal set-up allows in practice that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, may be
produced in Czech.
b

in civil proceedings:
...
ii

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she
may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional
expense; and/or

48

if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;
307. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.ii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
308. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It asks the Romanian
authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information about the practical implementation of
this undertaking for Czech.
b

iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

309. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.iii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
310. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify, in the next periodical report,
whether the legal set-up allows in practice that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, may be
produced in Czech.
c

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
...
ii

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she
may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional
expense; and/or
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

311. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.ii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
312. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It asks the Romanian
authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information about the practical implementation of
this undertaking concerning Czech.
c

iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

313. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.iii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
314. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify, in the next periodical report,
whether the legal set-up allows in practice that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, may be
produced in Czech.
d

to take steps to ensure that the application of sub-paragraphs i and iii of paragraphs b
and c above and any necessary use of interpreters and translations does not involve extra
expense for the persons concerned.

315. In light of the conclusions reached regarding sub-paragraph iii of paragraphs b and c above, the
Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking.
Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake:
a

not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because they
are drafted in a regional or minority language; or

49

316. The initial periodical report does not contain any information about the implementation of this
undertaking.
317. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information about its implementation.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or minority languages the most important
national statutory texts and those relating particularly to users of these languages, unless they are
otherwise provided.
318. According to the replies submitted by the Romanian authorities to the Committee of Experts’
questionnaire, this provision is only implemented for Hungarian.
319. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to make available in Czech the most important national statutory texts and those relating
particularly to users of this language, unless they are otherwise provided.
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
320. The Committee of Experts has not received any detailed information concerning the demographical
situation of the Czech national minority at local level, including about whether this minority reaches the 20%threshold in certain localities. This has hampered the examination of the application of Article 10. The
Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to submit, in the next periodical report, a list of the
localities where the Czech speakers live in numbers relevant for the purposes of Article 10, keeping in mind
its recommendation regarding the 20%-threshold (see under 1.4.2).
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of
regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the situation
of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

...
ii

to ensure that such of their officers as are in contact with the public use the regional
or minority languages in their relations with persons applying to them in these
languages; or

iii to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written
applications and receive a reply in these languages; or
iv to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written
applications in these languages; or
v

321.

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document
in these languages;

Article 10.1 concerns local branches of the central State authorities.

322. Provisions a.ii – a.v represent alternative options. As Romania has chosen option a.ii, options a.iii,
a.iv and a.v become redundant. In line with its practice, the Committee of Experts will ex officio examine
option a.ii only.
323. The implementation of this undertaking is hampered by the 20%-threshold. The Committee of Experts
refers in this respect to the observations and recommendation that it has made above (see under 1.4.2).
324. With regard to the Czech language, the initial periodical report states that the Police Inspectorate of
Caraş-Severin county has recruited policemen who can speak Czech.

50

325. The Committee of Experts welcomes the information from the Romanian authorities on their efforts
undertaken in the police administration. The state report, however, does not contain any information on the
use of Czech in the realm of other administrative bodies of the state administration. In order to conclude on
fulfilment or non-fulfilment, the Committee of Experts needs more information on the use of Czech in local
branches of the state administration. It asks the Romanian authorities to provide such information in the next
periodical report.
Paragraph 2
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who are
users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below, the
Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
...
b

the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written
applications in these languages;

326. According to Articles 2.2 and 8.1-2 of Government Decision no. 1206/2001, citizens belonging to
national minorities have the right to address oral or written requests to local authorities and the local and
county councils and to receive an answer in Romanian and the minority language. Apart from the fact that the
exercise of this right is linked to the 20%-threshold, the Committee of Experts has no indications that it is
exercised in practice.
26

327. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to allow and/or encourage the possibility for users of Czech to submit oral or written applications in
this language to local authorities.
c

the publication by regional authorities of their official documents also in the relevant
regional or minority languages;

328. According to the replies by the Romanian authorities to the questionnaire submitted to them by the
Committee of Experts, public administration in Romania is established only at the central and local levels.
However, in the perspective of the Committee of Experts the counties may qualify as regions in the sense of
the Charter. The Committee of Experts would welcome more information on the publication of documents of
the counties in Czech.
d

the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in the relevant regional
or minority languages;
27

329. According to the Romanian legislation , citizens belonging to national minorities are entitled to be
informed, in their mother tongue, about the agenda of the local and county council meetings and of the
normative and individual decisions adopted by them. However, the implementation of this possibility is limited
to municipalities where the national minority in question reaches 20% of the population. In addition, the
Committee of Experts has no indications that it is exercised in practice.
28

330. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to allow and/or encourage the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in
Czech.
e

the use by regional authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

331. The Committee of Experts refers to its remarks under Article 10.2.c and asks the Romanian
authorities to submit more information in the next periodical report.

26

See e.g. 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraphs 479-480.
Articles 39, 50 and 94.8 of the Law on Local Administration no. 215/2001; Articles 2.2 and 7.1-2 of Government Decision
no. 1206/2001 for approving the Rules for implementing the provisions concerning the right of citizens belonging to national minorities
to use their mother tongue in local government, contained in the Law on Local Administration no. 215/2001.
28
See e.g. 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraphs 482-483.
27

51

f

the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

332. With regard to the relevant thresholds, the Committee of Experts refers to the observations and
recommendation that it has made above (see under 1.4.2).
333. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to allow and/or encourage the use by local authorities of Czech in debates in their assemblies.
g

the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official language(s),
of traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or minority languages.

334. With regard to the 20%-threshold, the Committee of Experts refers to the observations and
recommendation that it has made above (see under 1.4.2).
335. As far as Czech is concerned, the use of place-names in this language seems to be limited to the
place-name signs of Sfânta Elena/Svatá Helena, Gârnic/Gernik, Șumița/Šumice, Ravensca/Ravenska,
Bigăr/Biger (all in Caraș-Severin county), Baia Nouă/Nove Doly and Eibenthal/Eibentál (Mehedinți county).
However, the Committee of Experts underlines that the term “place-names” within the meaning of the present
undertaking concerns not only the name of the municipality, but all topographical names (“la toponymie” in the
French version of the Charter) of that municipality that can be officially used, for example in texts produced by
the local authority (e.g. documents, forms, public relations material, websites) or in the signage (e.g. street
29
name signs, signposts and public transport signs, inscriptions for tourists).
336. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It asks the Romanian authorities
to provide more information on the use of place-names in Czech in the next periodical report.
Paragraph 3
With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting on
their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which regional or minority languages are
used, in accordance with the situation of each language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in the provision of the service;
or

b

to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request and receive a reply in
these languages; or

c

to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request in these languages.

337. Undertakings a, b and c represent alternative options. As Romania has chosen option a, options b
and c become redundant. In line with its practice, the Committee of Experts will ex officio examine option a
only. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts wishes to emphasise that “public services” refers to services
provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting on their behalf (e.g. railway, urban transport,
electricity, water and gas, cleaning and sanitation, telephone services, refuse collection and disposal,
cemeteries, sporting facilities, entertainment venues).
338. Article 19 of the Law on Local Government no. 215/2001 states that "[i]n the territorial-administrative
units where citizens belonging to national minorities have a share of over 20% of residents, the local
government authorities and public institutions subordinated to them shall ensure their use of decentralized
public services in their mother tongue, according to the Constitution, the present law and international treaties
to which Romania is party." It is not clear to the Committee of Experts whether the “public institutions

29

See e.g. 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraph 232.

52

subordinated to” local authorities cover public services in conformity with the present Charter provision. Even
if they cover public services, the problem remains that the implementation is linked to the 20%-threshold (see
under 1.4.2 above). Besides, there are no indications that this provisions has been applied to Czech in
practice.
339.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled.

The Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to ensure that Czech is used in the
provision of public services in practice and asks them to clarify the national legal basis for the
implementation of this provision.
Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the
Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
...
b

recruitment and, where necessary, training of the officials and other public service
employees required;

340. Local authorities and county councils with responsibility for a territorial administrative unit where more
than 20% of the population belong to a national minority must also employ staff speaking the minority
language concerned. However, there is no specific information about whether the Czech language qualifies
for this and how this provision is implemented for Czech in relevant municipalities where the 20%-threshold is
not met. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to provide information regarding
measures taken in accordance with this provision.
c

compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a
knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that
language is used.

341. The initial periodical report does not contain any information about the implementation of this
undertaking regarding Czech. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to provide
information regarding measures taken in accordance with this undertaking.
Paragraph 5
The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or minority
languages, at the request of those concerned.
342. The initial periodical report does not contain any information about the implementation of this
undertaking. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a position to conclude on its fulfilment and asks the
Romanian authorities to submit the relevant information in the next periodical report.
Article 11 – Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in
which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that the
public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this field, and
respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
a

to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:
...
iii to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer programmes in the regional or
minority languages;

53

343. According to the initial periodical report, Radio Reşiţa (Caraş-Severin county) broadcasts a
programme in Czech for 30 minutes per week (each Saturday). Furthermore, there is a bilingual (SlovakCzech) programme broadcast by Radio Timişoara half an hour per week (each Sunday afternoon).
344. As regards television, TVR 3 broadcasts a weekly programme (each Thursday) in Czech with a
duration of five minutes.
345. The Committee of Experts welcomes the presence of the Czech language on public radio and
television. It notes, however, that the duration of the programmes in Czech is very short, in particular on
television. The presence of Czech on television remains symbolical, which reduces the effectiveness and
30
attractiveness of this broadcasting. The Committee of Experts reiterates the great importance of the
electronic media, especially television, for the promotion of minority languages in modern societies. In
particular, an appropriate presence of a minority language on television can enhance considerably its social
31
prestige.
346.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled.

The Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to extend the duration of radio and
television broadcasts in Czech.
b

...
ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;

347. It appears from the replies by the Romanian authorities to the questionnaire submitted to them by the
Committee of Experts that there are no private radio programmes in Czech.
348. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to facilitate the broadcasting of private radio programmes in Czech on a regular basis.
c

...
ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;

349. It appears from the replies by the Romanian authorities to the questionnaire submitted to them by the
Committee of Experts that there are no private television programmes in Czech.
350. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to facilitate the broadcasting of private television programmes in Czech on a regular basis.
d

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in the regional or minority languages

351. The initial periodical report states that television channel TVR 3 broadcasts, on a weekly basis, an art
film from the Czech Republic with subtitling in Romanian. The exchange of movies has been agreed in the
framework of a co-operation agreement between the public television services of Romania and the Czech
Republic. The report does, however, not contain additional information concerning the implementation of this
provision for Czech.
352. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It asks the Romanian authorities
to submit, in their next periodical report, additional information about measures taken to encourage and/or
facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual works in Czech.
e

30
31

i

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one
newspaper in the regional or minority languages; or

See 2nd Evaluation Report on the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraph 800.
See 2nd Evaluation Report on Switzerland, ECRML(2004)6, paragraph 118.

54

353. The initial periodical report does not contain any information concerning the implementation of this
provision for Czech. During the on-the-spot visit, representatives of the Czech speakers stated that a monthly
publication exists which uses this language. However, the Committee of Experts underlines that a
32
“newspaper” in conformity with the present undertaking has to be published at least weekly.
354. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one newspaper in
Czech.
g

to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using regional or minority
languages.

355. The initial periodical report does not contain any information concerning the implementation of this
provision for Czech. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of
this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such information in the next periodical report.
Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television broadcasts
from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority
language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from
neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure that no restrictions will
be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of information in the written press in a
language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of the
above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such
formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a
democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the
prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the
reputation or rights of others, for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for
maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
356. According to the initial periodical report, Article 75.1-2 of the Audiovisual Law No. 504/2002
guarantees free transmission of radio and television broadcasts from abroad. Furthermore, the European
Union’s Audiovisual Media Services Directive 2007/65/EC ensures freedom of reception and retransmissions
of audiovisual media services from other EU states. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian
authorities to specify, in the next periodical report, whether it is possible for Czech speakers to receive radio
and television programmes in Czech.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to ensure that the interests of the users of regional or minority languages are
represented or taken into account within such bodies as may be established in accordance with the
law with responsibility for guaranteeing the freedom and pluralism of the media.
357. The initial periodical report refers to the National Audiovisual Council of Romania as the autonomous
public authority in charge of the defence of the public interest in the broadcast media. However, there is no
specific information as to whether the interests of the Czech speakers are represented or taken into account
by the Council, or whether there are other bodies in Romania performing tasks relevant under this
undertaking. Furthermore, the information available does not cover the print media. The Committee of
Experts is currently not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian
authorities to clarify these issues in the next periodical report.

32

See 1st Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of Serbia, ECRML(2009)2, paragraph 267; 2nd Report of the Committee of
Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraph 654.

55

Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural centres,
museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production,
vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries, including inter alia the
use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are
used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this
field:
a

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority languages
and foster the different means of access to works produced in these languages;

358. According to the initial periodical report, the “Democratic Union of Slovaks and Czechs of Romania”
receives financial support from the Romanian authorities to cover also cultural activities in Czech. The
Democratic Union’s main publication is the monthly cultural magazine “Naše snahy”, which is bilingual
(Slovak and Czech) and has a summary in Romanian. The magazine includes political information, articles of
general interest, short stories, poems and studies. It has a supplement (“Naše snahy plus”) which is a
quarterly literary magazine in Slovak and Czech. Furthermore, three schools which use Czech publish
monthly school magazines in Czech. In 2008, two books in Czech were published, and several local libraries
have books in Czech. The Democratic Union has organised several cultural activities promoting the Czech
language and culture.
359.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
b

to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in regional
or minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, postsynchronisation and subtitling activities;

360. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Czech language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.
c

to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages
by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling
activities;

361. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Czech language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.
d

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of
various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of
regional or minority languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for
which they provide backing;

362. Most cultural activities promoting the Czech language are carried out by the state-funded “Democratic
Union of Slovaks and Czechs of Romania”. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
e

to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting
cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of the regional or
minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest of the population;

363. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination under Article 12.1.d, which applies accordingly.
The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
f

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or
minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

56

364. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination under Article 12.1.d, which applies accordingly.
The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
g

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for collecting,
keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the regional or
minority languages;

365. According to the replies by the Romanian authorities to the questionnaire submitted to them by the
Committee of Experts, the National Library of Romania keeps copies of documents of the national minorities.
The Committee of Experts notes, however, that the scope of this provision extends beyond the collection
activities usually carried out by national libraries. During the on-the-spot visit, representatives of the Czech
speakers stated that the body required by this undertaking does not exist.
366. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for collecting, keeping a
copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in Czech.
h

if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and terminological
research services, particularly with a view to maintaining and developing appropriate
administrative, commercial, economic, social, technical or legal terminology in each
regional or minority language.

367. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information concerning the application of this
provision to Czech.
368. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to submit the relevant information, especially commenting on any need to
develop necessary terminology in Czech, in the next periodical report.
Paragraph 2
In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are traditionally
used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to
allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in accordance with the
preceding paragraph.
369. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Czech language. Nevertheless, the Committee of Experts is aware that
the Romanian authorities regularly support several cultural activities which bring together some or all national
minorities. These activities include the annual festival “ProEtnica” in Sighișoara/Schäßburg, the Minority
Theatre Festival, the National Minorities Day, the Interethnic Film Festival, the documentary film festival
“Alternative” (in Târgu Mureș/Marosvásárhely/Neumarkt) and the rock music festival “Felsiget” (ibidem).
These events may be relevant under this provision if the Czech language has benefited from them and if the
events have taken place outside the area where Czech is traditionally used. The Committee of Experts asks
the Romanian authorities to clarify this in the next periodical report or to provide information on other relevant
activities.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for
regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.
370. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Czech language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.
Article 13 – Economic and social life
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole country:

57

a

to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without justifiable
reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to economic or
social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical documents such as
instructions for the use of products or installations;

371. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Czech language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.
b

to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of companies and private documents of
any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or minority languages, at least
between users of the same language;

372. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Czech language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.
Article 14 – Transfrontier exchanges
The Parties undertake:
a

to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the States in
which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if necessary to seek to
conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster contacts between the users of the
same language in the States concerned in the fields of culture, education, information,
vocational training and permanent education;

373. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Czech language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.
b

for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or promote co-operation
across borders, in particular between regional or local authorities in whose territory the
same language is used in identical or similar form.

374. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Czech language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.
2.2.4. German
Article 8 – Education
General issues
375. With regard to the German language, Romania has ratified Articles 8.1.a.i, b.i, c.i and d.i which put an
obligation on the state party to provide minority-language education irrespective of prior demand by parents
or students. In practice, however, a minimum number of parents or pupils have to demand the provision of
minority-language education. The undertakings chosen oblige the Romanian authorities to provide an offer of
minority language education throughout the whole language area. This does not preclude the possibility of not
establishing specific classes in minority languages if there are too few pupils. The Committee of Experts
refers in this respect to its observations and recommendation under 1.4.3 above, which apply to German
accordingly.

58

376.
The German language has traditionally benefited from a developed and geographically diversified
offer of German-medium education. As a result of the reputation that the schools of the German minority
enjoy in Romania, a considerable number of the pupils enrolled at these schools belong to the majority
population, which explains to some extent the high figures specified below. Nevertheless, the Committee of
Experts learned that it is not always possible for children from German-speaking families to receive Germanmedium education from kindergarten to upper secondary school at all the places where German speakers
traditionally reside.
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are
used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of
the official language(s) of the State:
a

i

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages;
or

377. According to the initial periodical report, 5 763 children attend kindergartens providing pre-school
education in German. These kindergartens are located in several counties. During the on-the-spot visit,
however, the Committee of Experts’ attention was drawn to the fact that, due to a shortage of German
teachers at the subsequent levels of education, many children who leave the German-medium kindergartens
cannot continue their education in German.
378. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled, but encourages the Romanian
authorities to ensure continuity between the different levels of education.
b

i

to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

379. The initial periodical report states that 6 050 pupils attend primary schools teaching in German.
Primary education in German is available in several counties, but there are problems with the continuity from
primary to secondary education due to a shortage of teachers.
380. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled, but encourages the Romanian
authorities to ensure continuity between the different levels of education.
c

i

to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority languages;
or

381. According to the replies submitted by the Romanian authorities to the Committee of Experts’
questionnaire, 4 798 students attend lower secondary education in German and 3 366 students upper
secondary education in German.
382. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled, but encourages the Romanian
authorities to ensure continuity between the different levels of education.
d

i

to make available technical and vocational education in the relevant regional or
minority languages; or

383. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of
this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information on
how they implement this provision for German.
e

i

to make available university and other higher education in regional or minority
languages; or

384. According to the initial periodical report, there exists an “Institute for research and education in the
German language” at the Babeş-Bolyai University in Cluj which is also supported by Germany. It offers two
MA programmes in German: “German Cultural Studies” and “German literature in South-East Europe”.
Within the same university, there are also MA programmes of the Faculty of History (History of south-eastern
Europe) and the Faculty of Economic Sciences and Affairs Management (Department of International

59

Economic Relations) which teach courses in German. The Committee of Experts commends the Romanian
authorities on the support that they provide to the German-speaking branch of the Babeş-Bolyai University,
which it considers best practice.
385.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
f

...
iii if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult education, to
favour and/or encourage the offering of such languages as subjects of adult and
continuing education;

386. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of
this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information on
how they implement this provision for German.
g

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is
reflected by the regional or minority language;

387. The Committee of Experts notes that the present undertaking concerns not only education for pupils
using a minority language, but also education for non-speakers about the specific history and traditions
related to the minority language spoken in the relevant territory. This normally entails including elements of
the history and culture which is reflected by the minority language in the national curriculum, or at least in the
33
curriculum for all pupils within the territories concerned.
388. The initial periodical report states that a textbook on the history and traditions of the German minority
has been published for grades six and seven. There is no information about how the history and the culture
which is reflected by the German language is taught at the other grades.
389. In addition, it is not clear to the Committee of Experts to what extent also non-speakers of German
benefit from the teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected by the German language. In their
replies to the Committee of Experts’ questionnaire, the Romanian authorities refer to a new optional subject
“History of National Minorities” which is taught in the tenth grade at 40 high schools in Romania. Furthermore,
owing to the revision of the Law on National Education in 2011, new history and geography textbooks will be
published and reflect the history and traditions of the national minorities. The Committee of Experts
commends the Romanian authorities on these positive initiatives and looks forward to receiving additional
information in the next periodical report.
390. The Committee of Experts is currently not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this
undertaking. It asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information on
whether also non-speakers benefit from the teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected by
German.
h

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of
paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;

391. According to the initial periodical report, basic training of the teaching staff of kindergartens and
primary schools providing education in German is carried out at the Andrei Şaguna Pedagogical College in
Sibiu/Hermannstadt. A number of other academic institutions, which offer studies with various specialties in
German or combine German and a non-philological subject, provide the teachers for teaching various
subjects in German. These institutions are the Babeş-Bolyai University and the Technical University in Cluj,
the “Politehnica” Universities of Timişoara and Bucharest, and the Bucharest Academy of Economic Studies.
Furthermore, teaching staff from Germany and Austria are employed, based on bilateral agreements.
392. The further training of the teachers of schools teaching in German is carried out by the “Continuing
Education Centre in the German Language” in Mediaş/Mediasch, which has a branch in Timişoara. The
centre’s work is supported by Germany.

33

See for example 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of Croatia, ECRML2005(3), paragraph 100; 2nd Report of the
Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML2009(6), paragraph 322.

60

393. The Committee of Experts considers that Romania has undertaken commendable steps in providing
an infrastructure for the training of teachers teaching in German. Nevertheless, the Romanian authorities
acknowledge in the initial periodical report that there still exists a shortage of German teachers. In several
counties there are kindergartens providing education in German but no teachers who could provide education
in German at primary, secondary and technical/vocational levels. As a result, the children who leave the
German-medium kindergartens cannot continue their education in German. During the on-the-spot visit,
representatives of the German speakers stated that the demand for German-language education cannot be
met due to the lack of teachers (including pre-school teachers). The underlying structural problems seem to
be the very low salaries of teachers and the lack of incentives for students to become teachers teaching in
minority languages.
394.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled.

The Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to provide the training of a number
of teachers that is sufficient to meet the demand for education in German and to introduce incentives
for minority language teachers.
i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken
and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority
languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be made
public.

395. For each minority in Romania, there are national committees and working groups that co-operate with
the authorities to develop the curricula and teaching materials. However, according to the replies submitted
by the Romanian authorities to the Committee of Experts’ questionnaire, no autonomous body exists for
German.
34

396. The Committee of Experts underlines that this undertaking requires a supervisory body or bodies
dedicated to looking into minority language education. This body can be an existing body which monitors the
measures taken and progress achieved in minority language education and produces and publishes periodical
reports.
397. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to provide additional information in the next periodical report.
Paragraph 2
With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the regional or
minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional
or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the regional or
minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.
398. The information contained in the initial periodical report concerns only the areas where German has
been traditionally used. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this
undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information on how
they implement this provision for German.
Article 9 – Judicial authorities
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents using
the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to the situation
of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the present
paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of justice:

34

See e.g. 1st Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the United Kingdom, ECRML(2004)1, paragraph 131.

61

a

in criminal proceedings:
...
ii

to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or minority language;
and/or

399. According to Article 128.2 of the Romanian Constitution, “Romanian citizens belonging to national
minorities have the right to express themselves in their mother tongue before the courts of law (…)”.
Furthermore, Article 14 of Law no. 304/2004 on the Judicial System stipulates the right of citizens belonging
to national minorities to express themselves in their own language before courts (paragraph 2). “Where one
or more parties require expressing themselves in their own language, the court shall provide, free of charge,
an authorised interpreter or translator” (paragraph 3). However, the Romanian authorities state in the initial
periodical report that they have no information about the implementation of this undertaking for German in
practice.
400. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It asks the Romanian
authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information about its practical implementation
concerning German.
a

iii to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not be considered
inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a regional or minority language;
and/or

401. According to Article 14.5 of Law no. 304/2004 on the Judicial System, “[a]pplications and procedural
provisions shall be made only in Romanian.” Furthermore, Article 128.1-2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
foresees the free use of an interpreter and the translation of documents only in cases where the party
concerned “does not speak Romanian”.
402. The Committee of Experts understands that “applications” in accordance with Article 14.5 of Law on
the Judicial System cover “requests” within the meaning of this Charter provision, which makes requests in a
minority language inadmissible. In addition, written or oral evidence can only be delivered if the person
concerned does not master Romanian. However, Article 9.1.a.iii of the Charter applies irrespective of whether
a party speaks Romanian, especially since most persons belonging to national minorities in Romania do
speak the majority language. Limiting the possibility to deliver written or oral evidence to persons who do not
speak Romanian would render this undertaking meaningless in most cases. On the other hand, the
Committee of Experts observes that Romanian legislation does not contain this restriction with regard to the
right of the accused to use a minority language (see Article 9.1.a.ii above).
403. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify, in the next periodical report,
whether the legal set-up allows in practice that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, may be
produced in German.
b

in civil proceedings:
...
ii

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she
may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional
expense; and/or
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

404. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.ii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
405. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It asks the Romanian
authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information about the practical implementation of
this undertaking for German.
b

iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

62

406. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.iii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
407. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify, in the next periodical report,
whether the legal set-up allows in practice that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, may be
produced in German.
c

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
...
ii

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she
may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional
expense; and/or
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

408. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.ii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
409. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It asks the Romanian
authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information about the practical implementation of
this undertaking concerning German.
c

iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

410. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.iii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
411. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify, in the next periodical report,
whether the legal set-up allows in practice that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, may be
produced in German.
d

to take steps to ensure that the application of sub-paragraphs i and iii of paragraphs b
and c above and any necessary use of interpreters and translations does not involve extra
expense for the persons concerned.

412. In light of the conclusions reached regarding sub-paragraph iii of paragraphs b and c above, the
Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking.
Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake:
a

not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because they
are drafted in a regional or minority language; or

413. The initial periodical report does not contain any information about the implementation of this
undertaking. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking
and asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information on how they
implement this provision for German.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or minority languages the most important
national statutory texts and those relating particularly to users of these languages, unless they are
otherwise provided.
414. According to the replies submitted by the Romanian authorities to the Committee of Experts’
questionnaire, this provision is only implemented for Hungarian.

63

415. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to make available in German the most important national statutory texts and those relating
particularly to users of this language, unless they are otherwise provided.
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
416. The Committee of Experts has not received any detailed information concerning the demographical
situation of the German national minority at local level. It follows from the initial periodical report (p. 80) that
there are probably no localities where the German minority still reaches the 20%-threshold. The Committee of
Experts asks the Romanian authorities to submit, in the next periodical report, a list of the localities where the
German speakers live in numbers relevant for the purposes of Article 10, keeping in mind its
recommendation regarding the 20%-threshold (see under 1.4.2).
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of
regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the situation
of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

...
ii

to ensure that such of their officers as are in contact with the public use the regional
or minority languages in their relations with persons applying to them in these
languages; or

iii to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written
applications and receive a reply in these languages; or
iv to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written
applications in these languages; or
v

417.

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document
in these languages;

Article 10.1 concerns local branches of the central State authorities.

418. Provisions a.ii – a.v represent alternative options. As Romania has chosen option a.ii, options a.iii,
a.iv and a.v become redundant. In line with its practice, the Committee of Experts will ex officio examine
option a.ii only.
419. The implementation of this undertaking is hampered by the 20%-threshold. The Committee of Experts
refers in this respect to the observations and recommendation that it has made above (see under 1.4.2).
420. The initial periodical report states that, irrespective of the 20%-threshold, the county border police
inspectorates of Maramureş/Máramaros and Bihor/Bihar and the county police inspectorates of Alba, Cluj,
Olt, Timiş and Sibiu/Hermannstadt have recruited staff able to use German in their relations with persons
applying to them in this language. However, the report also states that German is rarely used in practice.
421. The Committee of Experts welcomes the information from the Romanian authorities on their efforts
undertaken in the police administration. The state report, however, does not contain any information on the
use of German in the realm of other administrative bodies of the State administration. In order to conclude on
fulfilment or non-fulfilment, the Committee of Experts needs more information on the use of German in local
branches of the State administration. It asks the Romanian authorities to provide such information in the next
periodical report.
b

to make available widely used administrative texts and forms for the population in the
regional or minority languages or in bilingual versions;

64

422. The Committee of Experts notes that this provision concerns administrative texts and forms that are
widely used by local branches of the State authorities both internally or in relations with the public. It extends,
for example, to administrative texts and (application) forms related to identity documents, the population
registry, social welfare and local taxes.
423. The initial periodical report does not contain any information about the implementation of this
provision for German. During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed that widely used
administrative texts and forms for the population in German or in bilingual versions do not exist.
424. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to make available widely used administrative texts and forms for the population in German or in
bilingual versions.
c

to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in a regional or minority
language.

425. The Committee of Experts observes that this provision covers all forms of written communication by
local branches of the State authorities, both for internal use or in relations with one or several addressees
outside the administration.
426. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information concerning the application of this
provision to the German language. Besides, the Committee of Experts was informed during the on-the-spot
visit that in practice local branches of the State authorities do not draft documents in German.
427. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to allow the local branches of the State authorities to draft documents in German and to ensure an
appropriate level of implementation in practice.
Paragraph 2
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who are
users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below, the
Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
...
b

the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written
applications in these languages;

428. According to Articles 2.2 and 8.1-2 of Government Decision no. 1206/2001, citizens belonging to
national minorities have the right to address oral or written requests to local authorities and the local and
county councils and to receive an answer in Romanian and the minority language. The exercise of this right is
linked to the 20%-threshold, but there are apparently no localities where the German minority still reaches it.
Furthermore, the Committee of Experts has no indications that this right is exercised in practice.
35

429. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to allow and/or encourage the possibility for users of German to submit oral or written applications
in this language to local authorities.
c

the publication by regional authorities of their official documents also in the relevant
regional or minority languages;

430. According to the replies by the Romanian authorities to the questionnaire submitted to them by the
Committee of Experts, public administration in Romania is established only at the central and local levels.
However, in the perspective of the Committee of Experts the counties may qualify as regions in the sense of
the Charter. The Committee of Experts would welcome information on the publication of documents of the
counties in German.
d

35

the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in the relevant regional
or minority languages;

See e.g. 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraphs 479-480.

65

36

431. According to the Romanian legislation , citizens belonging to national minorities are entitled to be
informed, in their mother tongue, about the agenda of the local and county council meetings and of the
normative and individual decisions adopted by them. However, the implementation of this possibility is limited
to municipalities where the national minority in question reaches 20% of the population. In addition, the
Committee of Experts has no indications that it is exercised in practice.
37

432. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to allow and/or encourage the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in
German.
e

the use by regional authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

433. The Committee of Experts refers to its remarks under Article 10.2.c and asks the Romanian
authorities to submit the relevant information in the next periodical report.
f

the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

434. With regard to the relevant thresholds, the Committee of Experts refers to the observations and
recommendation that it has made above (see under 1.4.2).
435.
The Committee of Experts was informed during the on-the-spot visit that German is not used
anywhere in debates in local assemblies. Even in a situation where the thresholds of one third and one fifth
are met, German-speaking councillors refrain from using their language in local assembly debates because
they consider it impolite to do so in the presence of non-speakers of German. This seems to be the case in
the local assembly of Sibiu/Hermannstadt where 14 of the 23 councillors belong to the German minority’s
association/party. The Committee of Experts notes that such reluctance of minority language speakers to
make use of the language facilities that the authorities are obliged to provide is a frequent phenomenon. It
considers that both organisational measures (e.g. interpretation) and measures of encouragement need to be
taken in order to encourage minority language speakers to use their language without being afraid to be
regarded as “trouble-makers”.
436. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to allow and encourage the use by local authorities of German in debates in their assemblies.
g

the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official language(s),
of traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or minority languages.

437. With regard to the 20%-threshold, the Committee of Experts refers to the observations and
recommendation that it has made above (see under 1.4.2).
438. The Committee of Experts underlines that the term “place-names” within the meaning of the present
undertaking concerns not only the name of the municipality, but all topographical names (“la toponymie” in the
French version of the Charter) of that municipality/locality that can be officially used, for example in texts
38
produced by the local authority or in the signage. As regards the German language, several municipalities
have bilingual place-name signs (Romanian-German). German place-names are also used in other domains,
for example on street name signs (in one municipality: Sebeș/ Mühlbach), inscriptions on public buildings
(e.g. townhall of Târgu Mureș/Marosvásárhely/Neumarkt), train stations (e.g. in Aiud/Nagyenyed/Straßburg),
cultural sites and tourist signposts (e.g. concerning Transylvania’s fortified churches).

36

Articles 39, 50 and 94.8 of the Law on Local Administration no. 215/2001; Articles 2.2 and 7.1-2 of Government Decision
no. 1206/2001 for approving the Rules for implementing the provisions concerning the right of citizens belonging to national minorities
to use their mother tongue in local government, contained in the Law on Local Administration no. 215/2001.
37
See e.g. 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraphs 482-483.
38
See e.g. 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraph 232.

66

439. However, this signage exists de facto as it concerns places where the German minority has met the
20%-threshold in the recent past but, due to the emigration of Germans to Germany in the 1990s, no longer
meets it. There is no legal basis guaranteeing that the still existing bilingualism will be maintained when the
signage is renewed. Also, the Committee of Experts invites the Romanian authorities to encourage those
municipalities having bilingual place-name signs to use all local place-names in the minority language in the
relevant domains (street name, public transport and tourist signs or signposts; documents/forms; public
relations materials/websites, etc.).
440. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It asks the Romanian authorities
to provide more information on the use of place-names in German in the next periodical report.
Paragraph 3
With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting on
their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which regional or minority languages are
used, in accordance with the situation of each language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in the provision of the service;
or

b

to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request and receive a reply in
these languages; or

c

to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request in these languages.

441. Undertakings a, b and c represent alternative options. As Romania has chosen option a, options b
and c become redundant. In line with its practice, the Committee of Experts will ex officio examine option a
only. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts wishes to emphasise that “public services” refers to services
provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting on their behalf (e.g. railway, urban transport,
electricity, water and gas, cleaning and sanitation, telephone services, refuse collection and disposal,
cemeteries, sporting facilities, entertainment venues).
442. Article 19 of the Law on Local Government no. 215/2001 states that "[i]n the territorial-administrative
units where citizens belonging to national minorities have a share of over 20% of residents, the local
government authorities and public institutions subordinated to them shall ensure their use of decentralized
public services in their mother tongue, according to the Constitution, the present law and international treaties
to which Romania is party." It is not clear to the Committee of Experts whether the “public institutions
subordinated to” local authorities cover public services in conformity with the present Charter provision. Even
if they cover public services, the problem remains that the implementation is linked to the 20%-threshold (see
under 1.4.2 above). During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed that this provision is
not being applied to German in practice.
443.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled.

The Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to ensure that German is used in the
provision of public services in practice and asks them to clarify the national legal basis for the
implementation of this provision.
Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the
Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
...
b

recruitment and, where necessary, training of the officials and other public service
employees required;

67

444. The initial periodical report states that, irrespective of the 20%-threshold, the county border police
inspectorates of Maramureş and Bihor and the county police inspectorates of Alba, Cluj, Olt, Timiş and
Sibiu/Hermannstadt have recruited staff able to use German in their relations with persons applying to them
in this language. Furthermore, the county police inspectorates of Alba and Sibiu/Hermannstadt have
organised German language courses for policemen.
445. The Committee of Experts welcomes the information from the Romanian authorities on their efforts
undertaken in the police administration. The state report, however, does not contain any information
regarding the recruitment and training of officials of other State authorities, of local authorities, and of public
service providers. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to provide such information in
the next periodical report.
c

compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a
knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that
language is used.

446. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this undertaking. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment
of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information on
how they implement this undertaking for German.
Paragraph 5
The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or minority
languages, at the request of those concerned.
447. According to the initial periodical report, German surnames are used “in most cases” in identity
documents and the population register, but not always in conformity with the German spelling. There is no
specific information about the legal basis of the use of family names in minority languages.
448. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking. It asks
the Romanian authorities to submit, in the next periodical report, information about the legal situation and to
clarify how the authorities ensure, in public documents, the correct spelling of family names in minority
languages in practice.
Article 11 – Media
General issues
449. According to the initial periodical report, there are three private television programmes in German
addressing various age groups: a cultural programme on TV Arad (twice a week/25 minutes each), a
programme covering cultural, historical, educational and health topics at Light Channel TV (daily/24 hours),
and a cultural and religious programme broadcast by Alfa Omega TV in Timişoara (one hour/week). This
extensive offer would normally fulfil the requirements of Article 11.1.c.ii. However, German is the only
language covered by Part III for which neither of the two options of Article 11.1.c has been selected, despite
the practical situation mentioned above and the fact that German is promoted by the second-strongest (after
Hungarian) Part III menu. In light of the information obtained during the on-the-spot visit, this omission
appears to have occurred by mistake. The Committee of Experts would like to point out that Romania may,
pursuant to Article 3.2, notify the Secretary General of the Council of Europe that it accepts the obligation
arising out of one of the options contained in Article 11.1.c and encourages the Romanian authorities to
clarify this issue with the representatives of the German speakers.
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in
which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that the
public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this field, and
respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
a

to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:
...

68

iii to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer programmes in the regional or
minority languages;
450. According to the initial periodical report, public radio programmes in German are broadcast by Radio
Romania (370 minutes), Radio Timişoara (840 minutes), Radio Târgu-Mureş (200 minutes on medium
wave), Radio Reşiţa (30 minutes) and the radio of Cluj University. However, it is unclear at what intervals these
programmes are broadcast, what content they cover and which audience/age groups they address.
451. In 2007, public television programmes in German have been broadcast by TVR1, TVR2 (bimonthly),
TVR “Cultural” and TVR “International” (reruns of the programmes of TVR1 and TVR2), TVR3 (weekly art
film), TVR Cluj and TVR Timişoara (daily, 30 minutes). The Committee of Experts notes, however, that the
information contained in the initial periodical report is outdated, covering the years 2005-2007, and not
sufficiently clear as regards the duration and intervals of broadcasts, the content and the audience/age
groups of each programme.
452. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to submit more specific information in the next periodical report.
b

...
ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;

453. According to the replies by the Romanian authorities to the questionnaire submitted to them by the
Committee of Experts, Radio Arad broadcasts a cultural programme of 60 minutes duration. Furthermore,
Radio Dorna (Suceava county) broadcasts 120 minutes in German. In both cases, the intervals are unclear.
The Committee of Experts also notes that there are no private radio programmes in other parts of Romania
where German is used, especially in Transylvania.
454. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in German on a regular basis
in all regions where German is used. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities
to specify the intervals at which Radio Arad and Radio Dorna broadcast in German.
d

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in the regional or minority languages

455. The initial periodical report states that the television channel TVR 3 broadcasts, on a weekly basis, an
art film from Germany with subtitling in Romanian. The exchange of movies has been agreed in the
framework of a co-operation agreement between the public television services of Romania and Germany.
According to the replies by the Romanian authorities to the questionnaire submitted to them by the
Committee of Experts, the authorities have also purchased a number of DVDs of a film in German.
Considering the number of German speakers in Romania, the Committee of Experts is, however, of the view
that additional measures need to be taken in order to fulfill this undertaking for German.
456. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual works in German.
e

i

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one
newspaper in the regional or minority languages; or

457. According to the initial periodical report, the Romanian authorities support a daily newspaper
published entirely in German (“Allgemeine Deutsche Zeitung für Rumänien”), which has weekly supplements
for Transylvania and Banat (“Karpatenrundschau” and “Banater Zeitung”), as well as the weekly
“Hermannstädter Zeitung”. The Committee of Experts commends the Romanian authorities on this offer
which constitutes best practice.
458.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
f

i

to cover the additional costs of those media which use regional or minority
languages, wherever the law provides for financial assistance in general for the
media; or

69

459. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of
this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information on
how they implement this provision for German.
g

to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using regional or minority
languages.

460. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information about the implementation of this
provision regarding German. During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed that no
training scheme for journalists and other media staff using German exists.
461. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using German.
Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television broadcasts
from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority
language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from
neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure that no restrictions will
be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of information in the written press in a
language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of the
above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such
formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a
democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the
prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the
reputation or rights of others, for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for
maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
462. The initial periodical report refers to the European Union’s Audiovisual Media Services Directive
2007/65/EC which ensures freedom of reception and retransmissions of audiovisual media services from
other EU states. However, it is also stated that TV cable operators and operators of other TV systems rarely
take over and transmit German television channels. In light of this, the Committee of Experts asks the
Romanian authorities to inform it in the next periodical report whether German speakers can receive radio
and television programmes in German.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to ensure that the interests of the users of regional or minority languages are
represented or taken into account within such bodies as may be established in accordance with the
law with responsibility for guaranteeing the freedom and pluralism of the media.
463. The initial periodical report states that persons belonging to the German minority are only present in
the editors’ offices of German-language media. However, editors’ offices are not relevant under this
provision. Furthermore, the report refers to the National Audiovisual Council of Romania as the autonomous
public authority in charge of the defence of the public interest in the broadcast media. However, there is no
specific information as to whether the interests of the German speakers are represented or taken into
account by the council, or whether there are other bodies in Romania performing tasks relevant under this
undertaking. Also, the information available does not cover the print media. The Committee of Experts is
currently not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities
to clarify these issues in the next periodical report.

70

Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural centres,
museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production,
vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries, including inter alia the
use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are
used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this
field:
a

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority languages
and foster the different means of access to works produced in these languages;

464. According to the initial periodical report, the Romanian authorities have supported a high number of
cultural activities related to the German language. These activities have covered the fields of publishing
(books, periodicals, scientific series in German), events on literature, exhibitions, lectures on cultural topics,
presentation of German music, vernacular forms of cultural expression and festivals. There are two theatres
performing in German: the German State Theatre of Timişoara and the Radu Stanca Theatre in
Sibiu/Hermannstadt. Furthermore, major cultural sites which are linked to the German minority have also
inscriptions with historical/cultural information in German, including the fortified churches in Transylvania and
historical buildings in Sibiu/Hermannstadt (European cultural capital of 2007). The Committee of Experts
welcomes this comprehensive support.
465.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
b

to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in regional
or minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, postsynchronisation and subtitling activities;

466. The cultural activities of the German minority comprise a high number of literary productions,
including works by the winner of the 2009 Nobel Prize in Literature, Herta Müller. However, the initial
periodical report does not contain any specific information about how the Romanian authorities foster the
different means of access in other languages to literary and other works produced in German by aiding and
developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities. The Committee of Experts is
not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to
provide, in the next periodical report, information on how they implement this provision for German.
c

to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages
by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling
activities;

467. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the German language. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to
conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next
periodical report, information on how they implement this provision for German.
d

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of
various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of
regional or minority languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for
which they provide backing;

468. Most cultural activities promoting the German language are carried out by the state-funded
“Democratic Forum of the Germans in Romania”. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking
fulfilled.
e

to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting
cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of the regional or
minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest of the population;

71

469. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination under Article 12.1.d, which applies accordingly.
The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
f

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or
minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

470. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination under Article 12.1.d, which applies accordingly.
The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
g

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for collecting,
keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the regional or
minority languages;

471. According to the replies by the Romanian authorities to the questionnaire submitted to them by the
Committee of Experts, the National Library of Romania keeps copies of documents of the national minorities.
The Committee of Experts notes, however, that the scope of this provision extends beyond the collection
activities usually carried out by national libraries. During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was
informed that such a body does not exist for German. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian
authorities to submit information concerning audiovisual materials and publication of works in German in the
next periodical report.
h

if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and terminological
research services, particularly with a view to maintaining and developing appropriate
administrative, commercial, economic, social, technical or legal terminology in each
regional or minority language.

472. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information concerning the application of this
provision. During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed that no relevant terminological
research is taking place.
473. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to create and/or promote and finance translation and terminological research services with a view
to developing appropriate administrative, technical or legal terminology in German, in particular in light of the
application of the Charter.
Paragraph 2
In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are traditionally
used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to
allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in accordance with the
preceding paragraph.
474. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the German language. Nevertheless, the Committee of Experts is aware
that the Romanian authorities regularly support several cultural activities which bring together some or all
national minorities. These activities include the National Minorities Day, the Minority Theatre Festival and the
Interethnic Film Festival. These events may be relevant under this provision if the German language has
benefited from them and if the events have taken place outside the area where German is traditionally used.
The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify this in the next periodical report or to
provide information on other relevant activities.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for
regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.
475. The information contained in the initial periodical report concerns examples of Germany’s cultural
policy in Romania. However, the Committee of Experts underlines that this provision obliges the Romanian
authorities to make appropriate provision for the German language and the culture it reflects in countries in
39
which Romania presents its own culture and heritage. This should involve also countries other than the
minority’s kin state.

39

See for example 3rd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of Hungary, ECRML 2007 (5), paragraph 202.

72

476. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information on how they implement
this provision for German.
Article 13 – Economic and social life
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole country:
a

to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without justifiable
reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to economic or
social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical documents such as
instructions for the use of products or installations;

477. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of
this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information on
how they implement this provision for German.
b

to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of companies and private documents of
any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or minority languages, at least
between users of the same language;

478. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of
this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information on
how they implement this provision for German.
c

to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority languages in
connection with economic or social activities;

479. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of
this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information on
how they implement this provision for German.
Paragraph 2
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the public authorities
are competent, within the territory in which the regional or minority languages are used, and as far as
this is reasonably possible:
...
c

to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and hostels offer
the possibility of receiving and treating in their own language persons using a regional or
minority language who are in need of care on grounds of ill-health, old age or for other
reasons;

480. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information concerning the application of this
provision to the German language. During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed that
the German minority runs retirement homes of its own which are funded by means of the minority and from
Germany. No measures have been taken concerning hospitals. The Committee of Experts considers that a
systematic human resources policy is needed on the side of the authorities in order to ensure that Germanspeaking staff are actually available in social care facilities, in particular hospitals.
481. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and hostels offer the
possibility of receiving and treating in their own language persons using German who are in need of care on
grounds of ill-health, old age or for other reasons.

73

d

to ensure by appropriate means that safety instructions are also drawn up in regional or
minority languages;

482. The Committee of Experts notes that this provision concerns all forms of instructions whose aim it is
to prevent accidents, including at the workplace. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific
information (including examples) concerning the application of this provision to the German language. During
the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed that no safety instructions in German exist.
483. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to define, in co-operation with the representatives of the German minority and the local authorities
concerned, what kind of safety instructions are relevant under this provision and to ensure that they are also
drawn up in German.
e

to arrange for information provided by the competent public authorities concerning the
rights of consumers to be made available in regional or minority languages.

484. The Committee of Experts notes that this provision concerns both information concerning consumer
rights provided in public (e.g. information boards regarding passenger rights at stations or airports) or
40
relevant information on products. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information
concerning the application of this provision to the German language. During the on-the-spot visit, the
Committee of Experts was informed that information concerning the rights of consumers is not available in
German.
485. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian to
define, in co-operation with the representatives of the German minority, what information concerning
consumer rights is relevant under this provision and to arrange for such information to be made available in
German.
Article 14 – Transfrontier exchanges
The Parties undertake:
a

to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the States in
which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if necessary to seek to
conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster contacts between the users of the
same language in the States concerned in the fields of culture, education, information,
vocational training and permanent education;

486. The initial periodical report refers to co-operation in the educational field, in particular the co-operation
of the German section of Cluj University with several German and Austrian universities and the University of
Ljubljana (Slovenia), including exchanges of teaching staff and programmes that grant a double diploma.
Furthermore, the “Bukowina-Institut” in Augsburg (Germany), which the Romanian Minister of Foreign Affairs
visited in 2011, co-operates with the Universities of Suceava (Bukovina) and Iaşi. In addition, the German
Academic Exchange Service offers a number of scholarships for German-speaking teaching staff in
Romania, continuing education, young researchers, and students from the German minority. The Romanian
authorities also support the cross-border radio network “Funkforum” which unites radio programmes from
and for the German minorities in Romania, Hungary, Croatia and Serbia.
487.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
b

for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or promote co-operation
across borders, in particular between regional or local authorities in whose territory the
same language is used in identical or similar form.

488. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the German language. During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of
Experts was informed that, on the initiative of Transylvanian Saxons emigrated to Germany, the town of
Dinkelsbühl (Germany) is twinned with Sighişoara/Schäßburg in Romania. In 2011, the Romanian Minister of
Foreign Affairs attended the annual Festival of the Transylvanian Saxons in Germany. The Committee of
Experts asks the Romanian authorities to include an overview of other relevant co-operation between local
and regional authorities in their next periodical report.

40

See e.g. 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of Spain, ECRML(2008)5, paragraph 1193.

74

2.2.5. Hungarian
Article 8 – Education
General issues
489. With regard to the Hungarian language, Romania has ratified Articles 8.1.a.i, b.i, c.i and d.i which put
an obligation on the state party to provide minority-language education irrespective of prior demand by
parents or students. In practice, however, a minimum number of parents or pupils have to demand the
provision of minority-language education. The undertakings chosen oblige the Romanian authorities to
provide an offer of minority language education throughout the whole language area. This does not preclude
the possibility of not establishing specific classes in minority languages if there are too few pupils. The
Committee of Experts refers in this respect to its observations and recommendation under 1.4.3 above,
which apply to Hungarian accordingly.
490. There exists a considerable offer of Hungarian-medium education throughout the areas where
Hungarian is traditionally used. The figures indicated below regarding the number of pupils/students concern
the Counties of Timiş/Temes, Arad, Bihor/Bihar, Satu Mare/Szatmárnémeti/Sathmar,
Maramureş/Máramaros, Sălaj/Szilágy, Cluj/Kolozs, Alba/Fehér, Hunedoara/Hunyad,
Sibiu/Hermannstadt/Nagyszeben, Bistriţa-Năsăud/Beszterce-Naszód, Mureş/Maros, Harghita/Hargita,
Covasna/Kovászna, Braşov/Kronstadt/Brassó, Bacău/Bákó and Bucharest. The Committee of Experts
learned that in some localities in these counties it is not always possible for children from Hungarian-speaking
families to receive Hungarian-medium education from kindergarten to upper secondary school at all the
places where Hungarian speakers traditionally reside.
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are
used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of
the official language(s) of the State:
a

i

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages;
or

491. According to the initial periodical report, 41 054 children attend kindergartens providing pre-school
education in Hungarian.
492.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
b

i

to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

493. According to the initial periodical report, 47 603 pupils attend primary schools teaching in Hungarian.
During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed by representatives of the Hungarian
speakers that in some areas there are problems with the continuity from primary to secondary education due
to a shortage of teachers able to teach in Hungarian.
494. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled, but encourages the Romanian
authorities to ensure continuity between the different levels of education.
c

i

to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority languages;
or

495. According to the initial periodical report, 44 697 pupils are enrolled in gymnasium education (grades
5-8) in Hungarian while 31 559 pupils attend high school education (grades 9-12) in this language.
496. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled, but encourages the Romanian
authorities to ensure continuity between the different levels of education.
d

i

to make available technical and vocational education in the relevant regional or
minority languages; or

75

497. According to the initial periodical report, 8 870 students attend vocational education in Hungarian
while 1 102 students are enrolled in post high school and foremen education in this language. However, the
report also states that technical education in Hungarian exists only in the Harghita/Hargita,
Covasna/Kovászna and Mureş/Maros counties where the number of students is high. In other counties where
Hungarian is traditionally used, technical and vocational education can often not be organised because there
are not enough students to meet the minimum threshold of ten students. The Committee of Experts refers in
this context to its observations and recommendation under 1.4.3 above.
498. During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed by representatives of the
Hungarian speakers that there is a shortage of teachers able to teach subjects in Hungarian at technical and
vocational level.
499. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to ensure that there is a sufficient number of teachers able to teach subjects in Hungarian in
technical and vocational education.
e

i

to make available university and other higher education in regional or minority
languages; or

500. According to the initial periodical report, university education in Hungarian is provided in particular at
the Babeş-Bolyai University in Cluj-Napoca/Kolozsvár for over 50 specialties (e.g. computer science,
anthropology, political science, religion, environment, philosophy, geography, sociology). Out of the 21
faculties of the university, 17 offer at present courses in Romanian and Hungarian. There are also two
faculties (Reformed Theology and Roman-Catholic Theology) which teach exclusively in Hungarian.
Furthermore, university education in Hungarian is provided at the University of Medicine and Pharmacy
(general medicine, paediatrics, dentistry, pharmacy etc.) and at the Szentgyörgyi István Theatre University
(both in Târgu Mureş/Marosvásárhely/Neumarkt). University colleges teaching in Hungarian exist in
Gheorghieni/Gyergyószentmiklós, Miercurea Ciuc/Csíkszereda, Târgu Secuiesc/Kézdivásárhely, Sfântu
Gheorghe/Sepsiszentgyörgy and Satu Mare/Szatmárnémeti/Sathmar. In addition, the University of Bucharest
has a chair of Hungarology. During the 2007-2008 academic year, 29 587 students studied in Hungarian
within the public system of higher education.
501.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
f

i

to arrange for the provision of adult and continuing education courses which are
taught mainly or wholly in the regional or minority languages; or

502. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information concerning the application of this
provision. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information on how they implement
this provision for Hungarian.
g

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is
reflected by the regional or minority language;

503. The Committee of Experts notes that the present undertaking concerns not only education for pupils
using a minority language, but also education for non-speakers about the specific history and traditions
related to the minority language spoken in the relevant territory. This normally entails including elements of
the history and culture which is reflected by the minority language in the national curriculum, or at least in the
41
curriculum for all pupils within the territories concerned.
504. The information contained in the initial periodical report concerning the discipline “History and
Traditions of the Hungarian Minority” is not sufficiently clear.

41

See for example 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of Croatia, ECRML2005(3), paragraph 100; 2nd Report of the
Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML2009(6), paragraph 322.

76

505. In addition, it is not clear to the Committee of Experts to what extent also non-speakers of Hungarian
benefit from the teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected by the Hungarian language. In their
replies to the Committee of Experts’ questionnaire, the Romanian authorities refer to a new optional subject
“History of National Minorities” which is taught in the tenth grade at 40 high schools in Romania. Furthermore,
owing to the revision of the Law on National Education in 2011, new history and geography textbooks will be
published and reflect the history and traditions of the national minorities. The Committee of Experts
commends the Romanian authorities on these positive initiatives and looks forward to additional information
in the next periodical report.
506. The Committee of Experts is currently not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this
undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information
on how they implement this provision for Hungarian.
h

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of
paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;

507. According to the initial periodical report, the training of Hungarian teachers is carried out at
pedagogical colleges within the Babeş-Bolyai University of Cluj-Napoca/Kolozsvár. In 2007 and 2008, 35
continuing education courses were held and attended by 1 959 teaching staff using Hungarian.
508. In light of its observations regarding Article 8.1.b-d, the Committee of Experts notes that there exists
in some areas a shortage of teachers able to teach subjects in Hungarian. As a result, pupils in these areas
cannot easily continue their education in Hungarian at the following level. The underlying structural problems
seem to be the very low salaries of teachers and the lack of incentives for students to become teachers
teaching in minority languages. The new (2011) Law on National Education foresees the reimbursement of
the transportation costs incurred by pupils who have to commute to another municipality in order to attend
education in their minority language as well as the provision of accommodation and free meals in case such
education is provided by a boarding school. While welcoming this legislative improvement, the Committee of
Experts observes nonetheless that such measures cannot compensate for the provision of a sufficient
number of teachers able to teach subjects in Hungarian in areas where a relevant number of Hungarian
speakers live.
509.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled.

The Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to provide the training of a number
of teachers that is sufficient to meet the demand for education in Hungarian and to introduce
incentives for minority language teachers.
i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken
and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority
languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be made
public.

510. For each minority in Romania there are national committees and working groups that co-operate with
the authorities to develop the curricula and teaching materials. However, the initial periodical report does not
contain more specific information concerning the application of this provision regarding Hungarian. The
Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the
Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information on how they implement this
provision for Hungarian.
Paragraph 2
With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the regional or
minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional
or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the regional or
minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.

77

511. The initial periodical report contains only information concerning territories in which Hungarian is
traditionally used. However, this provision concerns territories in which the Hungarian language has no
traditional presence, like Bucharest. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the
fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report,
information on how they implement this provision for Hungarian.
Article 9 – Judicial authorities

512. While the initial periodical report does not provide concrete information about the application of the
relevant provisions of Article 9 to Hungarian, it generally states that Hungarian is used in practice, especially
in the areas where there is a large concentration of its speakers (e.g. Harghita/Hargita, Covasna/Kovászna
and Mureş/Maros counties). However, the Committee of Experts would need more specific information
(including statistics) in order to assess whether the provisions concerned are implemented.
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents using
the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to the situation
of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the present
paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of justice:
a

in criminal proceedings:
...
ii

to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or minority language;
and/or

513. According to Article 128.2 of the Romanian Constitution, “Romanian citizens belonging to national
minorities have the right to express themselves in their mother tongue before the courts of law (…)”.
Furthermore, Article 14 of Law no. 304/2004 on the Judicial System stipulates the right of citizens belonging
to national minorities to express themselves in their own language before courts (paragraph 2). “Where one
or more parties require expressing themselves in their own language, the court shall provide, free of charge,
an authorised interpreter or translator” (paragraph 3). However, the Romanian authorities state in the initial
periodical report that they have no information about the implementation of this undertaking for Hungarian in
practice.
514. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It asks the Romanian
authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information about its practical implementation
concerning Hungarian.
a

iii to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not be considered
inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a regional or minority language;
and/or

515. According to Article 14.5 of Law no. 304/2004 on the Judicial System, “[a]pplications and procedural
provisions shall be made only in Romanian.” Furthermore, Article 128.1-2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
foresees the free use of an interpreter and the translation of documents only in cases where the party
concerned “does not speak Romanian”.
516. The Committee of Experts understands that “applications” in accordance with Article 14.5 of Law on
the Judicial System cover “requests” within the meaning of this Charter provision, which makes requests in a
minority language inadmissible. In addition, written or oral evidence can only be delivered if the person
concerned does not master Romanian. However, Article 9.1.a.iii of the Charter applies irrespective of whether
a party speaks Romanian, especially since most persons belonging to national minorities in Romania do
speak the majority language. Limiting the possibility to deliver written or oral evidence to persons who do not
speak Romanian would render this undertaking meaningless in most cases. On the other hand, the
Committee of Experts observes that Romanian legislation does not contain this restriction with regard to the
right of the accused to use a minority language (see Article 9.1.a.ii above).
517. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify, in the next periodical report,
whether the legal set-up allows in practice that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, may be
produced in Hungarian.

78

b

in civil proceedings:
...
ii

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she
may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional
expense; and/or
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

518. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.ii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
519. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It asks the Romanian
authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information about the practical implementation of
this undertaking for Hungarian.
b

iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

520. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.iii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
521. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify, in the next periodical report,
whether the legal set-up allows in practice that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, may be
produced in Hungarian.
c

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
...
ii

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she
may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional
expense; and/or
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

522. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.ii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
523. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It asks the Romanian
authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information about the practical implementation of
this undertaking concerning Hungarian.
c

iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

524. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.iii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
525. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify, in the next periodical report,
whether the legal set-up allows in practice that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, may be
produced in Hungarian.
d

to take steps to ensure that the application of sub-paragraphs i and iii of paragraphs b
and c above and any necessary use of interpreters and translations does not involve extra
expense for the persons concerned.

79

526. In light of the conclusions reached regarding sub-paragraph iii of paragraphs b and c above, the
Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking.
Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake:
a

not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because they
are drafted in a regional or minority language; or

527. Hungarian speakers may present valid documents drawn up in Hungarian at the Covasna/Kovászna
county police inspectorate (e.g. wills, civil contracts, land registry extracts, agricultural register extracts,
documents issued by the Republic of Hungary). However, the initial periodical report does not contain any
additional and more general information about the implementation of this undertaking. The Committee of
Experts is therefore not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian
authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information on how they implement this provision for
Hungarian.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or minority languages the most important
national statutory texts and those relating particularly to users of these languages, unless they are
otherwise provided.
528. Based on Article 21 of Law No. 202/1998 concerning the organisation of the Official Journal of
Romania (Románia Hivatalos Közlönye in Hungarian), the Official Journal of Romania is also translated and
published in Hungarian.
529.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.

Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
530. While the Committee of Experts has not any received detailed information concerning the
demographical situation of the Hungarian national minority at local/regional level, it is aware that this minority
reaches the 20%-threshold in a high number of localities.
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of
regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the situation
of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

...
ii

to ensure that such of their officers as are in contact with the public use the regional
or minority languages in their relations with persons applying to them in these
languages; or

iii to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written
applications and receive a reply in these languages; or
iv to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written
applications in these languages; or
v

531.

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document
in these languages;

Article 10.1 concerns local branches of the central State authorities.

532. Provisions a.ii – a.v represent alternative options. As Romania has chosen option a.ii, options a.iii,
a.iv and a.v become redundant. In line with its practice, the Committee of Experts will ex officio examine
option a.ii only.

80

533. The implementation of this undertaking is hampered by the 20%-threshold. The Committee of Experts
refers in this respect to the observations and recommendation that it has made above (see under 1.4.2).
534. The initial periodical report states that the county police inspectorates of Harghita/Hargita and
Covasna/Kovászna as well as the County Border Police Inspectorate of Bihor/Bihar have at their disposal
Hungarian-speaking staff who can reply to requests made in Hungarian, especially during border controls or
on the police telephone hotline. Regarding counties where the Hungarian minority does not reach the 20%threshold, the county border police inspectorates of Satu Mare/ Szatmárnémeti/Sathmar and the county
police inspectorates of Cluj/Kolozsvár and Maramureş/ Máramaros have recruited staff able to use Hungarian
in their relations with persons applying to them in this language. While it seems that Hungarian is used to
some extent in counties where the 20%-threshold is met, practical implementation is more rare in other areas
inhabited by Hungarian speakers.
535. The initial periodical report also states that the Inspectorate General for Emergency Situations, which
seems to be a State authority, the National Agency for Cadastre and Land Registration, and branches of the
National Archives employ Hungarian speakers in areas where at least 20% of the population belong to the
Hungarian minority. In practice, however, only the National Agency for Cadastre and Land Registration
replies to requests made in Hungarian in this language whereas the other two institutions use Romanian.
This practice complies only with Article 10.1.a.iv, but not with option ii which applies here.
536. For purposes of its shadow report, the “Civic Engagement Movement” has sent applications in
Hungarian to 76 State authorities, local authorities and public service providers located in Mureş/Maros
county where 39.3% of the population belong to the Hungarian minority. In its letters, the association asked
for replies in Hungarian and made reference to relevant national laws and Article 10 of the Charter. According
to the shadow report, 19 institutions replied bilingually on the substance of the request and 13 in Romanian
only, 11 replied in Romanian that the request should be submitted again in the official language, and 33 did
not reply at all. During the on-the-spot visit, representatives of the “Civic Engagement Movement” also stated
that many Hungarian speakers refrain from submitting applications to State authorities in Hungarian because
they believe that using Romanian will speed up the processing of their request and influence the decision in a
positive way.
537. Local branches of the State authorities other than those referred to above are relevant under this
provision, for example the prefecture and the army (Centrul Militar). However, it is unclear whether Hungarian
can be used in relation with them. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify this in
the next periodical report.
42

538. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to ensure that those officers who are in contact with the public use the Hungarian language in their
relations with persons applying to them in this language.
b

to make available widely used administrative texts and forms for the population in the
regional or minority languages or in bilingual versions;

539. The Committee of Experts notes that this provision concerns administrative texts and forms that are
widely used by local branches of the State authorities both internally or in relations with the public. It extends,
for example, to administrative texts and (application) forms related to identity documents, the population
registry, social welfare and local taxes.
540. The initial periodical report does not contain any information about the implementation of this
provision for Hungarian. According to the replies by the Romanian authorities to the questionnaire submitted
to them by the Committee of Experts, local branches of State authorities have made available forms and
administrative documents in Hungarian, namely standardised application forms concerning public-interest
information, administrative complaints, archive documents, notification forms and summons. In its shadow
report, the “Civic Engagement Movement” states that the use of such forms is hampered by a lack of clear
internal guidelines.

42

See e.g. 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraphs 475-476

81

541. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to make available widely used administrative texts and forms for the population in Hungarian or in
bilingual versions.
c

to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in a regional or minority
language.

542. The Committee of Experts observes that this provision covers all forms of written communication by
local branches of the State authorities, both for internal use or in relations with one or several addressees
outside the administration.
543. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information concerning the application of this
provision to the Hungarian language. During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed
that documents in Hungarian are not generally available in the areas where Hungarian is used by a
considerable number of people.
544. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to allow the local branches of the State authorities to draft documents in Hungarian and to ensure
an appropriate level of implementation in practice.
Paragraph 2
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who are
users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below, the
Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
...
b

the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written
applications in these languages;

545. According to Articles 2.2 and 8.1-2 of Government Decision no. 1206/2001, citizens belonging to
national minorities have the right to address oral or written requests to local authorities and the local and
county councils and to receive an answer in Romanian and the minority language. As the exercise of this
right is linked to the 20%-threshold, the Committee of Experts refers to the observations and recommendation
that it has made above (see under 1.4.2).
546. The initial periodical report states that local public administration authorities in ten counties reply in
Hungarian to requests received in this language. Furthermore, local councils and their subordinated bodies in
14 counties have employed a significant number of Hungarian speakers. According to the replies by the
Romanian authorities to the questionnaire submitted to them by the Committee of Experts, bilingual
Romanian and Hungarian standardised forms were introduced into administrative use at local level after
ratification of the Charter. During the on-the-spot visit, however, representatives of the Hungarian speakers
stated that many Hungarian speakers submit applications to local authorities in Romanian, expecting that this
will speed up the processing of their request and influence the decision in a positive way.
43

547. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to allow and/or encourage the possibility for users of Hungarian to submit oral or written
applications in this language to local authorities.
c

the publication by regional authorities of their official documents also in the relevant
regional or minority languages;

548. According to the replies by the Romanian authorities to the questionnaire submitted to them by the
Committee of Experts, public administration in Romania is established only at the central and local levels.
However, in the perspective of the Committee of Experts the counties may qualify as regions in the sense of
the Charter. During the on-the-spot visit, representatives of the Hungarian speakers stated that a relatively
low number of county councils uses bilingual forms.
549. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to submit, in their next periodical report,
information on the publication of documents of the counties in Hungarian.

43

See e.g. 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraphs 479-480.

82

d
the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in the relevant regional or
minority languages;
44

550. According to the Romanian legislation , citizens belonging to national minorities are entitled to be
informed, in their mother tongue, about the agenda of the local and county council meetings and of the
normative and individual decisions adopted by them. However, the implementation of this possibility is limited
to municipalities where the national minority in question reaches 20% of the population.
551. The initial periodical report states that Hungarian is used for the publication of the county council
agenda (concerns eight county councils), county council decisions (four county councils) and decisions with
individual character (seven county councils). According to the replies by the Romanian authorities to the
questionnaire submitted to them by the Committee of Experts, local authorities have made available forms
and administrative documents in Hungarian, namely standardised application forms concerning publicinterest information, administrative complaints, urban planning, the issuing of authorisations and producer
certificates, housing, real estate taxes, notification forms and summons. In light of the information obtained
during the on-the-spot visit, such documents are not consistently used in practice.
45

552. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to allow and/or encourage the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in
Hungarian.
e

553.

the use by regional authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

The Committee of Experts refers to its remarks under Article 10.2.c.

554. According to the initial periodical report, six county councils use Hungarian during their meetings. It is,
however, not clear how the situation is in other areas traditionally inhabited by Hungarian speakers.
555. While considering this undertaking fulfilled, the Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities
to submit additional information in the next periodical report.
f

the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

556. With regard to the relevant thresholds, the Committee of Experts refers to the observations and
recommendation that it has made above (see under 1.4.2).
557.

As regards Hungarian, there is no information about the situation in assemblies of municipalities.

558. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information on how they implement
this provision for Hungarian.
g

the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official language(s),
of traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or minority languages.

559. With regard to the 20%-threshold, the Committee of Experts refers to the observations and
recommendation that it has made above (see under 1.4.2).

44
Articles 39, 50 and 94.8 of the Law on Local Administration no. 215/2001; Articles 2.2 and 7.1-2 of Government Decision
no. 1206/2001 for approving the Rules for implementing the provisions concerning the right of citizens belonging to national minorities
to use their mother tongue in local government, contained in the Law on Local Administration no. 215/2001.
45
See e.g. 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraphs 482-483.

83

560. The Committee of Experts underlines that the term “place-names” within the meaning of the present
undertaking concerns not only the name of the municipality/locality, but all topographical names (“la toponymie”
in the French version of the Charter) of that municipality that can be officially used, for example in texts
46
produced by the local authority or in the signage. As regards the Hungarian language, a high number of
municipalities and localities have bilingual place-name signs (Romanian-Hungarian). Hungarian place-names
are also used in other domains, for example on street name signs (e.g. in Târgu
Mureș/Marosvásárhely/Neumarkt), inscriptions on public buildings and at train stations (e.g. in
Aiud/Nagyenyed/Straßburg), cultural sites and tourist signposts. However, this use is not always consistent
and often depends on local initiatives. At times, the Hungarian inscriptions are erroneous, for example if the
Hungarian word for “street” is added to a Romanian name without translating the latter into Hungarian as well
(e.g. “Justiţiei utca” rather than correct “Bíróság utca”). Also, the Committee of Experts invites the Romanian
authorities to encourage those municipalities having bilingual place-name signs to use all local place-names
in the minority language in the relevant domains (street name, public transport and tourist signs or signposts;
documents/forms; public relations materials/websites, etc.).
561. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to adopt a structured approach encouraging the use of all place-names in Hungarian in a given
municipality in all relevant domains.
Paragraph 3
With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting on
their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which regional or minority languages are
used, in accordance with the situation of each language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in the provision of the service;
or

b

to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request and receive a reply in
these languages; or

c

to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request in these languages.

562. Undertakings a, b and c represent alternative options. As Romania has chosen option a, options b
and c become redundant. In line with its practice, the Committee of Experts will ex officio examine option a
only. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts wishes to emphasise that “public services” refers to services
provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting on their behalf (e.g. railway, urban transport,
electricity, water and gas, cleaning and sanitation, telephone services, refuse collection and disposal,
cemeteries, sporting facilities, entertainment venues).
563. Article 19 of the Law on Local Government no. 215/2001 states that "[i]n the territorial-administrative
units where citizens belonging to national minorities have a share of over 20% of residents, the local
government authorities and public institutions subordinated to them shall ensure their use of decentralized
public services in their mother tongue, according to the Constitution, the present law and international treaties
to which Romania is party." It is not clear to the Committee of Experts whether the “public institutions
subordinated to” local authorities cover public services in conformity with the present Charter provision. Even
if they cover public services, the problem remains that the implementation is linked to the 20%-threshold (see
under 1.4.2 above).
564. During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed that this provision is not being
consistently applied to Hungarian in practice. For example, electricity bills are usually not available in
Hungarian. According to the shadow report submitted by the “Civic Engagement Movement” (see under
Article 10.1.a above), there have been instances where the “Poşta Română” and the electricity provider
“Electrica” have refused to reply in Hungarian to requests received in this language. The Committee of

46

See e.g. 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraph 232.

84

Experts notes that such a practice would not even comply with the weakest option (c) of paragraph 3, let
alone with option a which requires that public service providers use the given minority language also
internally.
565.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled.

The Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to ensure that Hungarian is used in
the provision of public services in practice and asks them to clarify the national legal basis for the
implementation of this provision.
Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the
Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
...
b

recruitment and, where necessary, training of the officials and other public service
employees required;

566. The initial periodical report states that, irrespective of the 20%-threshold, several county border police
inspectorates, county police inspectorates and other State authorities have recruited staff able to use
Hungarian in their relations with persons applying to them in this language. There is, however, no information
about training and the implementation of this provision regarding other relevant local State authorities.
567. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to ensure, regarding all relevant authorities, the recruitment and, where necessary, training of the
officials and other public service employees required to implement their undertakings under Article 10
regarding the Hungarian language.
c

compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a
knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that
language is used.

568. According to the initial periodical report, the Covasna/Kovászna county police inspectorate is taking
care of the assignment of Hungarian-speaking policemen to areas where this language is spoken. There is
no other information available.
569. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, more comprehensive information on
how they implement this undertaking for Hungarian.
Paragraph 5
The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or minority
languages, at the request of those concerned.
570.

There is no specific information about the implementation of this undertaking.

571. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking. It asks
the Romanian authorities to submit, in the next periodical report, information about the legal situation and to
clarify how the authorities ensure, in public documents, the correct spelling of family names in minority
languages in practice.
Article 11 – Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in
which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that the
public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this field, and
respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:

85

a

to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:
...

ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one radio station and one
television channel in the regional or minority languages; or

572. According to the initial periodical report, public radio programmes in Hungarian are broadcast by
Radio Timişoara (14 hours/week), Radio Târgu-Mureş (50 hours/week), Radio Cluj (63 hours/week) and Radio
Reşiţa (30 minutes/week). The Committee of Experts notes that Radio Târgu-Mureş and Radio Cluj, which
broadcast seven to nine hours per day in Hungarian, could qualify as a “radio station in Hungarian” in
accordance with the present provision. As far as the other radio stations are concerned, their broadcasting
time in Hungarian is too limited for them to qualify as “radio stations in Hungarian”. In addition, it is unclear
what content all aforementioned programmes cover and which audience/age groups they address.
573. The Committee of Experts welcomes the current plans to extend the broadcasting time devoted to the
Hungarian language on public radio and encourages them to implement them in accordance with the
obligations entered into under this provision.
574. On public television, programmes in Hungarian of a duration of 152 hours were broadcast on TVR 1
and TVR 2 in 2007. In addition, TVR International and TVR Cultural broadcast about 50 hours in Hungarian in
the same year (reruns of the programmes of TVR1 and TVR2). The programmes covered various thematic
genres (news, art and culture, entertainment, science, music, education and religion). The Committee of
Experts notes, however, that the information contained in the initial periodical report is outdated, covering the
years 2005-2007. Based on the information received, the Committee of Experts notes that there is no
television channel in Hungarian.
575.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled for radio and not fulfilled for television.

The Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to set up a television channel in
Hungarian.
b

i

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one radio station in the regional
or minority languages; or

576. According to the replies by the Romanian authorities to the questionnaire submitted to them by the
Committee of Experts, 15 private radio stations located in different counties broadcast entirely in Hungarian.
For at least one radio station (Erdély FM based in both Târgu-Mureş/Marosvásárhely/ Neumarkt and
Toplița/Maroshévíz) it is clear that the broadcasting time in Hungarian extends to 24 hours per day.
Furthermore, several other private radio stations broadcast individual programmes in Hungarian. The existing
offer covers various age groups and thematical genres. The Committee of Experts welcomes this
comprehensive offer.
577.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
c

i

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one television channel in the
regional or minority languages; or

578. According to the replies by the Romanian authorities to the questionnaire submitted to them by the
Committee of Experts, ten private television channels located in different counties broadcast entirely in
Hungarian. For at least one television channel (Light Channel TV 1) it is clear that the broadcast time in
Hungarian extends to 24 hours per day. Furthermore, several other private television channels broadcast
individual programmes in Hungarian. The existing offer covers various age groups and thematic genres. The
Committee of Experts welcomes this comprehensive offer.
579.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
d

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in the regional or minority languages

86

580. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information concerning the application of this
provision. According to the replies by the Romanian authorities to the questionnaire submitted to them by the
Committee of Experts, two documentaries and DVDs in Hungarian have been produced with their financial
assistance. Considering the number of Hungarian speakers in Romania, the Committee of Experts is,
however, of the view that additional measures need to be taken in order to implement this provision for
Hungarian.
581. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual works in Hungarian.
e

i

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one
newspaper in the regional or minority languages; or

582. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of
this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information on
how they implement this provision for Hungarian.
f

i

to cover the additional costs of those media which use regional or minority
languages, wherever the law provides for financial assistance in general for the
media; or

583. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of
this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information on
how they implement this provision for Hungarian.
g

to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using regional or minority
languages.

584. According to the initial periodical report, staff of Erdély FM, including non-journalistic staff
(cameramen), attended training for journalists in 2010. Also, staff of “Paprika Radio” have been trained in
Hungary. Besides these examples, there is no information about whether there exists a general training
scheme for Hungarian-speaking journalists and media staff covering all parts of the country where Hungarian
is used.
585. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using Hungarian.
Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television broadcasts
from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority
language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from
neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure that no restrictions will
be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of information in the written press in a
language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of the
above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such
formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a
democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the
prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the
reputation or rights of others, for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for
maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
586. The initial periodical report refers to the European Union’s Audiovisual Media Services Directive
2007/65/EC which ensures freedom of reception and retransmissions of audiovisual media services from
other EU states. Nine television channels from Hungary are retransmitted in Romania.
587.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.

87

Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to ensure that the interests of the users of regional or minority languages are
represented or taken into account within such bodies as may be established in accordance with the
law with responsibility for guaranteeing the freedom and pluralism of the media.
588. According to the initial periodical report, representatives of the Hungarian minority are inter alia
members of the National Audiovisual Council.
589.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.

Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural centres,
museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production,
vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries, including inter alia the
use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are
used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this
field:
a

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority languages
and foster the different means of access to works produced in these languages;

590. According to the initial periodical report, the Romanian authorities have supported a high number of
cultural activities related to the Hungarian language. These activities have covered the fields of publishing
(books, periodicals in Hungarian), events, exhibitions, presentation of Hungarian music, vernacular forms of
cultural expression and festivals. There are nine theatres, six puppet theatres and one opera performing in
Hungarian. Furthermore, major cultural sites have also inscriptions with historical/cultural information in
Hungarian. The Committee of Experts welcomes this comprehensive support.
591.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
b

to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in regional
or minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, postsynchronisation and subtitling activities;

592. The initial periodical report specifies a number of literary works that have been translated, but it is not
clear whether these were translations from Hungarian (as required by this provision) or into Hungarian. In
addition, there is no information about dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities. The Committee
of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian
authorities to clarify these aspects in the next periodical report.
c

to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages
by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling
activities;

593. The initial periodical report specifies a number of literary works that have been translated, but it is not
clear whether these were translations into Hungarian (as required by this provision) or from Hungarian. In
addition, there is no information about dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities. The Committee
of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian
authorities to clarify these aspects in the next periodical report.
d

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of
various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of
regional or minority languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for
which they provide backing;

88

594. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information concerning the application of this
provision. However, the Committee of Experts notes that the Hungarian speakers have a diversified
infrastructure of cultural institutions (for example nine theatres) which ensures the incorporation of the
knowledge and use of Hungarian and the related culture in the undertakings which they initiate or for which
they provide backing.
595.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
e

to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting
cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of the regional or
minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest of the population;

596. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination under Article 12.1.d, which applies accordingly.
The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
f

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or
minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

597. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination under Article 12.1.d, which applies accordingly.
The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
g

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for collecting,
keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the regional or
minority languages;

598. According to the replies by the Romanian authorities to the questionnaire submitted to them by the
Committee of Experts, the National Library of Romania keeps copies of documents of the national minorities.
The Committee of Experts notes, however, that the scope of this provision extends beyond the collection
activities usually carried out by national libraries. It asks the Romanian authorities to submit information
concerning audiovisual materials and publication of works in Hungarian in the next periodical report.
h

if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and terminological
research services, particularly with a view to maintaining and developing appropriate
administrative, commercial, economic, social, technical or legal terminology in each
regional or minority language.

599. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information concerning the application of this
provision. During the on-the-spot visit, representatives of the Hungarian speakers stated that there is a lack
of administrative terminology in Hungarian, as a result of which civil servants often use Romanian. No
relevant terminological research appears to take place.
600. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to inform about any measures taken to promote and finance translation and
terminological research services with a view to developing appropriate administrative, technical or legal
terminology in Hungarian.
Paragraph 2
In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are traditionally
used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to
allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in accordance with the
preceding paragraph.
601. The initial periodical report refers in a general way to cultural activities in areas where the Hungarian
minority does not settle compactly. However, this provision concerns areas of the country where the regional
or minority language has not been traditionally used, for example Bucharest. Nevertheless, the Committee of
Experts is aware that the Romanian authorities regularly support several cultural activities which bring
together some or all national minorities. These activities include the National Minorities Day, the Minority
Theatre Festival and the Interethnic Film Festival. These events may be relevant under this provision if the
Hungarian language has benefited from them and if the events have taken place outside the area where
Hungarian is traditionally used. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify this in the
next periodical report or to provide information on other relevant activities.

89

Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for
regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.
602. The information contained in the initial periodical report is outdated and limited to the cultural policy
pursued in Hungary. However, this provision also concerns countries other than the minority’s kin state. The
Committee of Experts is therefore not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks
the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information on how they currently
implement this provision for Hungarian.
Article 13 – Economic and social life
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole country:
a

to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without justifiable
reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to economic or
social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical documents such as
instructions for the use of products or installations;

603. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information concerning the application of this
provision. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information on how they implement
this provision for Hungarian.
b

to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of companies and private documents of
any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or minority languages, at least
between users of the same language;

604. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information concerning the application of this
provision. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information on how they implement
this provision for Hungarian.
c

to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority languages in
connection with economic or social activities;

605. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information concerning the application of this
provision. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information on how they implement
this provision for Hungarian.
Paragraph 2
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the public authorities
are competent, within the territory in which the regional or minority languages are used, and as far as
this is reasonably possible:
...
c

to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and hostels offer
the possibility of receiving and treating in their own language persons using a regional or
minority language who are in need of care on grounds of ill-health, old age or for other
reasons;

606. The initial periodical report states that in areas with a majority of Hungarian speakers this language
can be used in hospitals. However, this appears to be a mere reflection of the demographical situation in the
regions concerned. It is not clear to the Committee of Experts what structural and practical measures the
Romanian authorities take (e.g. recruitment of bilingual staff, language training for existing staff, signage in
social care facilities) with a view to ensuring the application of this provision in all areas with relevant numbers

90

of Hungarian speakers. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this
undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information on how
they implement this provision for Hungarian.
d

to ensure by appropriate means that safety instructions are also drawn up in regional or
minority languages;

607. The Committee of Experts notes that this provision concerns all forms of instructions whose aim it is
to prevent accidents, including at the workplace. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific
information (including examples) concerning the application of this provision. Representatives of the
Hungarian speakers have pointed out that safety instructions are usually in Romanian only, even in areas
where Hungarian speakers form the majority of the population.
608. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report,
information on how they implement this provision for Hungarian.
e

to arrange for information provided by the competent public authorities concerning the
rights of consumers to be made available in regional or minority languages.

609. The initial periodical report states that in counties with a majority of Hungarian speakers this language
can be used for lodging claims with inspectorates for consumer protection. Replies to such claims are,
however, worded only in Hungarian if the person concerned has explicitly requested that. Furthermore,
information material has been published in Hungarian to inform consumers, but it is not clear what kind of
information these leaflets contain. The Committee of Experts considers that a more structured approach is
needed in order to implement this provision. This approach should cover information concerning consumer
rights provided in public (e.g. information boards regarding passenger rights at stations or airports) or
47
relevant information on products.
610. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to define, in co-operation with the representatives of the Hungarian minority, what information
concerning consumer rights is relevant under this provision and to arrange that such information is made
available in Hungarian.
Article 14 – Transfrontier exchanges
The Parties undertake:
a

to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the States in
which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if necessary to seek to
conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster contacts between the users of the
same language in the States concerned in the fields of culture, education, information,
vocational training and permanent education;

611. The initial periodical report states that, within the framework of the 1996 Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation concluded between Romania and Hungary, the protection of the Hungarian minority in Romania
receives considerable attention. For example, school exchanges between 50 schools in Bihor/Bihar county
(Romania) and Hajdu–Bihar (Hungary) have been organised. The report does not contain additional
examples of co-operation in the fields of culture, education, information, vocational training and permanent
education.
612. While considering this undertaking fulfilled, the Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities
to submit further information in the next periodical report.
b

47

for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or promote co-operation
across borders, in particular between regional or local authorities in whose territory the
same language is used in identical or similar form.

See e.g. 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of Spain, ECRML(2008)5, paragraph 1193

91

613. According to the initial periodical report, several publications about transfrontier co-operation in
general have been translated into Hungarian. However, there is no specific information about how cooperation across borders between regional or local authorities is to the benefit of the Hungarian language.
The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to provide the relevant information in the next periodical report.
2.2.6. Russian
Article 8 – Education
General issues
614. With regard to the Russian language, Romania has ratified Articles 8.1.b.iii and c.iii which put an
obligation on the state party to provide minority-language education irrespective of prior demand by parents
or students. In practice, however, a minimum number of parents or pupils have to demand the provision of
minority-language education. The undertakings chosen oblige the Romanian authorities to provide an offer of
minority language education throughout the whole language area. This does not preclude the possibility of not
establishing specific classes in minority languages if there are too few pupils. The Committee of Experts
refers in this respect to its observations and recommendation under 1.4.3 above, which apply to Russian
accordingly.
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are
used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of
the official language(s) of the State:
a

i

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant regional or
minority languages; or

iii to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those pupils
whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient; or
615. According to the initial periodical report, Russian is used in the kindergartens of Sarichioi/ Сарикёй,
Jurilovca/Журиловка, Slava Cercheză/Черкезская Слава, Târgu-Frumos and Brăila. Pre-school education in
Russian is attended by a total of 198 children. However, the Committee of Experts considers that this number
is too low in view of the number of Russian speakers in Romania.
616. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to take steps with a view to extending the offer of Russian-language pre-school education.
b

...
iii to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

617. According to the replies submitted by the Romanian authorities to the Committee of Experts’
questionnaire, 553 pupils attend primary schools teaching Russian as an integral part of the curriculum.
During the on-the-spot visit, representatives of the Russian speakers informed the Committee of Experts that
this educational model covers three lessons per week. The Committee of Experts considers that the number
of Russian lessons per week should be increased in order to contribute to the maintenance of Russian as a
living language.
618. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled. Nevertheless, it encourages the
Romanian authorities to increase the number of Russian lessons per week.
c

...
iii to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

92

619. According to the replies submitted by the Romanian authorities to the Committee of Experts’
questionnaire, 648 students attend secondary schools teaching partly in Russian (642 at gymnasium level,
six in high school). Furthermore, 254 students learn Russian as a subject (nine at gymnasium level, 245 in
high school). The Committee of Experts welcomes the fact that the provision of secondary education partly in
Russian goes beyond the requirements of the present undertaking.
620.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
d

i

to make available technical and vocational education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of technical and vocational education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or

iii

to provide, within technical and vocational education, for the teaching of the relevant regional
or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

iv to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils
who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered sufficient;
621. According to the initial periodical report, eight students attend technical education in Russian in Iaşi.
The Committee of Experts considers that this number is too low considering the number of Russian speakers
in Romania and notes that no technical and vocational education is made available in the traditional
settlement area of the Russian speakers.
622. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to take steps with a view to extending the offer of teaching in Russian, or teaching Russian as a
subject, at technical and vocational education.
e

...
ii

to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher
education subjects; or

623. The initial periodical report does not contain any information about the implementation of this
provision for Russian. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this
undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information about its
implementation.
f

iii if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult education, to
favour and/or encourage the offering of such languages as subjects of adult and
continuing education;

624. The initial periodical report states that adult education exists, but does not specify this information
further with regard to Russian. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a position to conclude on the
fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report,
information about its implementation.
g

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is
reflected by the regional or minority language;

625. The Committee of Experts notes that the present undertaking concerns not only education for pupils
using a minority language, but also education for non-speakers about the specific history and traditions
related to the minority language spoken in the relevant territory. This normally entails including elements of
the history and culture which is reflected by the minority language in the national curriculum, or at least in the
48
curriculum for all pupils within the territories concerned.

48

See for example 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of Croatia, ECRML2005(3), paragraph 100; 2nd Report of the
Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML2009(6), paragraph 322

93

626. According to the initial periodical report, a textbook entitled “History of Lippovan Russian Culture and
Civilisation in Romania” is in use and the history and culture of the Russians in Romania is taught in the
Russian minority schools.
627. However, it is not clear to the Committee of Experts to what extent also non-speakers of Russian
benefit from the teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected by the Russian language. In their
replies to the Committee of Experts’ questionnaire, the Romanian authorities refer to a new optional subject
“History of National Minorities” which is taught in the tenth grade at 40 high schools in Romania. Furthermore,
owing to the revision of the Law on National Education in 2011, new history and geography textbooks will be
published and reflect the history and traditions of the national minorities. The Committee of Experts
commends the Romanian authorities on these positive initiatives and looks forward to additional information
in the next periodical report.
628. The Committee of Experts is currently not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this
undertaking. It asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, additional information
on how this provision is applied to the Russian language.
h

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of
paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;

629. According to the initial periodical report, the basic training of Russian teachers was organised at the
pedagogic schools in Tulcea and Suceava until 1996. The Romanian authorities acknowledge that there is an
urgent need to set up this pedagogical profile again to provide the teaching staff needed for Russian
language education.
630. Further training is carried out annually in Romania and in Moscow (A. S. Pushkin Institute) on the
basis of the intergovernmental programme of cultural and scientific cooperation concluded by Romania and
Russia. Furthermore, annual courses are organised by the Distant Education Institute of Moscow and by the
State University of Saint Petersburg. Specific events related to continuing training also take place
(conferences, courses of teaching methods).
631. The Committee of Experts finds that Romania provides an appropriate infrastructure for the further
training of Russian teachers. However, no basic training is organised in Romania and there is a shortage of
pre-school teachers. The underlying structural problems seem to be the very low salaries of teachers and the
lack of incentives for students to become teachers teaching in minority languages.
632. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled regarding basic training and fulfilled
regarding further training.
The Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to provide the basic training of a
number of teachers that is sufficient to meet the demand for Russian-language education and to
introduce incentives for minority language teachers.
i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken
and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority
languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be made
public.

633. For each minority in Romania there are national committees and working groups that co-operate with
the authorities to develop the curricula and teaching materials. Apart from this, there are no indications that
49
measures have been taken to implement this provision for Russian. The Committee of Experts underlines
that this undertaking requires a supervisory body or bodies dedicated to looking into minority language
education. This body can be an existing body, or a newly established body covering one or several minority
languages, which monitors the measures taken and progress achieved in minority language education and
produces and publishes periodical reports.
634. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to provide additional information in the next periodical report.

49

See e.g. 1st Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the United Kingdom, ECRML(2004)1, paragraph 131.

94

Paragraph 2
With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the regional or
minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional
or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the regional or
minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.
635. The initial periodical report does not contain any relevant information about the implementation of this
provision for Russian. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this
undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information about its
implementation.
Article 9 – Judicial authorities
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents using
the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to the situation
of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the present
paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of justice:
a

in criminal proceedings:
...
ii

to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or minority language;
and/or

636. According to Article 128.2 of the Romanian Constitution, “Romanian citizens belonging to national
minorities have the right to express themselves in their mother tongue before the courts of law (…)”.
Furthermore, Article 14 of Law no. 304/2004 on the Judicial System stipulates the right of citizens belonging
to national minorities to express themselves in their own language before courts (paragraph 2). “Where one
or more parties require expressing themselves in their own language, the court shall provide, free of charge,
an authorised interpreter or translator” (paragraph 3). However, the Romanian authorities state in the initial
periodical report that they have no information about the implementation of this undertaking for Russian in
practice.
637. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It asks the Romanian
authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information about its practical implementation
concerning Russian.
a

iii to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not be considered
inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a regional or minority language;
and/or

638. According to Article 14.5 of Law no. 304/2004 on the Judicial System, “[a]pplications and procedural
provisions shall be made only in Romanian.” Furthermore, Article 128.1-2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
foresees the free use of an interpreter and the translation of documents only in cases where the party
concerned “does not speak Romanian”.
639. The Committee of Experts understands that “applications” in accordance with Article 14.5 of Law on
the Judicial System cover “requests” within the meaning of this Charter provision, which makes requests in a
minority language inadmissible. In addition, written or oral evidence can only be delivered if the person
concerned does not master Romanian. However, Article 9.1.a.iii of the Charter applies irrespective of whether
a party speaks Romanian, especially since most persons belonging to national minorities in Romania do
speak the majority language. Limiting the possibility to deliver written or oral evidence to persons who do not
speak Romanian would render this undertaking meaningless in most cases. On the other hand, the
Committee of Experts observes that Romanian legislation does not contain this restriction with regard to the
right of the accused to use a minority language (see Article 9.1.a.ii above).

95

640. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify, in the next periodical report,
whether the legal set-up allows in practice that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, may be
produced in Russian.
b

in civil proceedings:
...
ii

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she
may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional
expense; and/or
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

641. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.ii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
642. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It asks the Romanian
authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information about the practical implementation of
this undertaking for Russian.
b

iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

643. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.iii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
644. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify, in the next periodical report,
whether the legal set-up allows in practice that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, may be
produced in Russian.
c

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
...
ii

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she
may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional
expense; and/or
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

645. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.ii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
646. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It asks the Romanian
authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information about the practical implementation of
this undertaking concerning Russian.
c

iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

647. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.iii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
648. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify, in the next periodical report,
whether the legal set-up allows in practice that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, may be
produced in Russian.

96

d

to take steps to ensure that the application of sub-paragraphs i and iii of paragraphs b
and c above and any necessary use of interpreters and translations does not involve extra
expense for the persons concerned.

649. In light of the conclusions reached regarding sub-paragraph iii of paragraphs b and c above, the
Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking.
Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake:
a

not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because they
are drafted in a regional or minority language; or

650. The initial periodical report does not contain any information about the implementation of this
undertaking. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking
and asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information about its
implementation.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or minority languages the most important
national statutory texts and those relating particularly to users of these languages, unless they are
otherwise provided.
651. According to the replies submitted by the Romanian authorities to the Committee of Experts’
questionnaire, this provision is only implemented for Hungarian.
652. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to make available in Russian the most important national statutory texts and those relating
particularly to users of this language, unless they are otherwise provided.
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
653. The initial periodical report states that the Russian national minority represents the majority of the
population in at least six localities in the Tulcea and Constanţa counties. There are apparently a number of
additional localities with a substantial number of Russian speakers. The Committee of Experts asks the
Romanian authorities to submit, in the next periodical report, a complete list of the localities where the
Russian speakers live in numbers relevant for the purposes of Article 10, keeping in mind its
recommendation regarding the 20%-threshold (see under 1.4.2).
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of
regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the situation
of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

...
ii

to ensure that such of their officers as are in contact with the public use the regional
or minority languages in their relations with persons applying to them in these
languages; or

iii to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written
applications and receive a reply in these languages; or
iv to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written
applications in these languages; or
v

654.

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document
in these languages;

Article 10.1 concerns local branches of the central State authorities.

97

655. Provisions a.ii – a.v represent alternative options. As Romania has chosen option a.ii, options a.iii,
a.iv and a.v become redundant. In line with its practice, the Committee of Experts will ex officio examine
option a.ii only.
656. The implementation of this provision is hampered by the 20%-threshold. The Committee of Experts
refers in this respect to the observations and recommendation that it has made above (see under 1.4.2).
657. The initial periodical report states that the county border police inspectorates of Suceava, Botoşani,
Galaţi and Iaşi have at their disposal staff able to use Russian as well as translators for Russian.
658. The Committee of Experts welcomes the information from the Romanian authorities on their efforts
undertaken in the police administration. The state report, however, does not contain any information on the
use of Russian in the realm of other administrative bodies of the state administration. In order to conclude on
fulfilment or non-fulfilment, the Committee of Experts needs more information on the use of Russian in local
branches of the state administration in the Tulcea and Constanţa counties. It asks the Romanian authorities
to provide such information in the next periodical report.
Paragraph 2
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who are
users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below, the
Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
...
b

the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written
applications in these languages;

659. According to Articles 2.2 and 8.1-2 of Government Decision no. 1206/2001, citizens belonging to
national minorities have the right to address oral or written requests to local authorities and the local and
county councils and to receive an answer in Romanian and the minority language. The exercise of this right is
linked to the 20%-threshold.
660. According to the initial periodical report, “some” local authorities in the Constanţa and Tulcea counties
have at their disposal Russian-speaking staff. In Tulcea county, Russian has been used by local authorities in
relations with persons belonging to the Russian minority. As this information is very general, the Committee
of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to submit more precise information about the practical
implementation in the next periodical report.
661. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. Considering the problems related
to the 20%-threshold, the Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to allow and/or
encourage the possibility for users of Russian to submit oral or written applications in this language to local
authorities.
d

the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in the relevant regional
or minority languages;
50

662. According to the Romanian legislation , citizens belonging to national minorities are entitled to be
informed, in their mother tongue, about the agenda of the local and county council meetings and of the
normative and individual decisions adopted by them. However, the implementation of this possibility is limited
to municipalities where the national minority in question reaches 20% of the population. In addition, the
Committee of Experts has no indications that it is exercised in practice.
51

663. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to allow and/or encourage the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in
Russian.

50
Articles 39, 50 and 94.8 of the Law on Local Administration no. 215/2001; Articles 2.2 and 7.1-2 of Government Decision
no. 1206/2001 for approving the Rules for implementing the provisions concerning the right of citizens belonging to national minorities
to use their mother tongue in local government, contained in the Law on Local Administration no. 215/2001.
51
See e.g. 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraphs 482-483.

98

f

the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

664. With regard to the relevant thresholds, the Committee of Experts refers to the observations and
recommendation that it has made above (see under 1.4.2). As regards the Russian language, the Committee
of Experts has not received any information about how this provision is applied.
665. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to allow and/or encourage the use by local authorities of Russian in debates in their assemblies.
g

the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official language(s),
of traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or minority languages.

666. With regard to the 20%-threshold, the Committee of Experts refers to the observations and
recommendation that it has made above (see under 1.4.2).
667. The Committee of Experts underlines that the term “place-names” within the meaning of the present
undertaking concerns not only the name of the municipality, but all topographical names (“la toponymie” in the
French version of the Charter) of that municipality that can be officially used, for example in texts produced by
52
the local authority or in the signage. As regards the Russian language, the use of place-names is limited to a
number of bilingual place-name signs (Romanian-Russian). However, the Committee of Experts invites the
Romanian authorities to encourage those municipalities having bilingual place-name signs to use all local
place-names in the minority language in the relevant domains (street name, public transport and tourist signs
or signposts; documents/forms; public relations materials/websites, etc.).
668. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It asks the Romanian authorities
to provide more information on the use of place-names in Russian in the next periodical report.
Paragraph 3
With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting on
their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which regional or minority languages are
used, in accordance with the situation of each language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in the provision of the service;
or

b

to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request and receive a reply in
these languages; or

669. Undertakings a, b and c represent alternative options. As Romania has chosen option a, options b
and c become redundant. In line with its practice, the Committee of Experts will ex officio examine option a
only. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts wishes to emphasise that “public services” refers to services
provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting on their behalf (e.g. railway, urban transport,
electricity, water and gas, cleaning and sanitation, telephone services, refuse collection and disposal,
cemeteries, sporting facilities, entertainment venues).
670. Article 19 of the Law on Local Government no. 215/2001 states that "[i]n the territorial-administrative
units where citizens belonging to national minorities have a share of over 20% of residents, the local
government authorities and public institutions subordinated to them shall ensure their use of decentralized
public services in their mother tongue, according to the Constitution, the present law and international treaties
to which Romania is party." It is not clear to the Committee of Experts whether the “public institutions
subordinated to” local authorities cover public services in conformity with the present Charter provision. Even
if they cover public services, the problem remains that the implementation is linked to the 20%-threshold (see

52

See e.g. 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraph 232.

99

under 1.4.2 above). In addition, the Committee of Experts has no indications that the provision is
implemented in practice.
671.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled.

The Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to ensure that Russian is used in the
provision of public services in practice and asks them to clarify the national legal basis for the
implementation of this provision.
Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the
Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
...
b

recruitment and, where necessary, training of the officials and other public service
employees required;

672. Local authorities and county councils with responsibility for a territorial administrative unit where more
than 20% of the population belong to a national minority must also employ staff speaking the minority
language concerned. However, there is no specific information about whether the Russian language qualifies
for this and how this provision is implemented for Russian in relevant municipalities where the 20%-threshold
is not met. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information on how they implement
this provision for Russian.
c

compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a
knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that
language is used.

673. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information concerning the application of this
undertaking. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking
and asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information on how they
implement this undertaking for Russian.
Paragraph 5
The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or minority
languages, at the request of those concerned.
674. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information concerning the application of this
undertaking. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking
and asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information on how they
implement this provision for Russian.
Article 11 – Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in
which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that the
public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this field, and
respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
a

to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:
...
iii to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer programmes in the regional or
minority languages;

100

675. According to the initial periodical report, Radio Constanţa broadcasts two programmes in Russian:
one every Wednesday (30 minutes duration) and another one each Monday (from 23.15 to 24.00, covering
news).
676. On public television, Russian is used on TVR 1, TVR 2, TVR3 and TVR Cultural, but the duration of
the programmes and intervals are unclear. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to
submit such information in their next periodical report.
677. The Committee of Experts notes that the broadcasting time devoted to Russian on public radio is
relatively limited in light of the number of Russian speakers, which reduces the effectiveness and
53
attractiveness of this broadcasting. The Committee of Experts reiterates the great importance of the
electronic media for the promotion of minority languages in modern societies. In particular, a regular and
predictable presence of a minority language on radio and television can enhance considerably its social
54
prestige.
678. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled with respect to radio. Regarding
television, it is not in a position to reach a conclusion about the fulfilment of this provision.
The Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to extend the duration of radio
broadcasts in Russian.
b

...
ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;

679. It appears from the initial periodical report that no private radio programmes in Russian exist and that
the Romanian authorities have not taken any initiatives to encourage the broadcasting of private radio
programmes in Russian.
680. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in Russian on a regular basis.
c

...
ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;

681. It appears from the initial periodical report that no private television programmes in Russian exist and
that the Romanian authorities have not taken any initiative to encourage the broadcasting of private television
programmes in Russian.
682. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in Russian on a regular basis.
d

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in the regional or minority languages

683. According to the initial periodical report, audio-visual materials (CD and DVD) have been produced
and distributed as teaching aids to schools teaching in Russian. No additional information is available.
684. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to take additional measures with a view to encouraging and/or facilitating the production and
distribution of audio and audiovisual works in Russian.
e

53
54

i

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one
newspaper in the regional or minority languages; or

See 2nd Evaluation Report on the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraph 800.
See 2nd Evaluation Report on Switzerland, ECRML(2004)6, paragraph 118.

101

685. According to the initial periodical report, the Community of Lippovan-Russians publishes the socialcultural monthly “Dawn”. However, the Committee of Experts underlines that a “newspaper” in conformity with
55
the present undertaking has to be published at least weekly.
686. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one newspaper in
Russian.
g

to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using regional or minority
languages.

687. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of
this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information on
how they implement this provision for Russian.
Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television broadcasts
from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority
language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from
neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure that no restrictions will
be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of information in the written press in a
language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of the
above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such
formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a
democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the
prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the
reputation or rights of others, for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for
maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
688. The initial periodical report states that, in municipalities inhabited compactly by the Lippovan
Russians, broadcasts from the Russian Federation can be received.
689.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.

Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to ensure that the interests of the users of regional or minority languages are
represented or taken into account within such bodies as may be established in accordance with the
law with responsibility for guaranteeing the freedom and pluralism of the media.
690.
The initial periodical report does not contain any relevant information about the application of this
provision to the Russian language. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment
of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information on
how they implement this provision for Russian.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural centres,
museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production,
vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries, including inter alia the
use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are
used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this
field:
a

55

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority languages
and foster the different means of access to works produced in these languages;

See 1st Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of Serbia, ECRML(2009)2, paragraph 267; 2nd Report of the Committee of
Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraph 654.

102

691. According to the initial periodical report, the Romanian authorities have provided financial support to
the publication of the bilingual cultural magazine “Kitej-grad”. Whereas the report also refers to other cultural
activities, it is not clear to what extent they have been supported by the Romanian authorities. Considering
the number of Russian speakers in Romania, the support to the cultural magazine alone would not be
sufficient to comply with this undertaking.
692. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to inform it, in the next periodical report, about what other cultural activities and facilities receive
support from the Romanian authorities.
b

to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in regional
or minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, postsynchronisation and subtitling activities;

693. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Russian language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.
c

to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages
by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling
activities;

694. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Russian language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.
d

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of
various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of
regional or minority languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for
which they provide backing;

695. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Russian language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.
e

to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting
cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of the regional or
minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest of the population;

696. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Russian language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.
f

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or
minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

697. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Russian language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.
g

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for collecting,
keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the regional or
minority languages;

103

698. According to the replies by the Romanian authorities to the questionnaire submitted to them by the
Committee of Experts, the National Library of Romania keeps copies of documents of the national minorities.
The Committee of Experts notes, however, that the scope of this provision extends beyond the collection
activities usually carried out by national libraries. It asks the Romanian authorities to submit information
concerning audiovisual materials and publication of works in Russian in the next periodical report.
h

if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and terminological
research services, particularly with a view to maintaining and developing appropriate
administrative, commercial, economic, social, technical or legal terminology in each
regional or minority language.

699. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information concerning the application of this
provision to the Russian language.
700. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to submit the relevant information, especially commenting on any need to
develop necessary terminology in Russian, in the next periodical report.
Paragraph 2
In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are traditionally
used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to
allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in accordance with the
preceding paragraph.
701. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Russian language. Nevertheless, the Committee of Experts is aware
that the Romanian authorities regularly support several cultural activities which bring together some or all
national minorities. These activities include the annual festival “ProEtnica” in Sighișoara/Schäßburg, the
Minority Theatre Festival, the National Minorities Day, the Interethnic Film Festival, the documentary film
festival “Alternative” (in Târgu Mureș/Marosvásárhely/Neumarkt) and the rock music festival “Felsiget”
(ibidem). These events may be relevant under this provision if the Russian language has benefited from them
and if the events have taken place outside the area where Russian is traditionally used. The Committee of
Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify this in the next periodical report and to provide information
on other relevant activities.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for
regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.
702. The initial periodical report does not contain any relevant information concerning the application of
this provision to the Russian language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a position to conclude
on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such information in the next
periodical report.
Article 13 – Economic and social life
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole country:
a

to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without justifiable
reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to economic or
social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical documents such as
instructions for the use of products or installations;

703. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Russian language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.

104

b

to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of companies and private documents of
any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or minority languages, at least
between users of the same language;

704. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Russian language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.
Article 14 – Transfrontier exchanges
The Parties undertake:
a

to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the States in
which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if necessary to seek to
conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster contacts between the users of the
same language in the States concerned in the fields of culture, education, information,
vocational training and permanent education;

705. The initial periodical report does not contain any relevant information concerning the application of
this provision to the Russian language. In particular, it is not clear what bilateral and multilateral agreements
exist pursuant to this provision and how they are applied to the benefit of the Russian language in the fields of
culture, education, information, vocational training and permanent education. The Committee of Experts is
therefore not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities
to submit such information in the next periodical report.
b

for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or promote co-operation
across borders, in particular between regional or local authorities in whose territory the
same language is used in identical or similar form.

706. The initial periodical report refers to the contacts of the “Community of Lippovan Russians of
Romania” with the Russian authorities as well as international organisations of Russian minorities. In this
framework, a considerable number of activities in the fields of education and culture have been organised.
However, this undertaking is also concerned with co-operation across borders between regional or local
authorities, and the report does not contain any information on this aspect. The Committee of Experts is
therefore not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities
to submit such information in the next periodical report.
2.2.7. Serbian
Article 8 – Education
General issues
707. With regard to the Serbian language, Romania has ratified Articles 8.1.a.ii, b.i and c.i which put an
obligation on the state party to provide minority-language education irrespective of prior demand by parents
or students. In practice, however, a minimum number of parents or pupils have to demand the provision of
minority-language education. The undertakings chosen oblige the Romanian authorities to provide an offer of
minority language education throughout the whole language area. This does not preclude the possibility of not
establishing specific classes in minority languages if there are too few pupils. The Committee of Experts
refers in this respect to its observations and recommendation under 1.4.3 above, which apply to Serbian
accordingly.
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are
used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of
the official language(s) of the State:
a

...
ii

to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant regional or
minority languages; or

105

708. According to the initial periodical report, Serbian is used in ten kindergartens in the Caraş-Severin,
Timiş and Arad counties which are attended by 267 children. The Committee of Experts welcomes the fact
that the provision of pre-school education in Serbian goes beyond the requirements of the present
undertaking (bilingual pre-school education).
709.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
b

i

to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

710. According to the initial periodical report, primary education in Serbian is provided for 134 pupils. An
additional 252 pupils learn Serbian as a subject. The Committee of Experts considers, however, that the
number of 134 pupils enrolled in Serbian-medium education is relatively limited considering the number of
Serbian speakers in Romania and that more emphasis should be placed on teaching in Serbian at primary
schools.
711. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled. Nevertheless, it encourages the
Romanian authorities to promote, in co-operation with the representatives of the Serbian speakers, a shift
from mainly teaching Serbian as a subject to Serbian-medium education at primary level, in conformity with
the present undertaking.
c

i

to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority languages;
or

712. According to the initial periodical report, secondary education in Serbian is provided for 89 students
(grades 5-8) and 107 students (grades 9-12) respectively. An additional 449 pupils learn Serbian as a
subject.
713. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled. Nevertheless, it encourages the
Romanian authorities, in co-operation with the representatives of the Serbian speakers, to promote a shift
from mainly teaching Serbian as a subject to Serbian-medium education at secondary level, in conformity
with the present undertaking.
d

i

to make available technical and vocational education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of technical and vocational education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or

iii

to provide, within technical and vocational education, for the teaching of the relevant regional
or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

iv to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils
who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered sufficient;
714. The initial periodical report does not contain any information about the implementation of this
provision for Serbian. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this
undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information about its
implementation.
e

...
ii

to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher
education subjects; or

715. According to the initial periodical report, Serbian can be studied at the University of Bucharest
(Serbian Language Department) and at the University of Timişoara (Slavic Languages Department). At both
universities, most of the courses within the aforementioned specialities are taught in Serbian.
716.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.

106

g

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is
reflected by the regional or minority language;

717. The Committee of Experts notes that the present undertaking concerns not only education for pupils
using a minority language, but also education for non-speakers about the specific history and traditions
related to the minority language spoken in the relevant territory. This normally entails including elements of
the history and culture which is reflected by the minority language in the national curriculum, or at least in the
56
curriculum for all pupils within the territories concerned.
718. According to the initial periodical report, pupils belonging to the Serbian national minority study the
subject “The History and Traditions of the Serb Minority” (at grades 6-7).
719. It is, however, not clear to the Committee of Experts to what extent also non-speakers of Serbian
benefit from the teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected by the Serbian language. In their
replies to the Committee of Experts’ questionnaire, the Romanian authorities refer to a new optional subject
“History of National Minorities” which is taught in the tenth grade at 40 high schools in Romania. Furthermore,
owing to the revision of the Law on National Education in 2011, new history and geography textbooks will be
published and reflect the history and traditions of the national minorities. The Committee of Experts
commends the Romanian authorities on these positive initiatives and looks forward to additional information
in the next periodical report.
720. The Committee of Experts is currently not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this
undertaking. It asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information on
whether also non-speakers benefit from the teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected by the
Serbian language.
h

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of
paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;

721. According to the initial periodical report, further training of Serbian teachers is part of the teaching
methods activities organised annually by the “Union of Serbs of Romania” for staff teaching at schools
providing teaching in Serbian. However, there is no detailed information about the provision of the basic
training of Serbian teachers, nor about how the Romanian authorities support further training.
722. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking. It asks
the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information on how they organise
the basic and further training of teachers who are qualified to teach Serbian as a subject as well as to teach
other subjects in Serbian.
i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken
and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority
languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be made
public.

723. According to the initial periodical report, the Timiş county School Inspectorate employs an inspector
for Serbian who is also in charge of the Caraş-Severin, Arad and Mehedinţi counties. Furthermore, for each
minority in Romania there are national committees and working groups that co-operate with the authorities to
develop the curricula and teaching materials. It appears, however, that no periodic report on the measures
taken and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of Serbian has been drawn up.
57

724. In light of the above, the Committee of Experts underlines that this undertaking requires a
supervisory body or bodies dedicated to looking into minority language education. This body can be an
existing body, or a newly established body covering one or several minority languages, which monitors the
measures taken and progress achieved in minority language education and produces and publishes periodical
reports.

56
See for example 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of Croatia, ECRML2005(3), paragraph 100; 2nd Report of the
Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML2009(6), paragraph 322
57
See e.g. 1st Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the United Kingdom, ECRML(2004)1, paragraph 131

107

725. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to provide additional information in the next periodical report.
Article 9 – Judicial authorities
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents using
the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to the situation
of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the present
paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of justice:
a

in criminal proceedings:
...
ii

to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or minority language;
and/or

726. According to Article 128.2 of the Romanian Constitution, “Romanian citizens belonging to national
minorities have the right to express themselves in their mother tongue before the courts of law (…)”.
Furthermore, Article 14 of Law no. 304/2004 on the Judicial System stipulates the right of citizens belonging
to national minorities to express themselves in their own language before courts (paragraph 2). “Where one
or more parties require expressing themselves in their own language, the court shall provide, free of charge,
an authorised interpreter or translator” (paragraph 3). However, the Romanian authorities state in the initial
periodical report that they have no information about the implementation of this undertaking for Serbian in
practice.
727. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It asks the Romanian
authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information about its practical implementation
concerning Serbian.
a

iii to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not be considered
inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a regional or minority language;
and/or

728. According to Article 14.5 of Law no. 304/2004 on the Judicial System, “[a]pplications and procedural
provisions shall be made only in Romanian.” Furthermore, Article 128.1-2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
foresees the free use of an interpreter and the translation of documents only in cases where the party
concerned “does not speak Romanian”.
729. The Committee of Experts understands that “applications” in accordance with Article 14.5 of Law on
the Judicial System cover “requests” within the meaning of this Charter provision, which makes requests in a
minority language inadmissible. In addition, written or oral evidence can only be delivered if the person
concerned does not master Romanian. However, Article 9.1.a.iii of the Charter applies irrespective of whether
a party speaks Romanian, especially since most persons belonging to national minorities in Romania do
speak the majority language. Limiting the possibility to deliver written or oral evidence to persons who do not
speak Romanian would render this undertaking meaningless in most cases. On the other hand, the
Committee of Experts observes that Romanian legislation does not contain this restriction with regard to the
right of the accused to use a minority language (see Article 9.1.a.ii above).
730. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify, in the next periodical report,
whether the legal set-up allows in practice that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, may be
produced in Serbian.
b

in civil proceedings:
...
ii

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she
may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional
expense; and/or

108

if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;
731. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.ii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
732. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It asks the Romanian
authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information about the practical implementation of
this undertaking for Serbian.
b

iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

733. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.iii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
734. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify, in the next periodical report,
whether the legal set-up allows in practice that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, may be
produced in Serbian.
c

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
...
ii

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she
may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional
expense; and/or
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

735. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.ii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
736. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It asks the Romanian
authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information about the practical implementation of
this undertaking concerning Serbian.
c

iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

737. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.iii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
738. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify, in the next periodical report,
whether the legal set-up allows in practice that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, may be
produced in Serbian.
d

to take steps to ensure that the application of sub-paragraphs i and iii of paragraphs b
and c above and any necessary use of interpreters and translations does not involve extra
expense for the persons concerned.

739. In light of the conclusions reached regarding sub-paragraph iii of paragraphs b and c above, the
Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking.

109

Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake:
a

not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because they
are drafted in a regional or minority language; or

740. The initial periodical report does not contain any information about the implementation of this
undertaking.
741. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information about its implementation.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or minority languages the most important
national statutory texts and those relating particularly to users of these languages, unless they are
otherwise provided.
742. According to the replies submitted by the Romanian authorities to the Committee of Experts’
questionnaire, this provision is only implemented for Hungarian.
743. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to make available in Serbian the most important national statutory texts and those relating
particularly to users of this language, unless they are otherwise provided.
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
744. The Committee of Experts has not received any detailed information concerning the demographical
situation of the Serbian national minority at local level. From the initial periodical report, it appears that the
Serbian minority reaches the 20%-threshold in a few localities in Banat. The Committee of Experts asks the
Romanian authorities to submit, in the next periodical report, a list of the localities where the Serbian
speakers live in numbers relevant for the purposes of Article 10, keeping in mind its recommendation
regarding the 20%-threshold (see under 1.4.2).
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of
regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the situation
of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

...
ii

to ensure that such of their officers as are in contact with the public use the regional
or minority languages in their relations with persons applying to them in these
languages; or

iii to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written
applications and receive a reply in these languages; or
iv to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written
applications in these languages; or
v

745.

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document
in these languages;

Article 10.1 concerns local branches of the central State authorities.

110

746. Provisions a.ii – a.v represent alternative options. As Romania has chosen option a.ii, options a.iii,
a.iv and a.v become redundant. In line with its practice, the Committee of Experts will ex officio examine
option a.ii only.
747. The implementation of this undertaking is hampered by the 20%-threshold. The Committee of Experts
refers in this respect to the observations and recommendation that it has made above (see under 1.4.2).
748. With regard to the Serbian language, the initial periodical report states that the border police in the
settlement area of the Serbian minority has Serbian-speaking officers. It is, however, not clear whether this is
the result of a specific human resources policy.
749. The Committee of Experts welcomes the information from the Romanian authorities on their efforts
undertaken in the police administration. The state report, however, does not contain any information on the
use of Serbian in the realm of other administrative bodies of the state administration. In order to conclude on
fulfilment or non-fulfilment, the Committee of Experts needs more information on the use of Serbian in local
branches of the state administration. It asks the Romanian authorities to provide such information in the next
periodical report.
Paragraph 2
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who are
users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below, the
Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
...
b

the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written
applications in these languages;

750. According to Articles 2.2 and 8.1-2 of Government Decision no. 1206/2001, citizens belonging to
national minorities have the right to address oral or written requests to local authorities and the local and
county councils and to receive an answer in Romanian and the minority language. The exercise of this right is
linked to the 20%-threshold.
751. According to the initial periodical report, “some authorities of the local public administration in CaraşSeverin and Mehedinţi counties” employ Serbian-speaking officers. In the Caraş-Severin and Timiş counties,
local authorities accept applications submitted by Serbian-speakers in Serbian.
752. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. Considering the problems related
to the 20%-threshold, the Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to allow and/or
encourage the possibility for users of Serbian to submit oral or written applications in this language to local
authorities.
d

the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in the relevant regional
or minority languages;
58

753. According to the Romanian legislation , citizens belonging to national minorities are entitled to be
informed, in their mother tongue, about the agenda of the local council meetings and of the normative and
individual decisions adopted by them. However, the implementation of this possibility is limited to
municipalities where the national minority in question reaches 20% of the population. During the on-the-spot
visit, the Committee of Experts was informed that Serbian is not used by local authorities in practice.
59

754. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to allow and/or encourage the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in
Serbian.

58
Articles 39, 50 and 94.8 of the Law on Local Administration no. 215/2001; Articles 2.2 and 7.1-2 of Government Decision
no. 1206/2001 for approving the Rules for implementing the provisions concerning the right of citizens belonging to national minorities
to use their mother tongue in local government, contained in the Law on Local Administration no. 215/2001.
59
See e.g. 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraphs 482-483.

111

f

the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

755. With regard to the relevant percentage thresholds, the Committee of Experts refers to the
observations and recommendation that it has made above (see under 1.4.2).
756. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to allow and/or encourage the use by local authorities of Serbian in debates in their assemblies.
g

the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official language(s),
of traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or minority languages.

757. With regard to the 20%-threshold, the Committee of Experts refers to the observations and
recommendation that it has made above (see under 1.4.2).
758. As far as Serbian is concerned, the use of place-names in this language seems to be limited to the
place-name signs of several localities in the Caraş-Severin, Mehedinţi and Timiş counties. During the on-thespot visit, representatives of the Serbian speakers confirmed that place-names in Serbian are not used in
other domains, for example on street name signs. However, the Committee of Experts underlines that the term
“place-names” within the meaning of the present undertaking concerns not only the name of the municipality, but
all topographical names (“la toponymie” in the French version of the Charter) of that municipality that can be
officially used, for example in texts produced by the local authority (e.g. documents, forms, public relations
material, websites) or in the signage (e.g. street name signs, signposts and public transport signs, inscriptions
60
for tourists).
759. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It asks the Romanian authorities
to provide more information on the use of place-names in Serbian in the next periodical report.
Paragraph 3
With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting on
their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which regional or minority languages are
used, in accordance with the situation of each language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in the provision of the service;
or

b

to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request and receive a reply in
these languages; or

760. Undertakings a, b and c represent alternative options. As Romania has chosen option a, options b
and c become redundant. In line with its practice, the Committee of Experts will ex officio examine option a
only. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts wishes to emphasise that “public services” refers to services
provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting on their behalf (e.g. railway, urban transport,
electricity, water and gas, cleaning and sanitation, telephone services, refuse collection and disposal,
cemeteries, sporting facilities, entertainment venues).
761. Article 19 of the Law on Local Government no. 215/2001 states that "[i]n the territorial-administrative
units where citizens belonging to national minorities have a share of over 20% of residents, the local
government authorities and public institutions subordinated to them shall ensure their use of decentralized
public services in their mother tongue, according to the Constitution, the present law and international treaties
to which Romania is party." It is not clear to the Committee of Experts whether the “public institutions
subordinated to” local authorities cover public services in conformity with the present Charter provision. Even
if they cover public services, the problem remains that the implementation is linked to the 20%-threshold (see

60

See e.g. 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraph 232.

112

under 1.4.2 above). Besides, there are no indications that this provision has been applied to Serbian in
practice.
762.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled.

The Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to ensure that Serbian is used in the
provision of public services in practice and asks them to clarify the national legal basis for the
implementation of this provision.
Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the
Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
...
b

recruitment and, where necessary, training of the officials and other public service
employees required;

763. Local authorities and county councils with responsibility for a territorial administrative unit where more
than 20% of the population belong to a national minority must also employ staff speaking the minority
language concerned. However, there is no specific information about whether the Serbian language qualifies
for this and how this provision is implemented for Serbian in relevant municipalities where the 20%-threshold
is not met. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to provide information regarding
measures taken in accordance with this provision.
c

compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a
knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that
language is used.

764. The initial periodical report does not contain any information about the implementation of this
undertaking regarding Serbian. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to provide
information regarding measures taken in accordance with this undertaking.
Paragraph 5
The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or minority
languages, at the request of those concerned.
765. The initial periodical report does not contain any information about the implementation of this
undertaking regarding Serbian. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to provide
information regarding measures taken in accordance with this undertaking.
Article 11 – Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in
which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that the
public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this field, and
respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
a

to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:
...
iii to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer programmes in the regional or
minority languages;

113

766. According to the initial periodical report, programmes in Serbian are broadcast by Radio Timişoara
(daily, 840 minutes per week) and Radio Reşiţa (30 minutes per week). During the on-the-spot visit,
representatives of the Serbian speakers stated that the radio programmes in Serbian are broadcast at
unsuitable times which makes it difficult to listen to them. On the other hand, there are plans to extend the
broadcast time in Serbian, which may be an opportunity for the authorities to examine the issue of the
broadcast time with the representatives of the Serbian speakers.
767. However, it is not sufficiently clear from the state report whether TVR3 broadcasts a weekly television
programme in Serbian.
768. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled regarding radio. With regard to
television, the Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to submit specific information in the next
periodical report.
b

...
ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;

769. According to the replies by the Romanian authorities to the questionnaire submitted to them by the
Committee of Experts, “Radio Banat Link” in Timişoara broadcasts a private radio programme in Serbian.
However, there is no additional information available (for example about the duration of the programme and
its target audience). The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to provide more specific
information about the broadcasting of private radio programmes in Serbian in the next periodical report.
c

...
ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;

770. According to the replies by the Romanian authorities to the questionnaire submitted to them by the
Committee of Experts, private television programmes in Serbian are broadcast by “Info TV” in Arad county
and “Alfa Omega TV” in Timişoara. Both programmes have each a duration of one hour per week and cover
cultural topics for different age groups.
771.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
d

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in the regional or minority languages

772. The initial periodical report states that the television channel TVR 3 broadcasts, on a weekly basis, art
films in regional or minority languages with subtitling in Romanian. The exchange of movies is based on cooperation agreements between the public television services of Romania and the respective kin-states. An
agreement with Serbia has been considered as well, but it is not clear whether the agreement has actually
been concluded. No other information about the implementation of this provision for Serbian is available.
773. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to submit more specific information in the next periodical report.
e

i

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one
newspaper in the regional or minority languages; or

774. According to the initial periodical report, there is a weekly newspaper in Serbian. It is published by the
“Union of Serbs of Romania” with the financial support of the Department for Interethnic Relations.
775.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
g

to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using regional or minority
languages.

114

776. According to the initial periodical report, the Romanian authorities organised in 2008 a seminar on
cultural diversity and the media which involved representatives of the national minorities' media. It is not clear
whether media using Serbian attended this seminar and to what extent it can qualify as an activity “supporting
the training of journalists and other staff for media using” Serbian. Furthermore, the private channel “Info TV
Arad” has organised an internal training. The Committee of Experts would need additional information in
order to conclude on fulfilment or non-fulfilment.
777. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to submit more specific information in the next periodical report.
Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television broadcasts
from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority
language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from
neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure that no restrictions will
be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of information in the written press in a
language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of the
above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such
formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a
democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the
prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the
reputation or rights of others, for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for
maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
778. The initial periodical report states that three television channels from Serbia (TVR Serbia, RTSAT and
Pink+) have been included in the RCS-RDS TV cable network in Romania and can be received in the region
where Serbian is used. Furthermore, radio programmes from Serbia can be received in that area.
779.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.

Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to ensure that the interests of the users of regional or minority languages are
represented or taken into account within such bodies as may be established in accordance with the
law with responsibility for guaranteeing the freedom and pluralism of the media.
780. The initial periodical report does not contain relevant information regarding the implementation of this
provision for Serbian. The Committee of Experts is currently not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of
this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to provide specific information in the next periodical
report.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural centres,
museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production,
vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries, including inter alia the
use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are
used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this
field:
a

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority languages
and foster the different means of access to works produced in these languages;

781. According to the initial periodical report, the Romanian authorities have provided financial support
inter alia to the publication of books in Serbian (including an “Anthology of Serbian Literature”), literature
festivals, song festivals, the Serbian Culture Day and theatre activities in Serbian. During the on-the-spot visit,
representatives of the Serbian speakers expressed their satisfaction with this support.

115

782.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
b

to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in regional
or minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, postsynchronisation and subtitling activities;

783. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Serbian language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.
c

to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages
by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling
activities;

784. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Serbian language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.
d

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of
various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of
regional or minority languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for
which they provide backing;

785. Most cultural activities promoting the Serbian language are carried out by the state-funded “Union of
the Serbs of Romania”. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
e

to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting
cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of the regional or
minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest of the population;

786. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination under Article 12.1.d, which applies accordingly.
The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
f

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or
minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

787. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination under Article 12.1.d, which applies accordingly.
The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
g

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for collecting,
keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the regional or
minority languages;

788. According to the replies by the Romanian authorities to the questionnaire submitted to them by the
Committee of Experts, the National Library of Romania keeps copies of documents of the national minorities.
The Committee of Experts notes, however, that the scope of this provision extends beyond the collection
activities usually carried out by national libraries. It asks the Romanian authorities to submit information
concerning audiovisual materials and publication of works in Serbian in the next periodical report.
h

if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and terminological
research services, particularly with a view to maintaining and developing appropriate
administrative, commercial, economic, social, technical or legal terminology in each
regional or minority language.

789. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information concerning the application of this
provision to the Serbian language.

116

790. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to submit the relevant information, especially commenting on any need to
develop necessary terminology in Serbian, in the next periodical report.
Paragraph 2
In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are traditionally
used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to
allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in accordance with the
preceding paragraph.
791. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Serbian language. Nevertheless, the Committee of Experts is aware
that the Romanian authorities regularly support several cultural activities which bring together some or all
national minorities. These activities include the annual festival “ProEtnica” in Sighișoara/Schäßburg, the
Minority Theatre Festival, the National Minorities Day, the Interethnic Film Festival, the documentary film
festival “Alternative” (in Târgu Mureș/Marosvásárhely/Neumarkt) and the rock music festival “Felsiget”
(ibidem). These events may be relevant under this provision if the Serbian language has benefited from them
and if the events have taken place outside the area where Serbian is traditionally used. The Committee of
Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify this in the next periodical report or to provide information on
other relevant activities.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for
regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.
792. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Serbian language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.
Article 13 – Economic and social life
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole country:
a

to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without justifiable
reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to economic or
social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical documents such as
instructions for the use of products or installations;

793. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information concerning the application of this
provision to the Serbian language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a position to conclude on the
fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such information in the next
periodical report.
b

to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of companies and private documents of
any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or minority languages, at least
between users of the same language;

794. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Serbian language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.

117

Article 14 – Transfrontier exchanges
The Parties undertake:
a

to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the States in
which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if necessary to seek to
conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster contacts between the users of the
same language in the States concerned in the fields of culture, education, information,
vocational training and permanent education;

795. According to the initial periodical report, the 1996 Treaty on Friendship, Good Neighbourhood and Cooperation between Romania and the (former) Federal Republic of Yugoslavia provides for language and
literature exchanges. On the basis of this treaty, lecturers from Serbia are employed at the departments of
Slavic languages at the Universities of Bucharest and Timişoara. Furthermore, cross-border programmes are
broadcast by Radio Timişoara twice per month in Serbian, Romanian and Hungarian, with the participation of
the cities of Subotica/Szabadka (Serbia), Szeged (Hungary) and Timişoara.
796.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
b

for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or promote co-operation
across borders, in particular between regional or local authorities in whose territory the
same language is used in identical or similar form.

797. The information provided in the initial periodical report deals with cross-border co-operation with
Serbia in general but does not contain sufficient detailed information regarding these activities.
798. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to submit any specific information in the next periodical report.
2.2.8. Slovak
Article 8 – Education
General issues
799. With regard to the Slovak language, Romania has ratified Articles 8.1.a.i, b.i and c.i which put an
obligation on the state party to provide minority-language education irrespective of prior demand by parents
or students. In practice, however, a minimum number of parents or pupils have to demand the provision of
minority-language education. The undertakings chosen oblige the Romanian authorities to provide an offer of
minority language education throughout the whole language area. This does not preclude the possibility of not
establishing specific classes in minority languages if there are too few pupils. The Committee of Experts
refers in this respect to its observations and recommendation under 1.4.3 above, which apply to Slovak
accordingly.
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are
used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of
the official language(s) of the State:
a

i

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages;
or

800. According to the initial periodical report, 266 children attend kindergartens in the Arad and Bihor
counties which provide pre-school education in Slovak.
801.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
b

i

to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

118

802. According to the initial periodical report, 272 pupils attend primary schools teaching in Slovak. These
schools use textbooks specifically developed for Slovak-medium education.
803.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
c

i

to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority languages;
or

804. According to the initial periodical report, 273 students (gymnasium) and 220 students (high school)
attend secondary education in Slovak. These schools use textbooks specifically developed for Slovakmedium education.
805.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
d

i

to make available technical and vocational education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of technical and vocational education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or

iii

to provide, within technical and vocational education, for the teaching of the relevant regional
or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

iv to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils
who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered sufficient;
806. The initial periodical report does not contain any information about the implementation of this
provision for Slovak. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this
undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information about its
implementation.
e

...
ii

to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher
education subjects; or

807. According to the initial periodical report, Slovak can be studied at the Faculty of Foreign Languages
and Literatures of the University of Bucharest (Department of Slovak language and literature).
808.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
g

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is
reflected by the regional or minority language;

809. The Committee of Experts notes that the present undertaking concerns not only education for pupils
using a minority language, but also education for non-speakers about the specific history and traditions
related to the minority language spoken in the relevant territory. This normally entails including elements of
the history and culture which is reflected by the minority language in the national curriculum, or at least in the
61
curriculum for all pupils within the territories concerned.
810. According to the initial periodical report, the subject “History and traditions of Slovak minority” is
taught at grades 6-7 on the basis of a special textbook developed in co-operation with the Slovak speakers.
811. It is, however, not clear to the Committee of Experts to what extent also non-speakers of Slovak
benefit from the teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected by the Slovak language. In their
replies to the Committee of Experts’ questionnaire, the Romanian authorities refer to a new optional subject
“History of National Minorities” which is taught in the tenth grade at 40 high schools in Romania. Furthermore,
owing to the revision of the Law on National Education in 2011, new history and geography textbooks will be

61

See for example 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of Croatia, ECRML2005(3), paragraph 100; 2nd Report of the
Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML2009(6), paragraph 322.

119

published and reflect the history and traditions of the national minorities. The Committee of Experts
commends the Romanian authorities on these positive initiatives and looks forward to receiving additional
information in the next periodical report.
812. The Committee of Experts is currently not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this
undertaking. It asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information on
whether also non-speakers benefit from the teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected by the
Slovak language.
h

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of
paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;

813. According to the initial periodical report, the basic training of Slovak teachers is carried out at the
Faculty of Foreign Languages and Literatures of the University of Bucharest (Department of Slovak language
and literature). Furthermore, further training of the teachers of the schools teaching in Slovak is carried out by
the county school inspectorates and the teaching method centre of the University of Banská Bystrica,
Slovakia.
814.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken
and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority
languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be made
public.

815. According to the initial periodical report, teaching method specialists have been appointed in the Arad,
Bihor and Sălaj counties with a view to monitoring Slovak language education. Furthermore, for each minority
in Romania there are national committees and working groups that co-operate with the authorities to develop
the curricula and teaching materials. It appears, however, that no periodic report on the measures taken and
progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of Slovak has been drawn up.
62

816. In light of the above, the Committee of Experts underlines that this undertaking requires a
supervisory body or bodies dedicated to looking into minority language education. This body can be an
existing body, or a newly established body covering one or several minority languages, which monitors the
measures taken and progress achieved in minority language education and produces and publishes periodical
reports.
817. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to provide additional information in the next periodical report.
Paragraph 2
With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the regional or
minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional
or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the regional or
minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.
818. According to the initial periodical report, the number of Slovak speakers in areas where Slovak has no
traditional presence does not justify teaching in/of Slovak. Given that Romania has ratified this undertaking,
the Committee of Experts nonetheless considers that the Romanian authorities should, in co-operation with
the representatives of the Slovak speakers, take steps with a view to achieving at least a certain level of
fulfilment.
819. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to provide information on whether it is feasible to provide teaching in or of Slovak also in areas
where this language has not been traditionally used.

62

See e.g. 1st Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the United Kingdom, ECRML(2004)1, paragraph 131.

120

Article 9 – Judicial authorities
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents using
the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to the situation
of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the present
paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of justice:
a

in criminal proceedings:
...
ii

to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or minority language;
and/or

820. According to Article 128.2 of the Romanian Constitution, “Romanian citizens belonging to national
minorities have the right to express themselves in their mother tongue before the courts of law (…)”.
Furthermore, Article 14 of Law no. 304/2004 on the Judicial System stipulates the right of citizens belonging
to national minorities to express themselves in their own language before courts (paragraph 2). “Where one
or more parties require expressing themselves in their own language, the court shall provide, free of charge,
an authorised interpreter or translator” (paragraph 3). However, the Romanian authorities state in the initial
periodical report that they have no information about the implementation of this undertaking for Slovak in
practice.
821. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It asks the Romanian
authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information about its practical implementation
concerning Slovak.
a

iii to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not be considered
inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a regional or minority language;
and/or

822. According to Article 14.5 of Law no. 304/2004 on the Judicial System, “[a]pplications and procedural
provisions shall be made only in Romanian.” Furthermore, Article 128.1-2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
foresees the free use of an interpreter and the translation of documents only in cases where the party
concerned “does not speak Romanian”.
823. The Committee of Experts understands that “applications” in accordance with Article 14.5 of Law on
the Judicial System cover “requests” within the meaning of this Charter provision, which makes requests in a
minority language inadmissible. In addition, written or oral evidence can only be delivered if the person
concerned does not master Romanian. However, Article 9.1.a.iii of the Charter applies irrespective of whether
a party speaks Romanian, especially since most persons belonging to national minorities in Romania do
speak the majority language. Limiting the possibility to deliver written or oral evidence to persons who do not
speak Romanian would render this undertaking meaningless in most cases. On the other hand, the
Committee of Experts observes that Romanian legislation does not contain this restriction with regard to the
right of the accused to use a minority language (see Article 9.1.a.ii above).
824. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify, in the next periodical report,
whether the legal set-up allows in practice that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, may be
produced in Slovak.
b

in civil proceedings:
...
ii

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she
may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional
expense; and/or
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

121

825. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.ii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
826. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It asks the Romanian
authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information about the practical implementation of
this undertaking for Slovak.
b

iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

827. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.iii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
828. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify, in the next periodical report,
whether the legal set-up allows in practice that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, may be
produced in Slovak.
c

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
...
ii

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she
may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional
expense; and/or
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

829. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.ii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
830. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It asks the Romanian
authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information about the practical implementation of
this undertaking concerning Slovak.
c

iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

831. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.iii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
832. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify, in the next periodical report,
whether the legal set-up allows in practice that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, may be
produced in Slovak.
d

to take steps to ensure that the application of sub-paragraphs i and iii of paragraphs b
and c above and any necessary use of interpreters and translations does not involve extra
expense for the persons concerned.

833. In light of the conclusions reached regarding sub-paragraph iii of paragraphs b and c above, the
Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking.
Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake:
a

not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because they
are drafted in a regional or minority language; or

834. The initial periodical report does not contain any information about the implementation of this
undertaking.

122

835. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information about its implementation.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or minority languages the most important
national statutory texts and those relating particularly to users of these languages, unless they are
otherwise provided.
836. According to the replies submitted by the Romanian authorities to the Committee of Experts’
questionnaire, this provision is only implemented for Hungarian.
837. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to make available in Slovak the most important national statutory texts and those relating
particularly to users of this language, unless they are otherwise provided.
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
838. The Committee of Experts has not received any detailed information concerning the demographical
situation of the Slovak national minority at local level. From the initial periodical report (p. 80), it appears that
the Slovak minority reaches the 20%-threshold in at least one locality. The Committee of Experts asks the
Romanian authorities to submit, in the next periodical report, a list of the localities where the Slovak speakers
live in numbers relevant for the purposes of Article 10, keeping in mind its recommendation regarding the
20%-threshold (see under 1.4.2).
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of
regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the situation
of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

...
ii

to ensure that such of their officers as are in contact with the public use the regional
or minority languages in their relations with persons applying to them in these
languages; or

iii to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written
applications and receive a reply in these languages; or
iv to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written
applications in these languages; or
v

839.

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document
in these languages;

Article 10.1 concerns local branches of the central State authorities.

840. Provisions a.ii – a.v represent alternative options. As Romania has chosen option a.ii, options a.iii,
a.iv and a.v become redundant. In line with its practice, the Committee of Experts will ex officio examine
option a.ii only.
841. The implementation of this undertaking is hampered by the 20%-threshold. The Committee of Experts
refers in this respect to the observations and recommendation that it has made above (see under 1.4.2).
842. With regard to the Slovak language, the initial periodical report states that the border police in the
Slovak language area has staff who can speak Slovak. It is, however, not clear whether this is the result of a
specific human resources policy.

123

843. The Committee of Experts welcomes the information from the Romanian authorities on their efforts
undertaken in the police administration. The state report, however, does not contain any information on the
use of Slovak in the realm of other administrative bodies of the state administration. In order to conclude on
fulfilment or non-fulfilment, the Committee of Experts needs more information on the use of Slovak in local
branches of the state administration. It asks the Romanian authorities to provide such information in the next
periodical report.
Paragraph 2
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who are
users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below, the
Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
...
b

the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written
applications in these languages;

844. According to Articles 2.2 and 8.1-2 of Government Decision no. 1206/2001, citizens belonging to
national minorities have the right to address oral or written requests to local authorities and the local and
county councils and to receive an answer in Romanian and the minority language. The exercise of this right is
linked to the 20%-threshold.
845. With regard to Slovak, the initial periodical report limits itself to stating that local authorities in the Arad
and Bihor counties have replied in Slovak to applications submitted to them in this language. As this
information is very general, the Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to submit more precise
information about the practical implementation in the next periodical report.
63

846. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to allow and/or encourage the possibility for users of Slovak to submit oral or written applications
in this language to local authorities. Considering the problems related to the 20%-threshold, the Committee of
Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to allow and/or encourage the possibility for users of Slovak to
submit oral or written applications in this language to local authorities.
d

the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in the relevant regional
or minority languages;
64

847. According to the Romanian legislation , citizens belonging to national minorities are entitled to be
informed, in their mother tongue, about the agenda of the local council meetings and of the normative and
individual decisions adopted by them. However, the implementation of this possibility is limited to
municipalities where the national minority in question reaches 20% of the population. In addition, the
Committee of Experts has no indications that it is exercised in practice.
65

848. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to allow and/or encourage the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in
Slovak.
f

the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

849. With regard to the relevant percentage thresholds, the Committee of Experts refers to the
observations and recommendation that it has made above (see under 1.4.2).
850. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to allow and/or encourage the use by local authorities of Slovak in debates in their assemblies.

63

See e.g. 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraphs 479-480.
Articles 39, 50 and 94.8 of the Law on Local Administration no. 215/2001; Articles 2.2 and 7.1-2 of Government Decision
no. 1206/2001 for approving the Rules for implementing the provisions concerning the right of citizens belonging to national minorities
to use their mother tongue in local government, contained in the Law on Local Administration no. 215/2001.
65
See e.g. 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraphs 482-483.
64

124

g

the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official language(s),
of traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or minority languages.

851. With regard to the 20%-threshold, the Committee of Experts refers to the observations and
recommendation that it has made above (see under 1.4.2).
852. As far as Slovak is concerned, the use of place-names in this language seems to be limited to placename signs, for example in Nădlac/Nadlak (Arad county) and Budoi/Bodonoš (Bihor county). However, the
Committee of Experts underlines that the term “place-names” within the meaning of the present undertaking
concerns not only the name of the municipality, but all topographical names (“la toponymie” in the French
version of the Charter) of that municipality that can be officially used, for example in texts produced by the local
authority (e.g. documents, forms, public relations material, websites) or in the signage (e.g. street name signs,
66
signposts and public transport signs, inscriptions for tourists).
853. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It asks the Romanian authorities
to provide more information on the use of place-names in Slovak in the next periodical report.
Paragraph 3
With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting on
their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which regional or minority languages are
used, in accordance with the situation of each language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in the provision of the service;
or

b

to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request and receive a reply in
these languages; or

854. Undertakings a, b and c represent alternative options. As Romania has chosen option a, options b
and c become redundant. In line with its practice, the Committee of Experts will ex officio examine option a
only. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts wishes to emphasise that “public services” refers to services
provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting on their behalf (e.g. railway, urban transport,
electricity, water and gas, cleaning and sanitation, telephone services, refuse collection and disposal,
cemeteries, sporting facilities, entertainment venues).
855. Article 19 of the Law on Local Government no. 215/2001 states that "[i]n the territorial-administrative
units where citizens belonging to national minorities have a share of over 20% of residents, the local
government authorities and public institutions subordinated to them shall ensure their use of decentralized
public services in their mother tongue, according to the Constitution, the present law and international treaties
to which Romania is party." It is not clear to the Committee of Experts whether the “public institutions
subordinated to” local authorities cover public services in conformity with the present Charter provision. Even
if they cover public services, the problem remains that the implementation is linked to the 20%-threshold (see
under 1.4.2 above). Besides, there are no indications that this provision has been applied to Slovak in
practice.
856.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled.

The Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to ensure that Slovak is used in the
provision of public services in practice and asks them to clarify the national legal basis for the
implementation of this provision.

66

See e.g. 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraph 232.

125

Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the
Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
...
b

recruitment and, where necessary, training of the officials and other public service
employees required;

857. Local authorities and county councils with responsibility for a territorial administrative unit where more
than 20% of the population belong to a national minority must also employ staff speaking the minority
language concerned. However, there is no specific information about whether the Slovak language qualifies
for this and how this provision is implemented for Slovak in relevant municipalities where the 20%-threshold
is not met. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to provide information regarding
measures taken in accordance with this provision.
c

compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a
knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that
language is used.

858. The initial periodical report does not contain any information about the implementation of this
undertaking regarding Slovak. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to provide
information regarding measures taken in accordance with this undertaking.
Paragraph 5
The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or minority
languages, at the request of those concerned.
859. The initial periodical report does not contain any information about the implementation of this
undertaking. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a position to conclude on its fulfilment and asks the
Romanian authorities to submit the relevant information in the next periodical report.
Article 11 – Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in
which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that the
public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this field, and
respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
a

to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:
...
iii to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer programmes in the regional or
minority languages;

860. According to the initial periodical report, public radio programmes in Slovak are broadcast by Radio
Re i a (30 minutes weekly) and Radio Timişoara (one hour each Sunday). There are plans to extend the
radio broadcast time in Slovak. The Committee of Experts welcomes these plans and asks the Romanian
authorities to report about the development in the next periodical report.
861.

On television, TVR3 broadcasts a weekly programme in Slovak with a duration of nine minutes.

126

862. The Committee of Experts notes that the duration of the radio programmes in Slovak is too short in
light of the number of Slovak speakers. Furthermore, the very limited presence of Slovak on television is merely
67
symbolical, which reduces the effectiveness and attractiveness of this broadcasting. The Committee of
Experts reiterates the great importance of the electronic media for the promotion of minority languages in
modern societies. In particular, a substantial presence of a minority language on radio and television can
enhance considerably its social prestige.
863.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled.

The Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to extend the duration of radio and
television broadcasts in Slovak.
b

...
ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;

864. According to the replies by the Romanian authorities to the questionnaire submitted to them by the
Committee of Experts, Radio Transilvania broadcasts 55 minutes per week in Slovak. The programme
addresses different generations, but covers only a limited geographical area in Bihor county.
865. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in Slovak also in other areas
where Slovak is used, including Arad county.
c

...
ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;

866. It appears from the replies by the Romanian authorities to the questionnaire submitted to them by the
Committee of Experts that there are no private television programmes in Slovak.
867. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to facilitate the broadcasting of private radio programmes in Slovak on a regular basis.
d

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in the regional or minority languages

868. The initial periodical report states that the television channel TVR 3 broadcasts, on a weekly basis, an
art film from Slovakia with subtitling in Romanian. The exchange of movies has been agreed in the
framework of a co-operation agreement between the public television services of Romania and Slovakia.
There is no additional information about the application of this provision to Slovak.
869. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It asks the Romanian authorities
to submit, in their next periodical report, additional information about measures taken to encourage and/or
facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual works in Slovak.
e

i

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one
newspaper in the regional or minority languages; or

870. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Slovak language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.
g

67

to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using regional or minority
languages.

See 2nd Evaluation Report on the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraph 800.

127

871. According to the initial periodical report, the Faculty of Journalism in Bratislava (Slovakia) offers
courses for journalists from Slovak minorities. Two journalists from Romania have attended such training,
with financial assistance from the “Democratic Union of the Slovaks and Czechs of Romania”. The
Committee of Experts notes, however, that this number is relatively low. Furthermore, there is no information
about how the Romanian authorities have trained other staff for media using Slovak.
872. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It asks the Romanian authorities
to provide, in the next periodical report, additional information as to how they support the training of
journalists and other staff for media using Slovak.
Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television broadcasts
from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority
language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from
neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure that no restrictions will
be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of information in the written press in a
language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of the
above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such
formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a
democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the
prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the
reputation or rights of others, for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for
maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
873. The initial periodical report refers to the European Union’s Audiovisual Media Services Directive
2007/65/EC which ensures freedom of reception and retransmissions of audiovisual media services from
other EU states. As regards the Slovak language, broadcasts from Slovakia are received in the area where
Slovak is used.
874.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.

Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to ensure that the interests of the users of regional or minority languages are
represented or taken into account within such bodies as may be established in accordance with the
law with responsibility for guaranteeing the freedom and pluralism of the media.
875. The initial periodical report limits itself to stating that “the national minorities are generally represented
in such structures.” However, the Committee of Experts would need more specific information about how the
Romanian authorities ensure that the interests of the users of Slovak are represented or taken into account
within the relevant bodies.
876. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to submit more specific information about the application of this provision to
Slovak in the next periodical report.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural centres,
museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production,
vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries, including inter alia the
use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are
used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this
field:
a

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority languages
and foster the different means of access to works produced in these languages;

128

877. According to the initial periodical report, the “Democratic Union of Slovaks and Czechs of Romania”
receives financial support from the Romanian authorities to cover also cultural activities in Slovak. The
Democratic Union’s main publication is the monthly cultural magazine “Naše snahy”, which is bilingual
(Slovak and Czech) and has a summary in Romanian. The magazine includes political information, articles of
general interest, short stories, poems and studies. It has a supplement (“Naše snahy plus”) which is a
quarterly literary magazine in Slovak and Czech. Furthermore, there is a school magazine published in
Slovak. In 2008, five books in Slovak were published, and local libraries have books in Slovak. The Slovak
language is also used by an amateur theatre and during festivals.
878.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
b

to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in regional
or minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, postsynchronisation and subtitling activities;

879. According to the initial periodical report, the Ivan Krasko Society has translated literary works from
Slovak into Romanian. It is, however, not clear to the Committee of Experts how the Romanian authorities
contribute to the activities of this society and how many translations or other activities relevant under this
provision (dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities) have been carried out in the reporting
period.
880. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to submit more specific information in the next periodical report.
c

to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages
by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling
activities;

881. According to the initial periodical report, the Ivan Krasko Society has translated literary works from
Romanian into Slovak. The Committee of Experts refers to its remarks under Article 12.1.b.
882. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to submit more specific information in the next periodical report.
d

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of
various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of
regional or minority languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for
which they provide backing;

883. Most cultural activities promoting the Slovak language are carried out by the state-funded
“Democratic Union of Slovaks and Czechs of Romania”. The Committee of Experts considers this
undertaking fulfilled.
e

to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting
cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of the regional or
minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest of the population;

884. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination under Article 12.1.d, which applies accordingly.
The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
f

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or
minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

885. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination under Article 12.1.d, which applies accordingly.
The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
g

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for collecting,
keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the regional or
minority languages;

886. The initial periodical report does not provide any specific information about this undertaking, but
states generally that there is a Slovak ethnographic museum in Nădlac/Nadlak. It is not clear to the
Committee of Experts whether this institution performs tasks relevant under this provision.

129

887. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to submit more specific information in the next periodical report.
h

if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and terminological
research services, particularly with a view to maintaining and developing appropriate
administrative, commercial, economic, social, technical or legal terminology in each
regional or minority language.

888. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information concerning the application of this
provision to the Slovak language.
889. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to submit the relevant information, especially commenting on any need to
develop necessary terminology in Slovak, in the next periodical report.
Paragraph 2
In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are traditionally
used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to
allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in accordance with the
preceding paragraph.
890. According to the initial periodical report, Slovak is not used outside its traditional language area.
Considering that Romania has ratified this provision for Slovak, the Committee of Experts encourages the
Romanian authorities to consult the representatives of the Slovak speakers about how this provision should
be implemented. Besides, the Committee of Experts is aware that the Romanian authorities regularly support
several cultural activities which bring together some or all national minorities. These activities include the
annual festival “ProEtnica” in Sighi oara/Schäßburg, the Minority Theatre Festival, the National Minorities
Day, the Interethnic Film Festival, the documentary film festival “Alternative” (in Târgu
Mure /Marosvásárhely/Neumarkt) and the rock music festival “Felsiget” (ibidem). These events may be
relevant under this provision if the Slovak language has benefited from them and if the events have taken
place outside the area where Slovak is traditionally used. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian
authorities to clarify this in the next periodical report or to provide information on other relevant activities.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for
regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.
891. The initial periodical report does not contain any relevant information concerning the application of
this provision to the Slovak language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a position to conclude on
the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such information in the next
periodical report.
Article 13 – Economic and social life
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole country:
a

to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without justifiable
reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to economic or
social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical documents such as
instructions for the use of products or installations;

892. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information concerning the application of this
provision to the Slovak language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a position to conclude on the
fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such information in the next
periodical report.

130

b

to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of companies and private documents of
any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or minority languages, at least
between users of the same language;

893. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information concerning the application of this
provision to the Slovak language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a position to conclude on the
fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such information in the next
periodical report.
Article 14 – Transfrontier exchanges
The Parties undertake:
a

to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the States in
which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if necessary to seek to
conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster contacts between the users of the
same language in the States concerned in the fields of culture, education, information,
vocational training and permanent education;

894. The initial periodical report states that, pursuant to the “Inter-Ministerial Co-operation Programme in
the Domain of Education” concluded between Romania and Slovakia, further training in Slovakia is organised
every year for 25 teachers from the schools teaching in Slovak. Based on the same programme, three
teachers from Slovakia work at schools of the Slovak minority in Romania. Furthermore, the 2006–2008
Cultural Co-operation Programme between Romania and Slovakia provided inter alia for the organisation of
the Slovak Cultural Week, cultural projects, the maintenance of the cultural heritage of the Slovak minority in
Romania, co-operation between publishing houses and the editor offices of cultural magazines, translations
and co-operation between libraries.
895.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
b

for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or promote co-operation
across borders, in particular between regional or local authorities in whose territory the
same language is used in identical or similar form.

896. The initial periodical report refers in a general way to cross-border co-operation, for example within
the Euroregion “Carpatica”, but does not specify what measures have been carried out by regional or local
authorities to the benefit of the Slovak language.
897. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to submit such information in the next periodical report.
2.2.9. Turkish
Article 8 – Education
General issues
898. With regard to the Turkish language, Romania has ratified Articles 8.1.a.i, b.i and c.i which put an
obligation on the state party to provide minority-language education irrespective of prior demand by parents
or students. In practice, however, a minimum number of parents or pupils have to demand the provision of
minority-language education. The undertakings chosen oblige the Romanian authorities to provide an offer of
minority language education throughout the whole language area. This does not preclude the possibility of not
establishing specific classes in minority languages if there are too few pupils. The Committee of Experts
refers in this respect to its observations and recommendation under 1.4.3 above, which apply to Turkish
accordingly.
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are
used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of
the official language(s) of the State:

131

a

i

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages;
or

899. According to the initial periodical report, two bilingual kindergartens in Constanţa and Medgidia use
Turkish.
900. However, the Committee of Experts notes that the present undertaking requires that pre-school
education in the regional or minority language is made available. This implies the provision of education
essentially with the regional or minority language as the medium of instruction. Organising a substantial part
of pre-school education in the regional or minority language, as seems to be the case in the aforementioned
bilingual kindergartens, is not sufficient because this educational model is covered by the less demanding
undertaking under Article 8.1.a.ii that Romania has not ratified.
901. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts considers that the number of only two kindergartens does not
adequately correspond to the number of Turkish speakers in Romania.
902. In light of the obligation entered into by Romania, the Committee of Experts considers this
undertaking not fulfilled.
The Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to explore, in co-operation with
representatives of the Turkish speakers, the situation of pre-school education in Turkish in order to
make available pre-school education in this language.
b

i

to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

903. According to the initial periodical report, partial teaching in Turkish is organised at four grades of a
primary school whose general medium of instruction is Romanian.
904. However, the Committee of Experts notes that the present undertaking requires that primary
education in the regional or minority language is made available. This implies the provision of education
essentially with the regional or minority language as the medium of instruction. Organising partial teaching in
the regional or minority language is not sufficient because this educational model is covered by the less
demanding undertaking under Article 8.1.b.ii that Romania has not ratified.
905. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts considers that the number of only one primary school using
Turkish does not adequately correspond to the number of Turkish speakers in Romania.
906. In light of the obligation entered into by Romania, the Committee of Experts considers this
undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian authorities to make available primary education in
Turkish.
The Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to explore, in co-operation with
representatives of the Turkish speakers, the situation of primary education in Turkish in order to
make available primary education in this language.
c

i

to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority languages;
or

907. According to the initial periodical report, partial teaching in Turkish is organised at a secondary school
and a high school. At both schools, the general medium of instruction is Romanian.
908. However, the Committee of Experts notes that the present undertaking requires that secondary
education in the regional or minority language is made available. This implies the provision of education
essentially with the regional or minority language as the medium of instruction. Organising partial teaching in
the regional or minority language is not sufficient because this educational model is covered by the less
demanding undertaking under Article 8.1.c.ii that Romania has not ratified.
909. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts considers that the number of only two secondary schools
using Turkish does not adequately correspond to the number of Turkish speakers in Romania.

132

11

910. In light of the obligation entered into by Romania , the Committee of Experts considers this
undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian authorities to make available secondary education in
Turkish.
The Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to explore, in co-operation with
representatives of the Turkish speakers, the situation of secondary education in Turkish in order to
make available secondary education in this language.
d

i

to make available technical and vocational education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of technical and vocational education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or

iii

to provide, within technical and vocational education, for the teaching of the relevant regional
or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

iv to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils
who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered sufficient;
911. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information about the implementation of this
provision for Turkish. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this
undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information about its
implementation.
e

...
ii

to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher
education subjects; or

912. According to the initial periodical report, Turkish can be studied at the universities of Constanţa and
Bucharest.
913.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
f

...
iii if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult education, to
favour and/or encourage the offering of such languages as subjects of adult and
continuing education;

914. The initial periodical report does not contain any information about the implementation of this
provision for Turkish. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this
undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information about its
implementation.
g

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is
reflected by the regional or minority language;

915. The Committee of Experts notes that the present undertaking concerns not only education for pupils
using a minority language, but also education for non-speakers about the specific history and traditions
related to the minority language spoken in the relevant territory. This normally entails including elements of
the history and culture which is reflected by the minority language in the national curriculum, or at least in the
68
curriculum for all pupils within the territories concerned.
916. According to the initial periodical report, there exists a textbook and curriculum for the “History and
traditions of the Turkish minority”.

68

See for example 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of Croatia, ECRML2005(3), paragraph 100; 2nd Report of the
Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML2009(6), paragraph 322.

133

917. It is, however, not clear to the Committee of Experts to what extent also non-speakers of Turkish
benefit from the teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected by the Turkish language. In their
replies to the Committee of Experts’ questionnaire, the Romanian authorities refer to a new optional subject
“History of National Minorities” which is taught in the tenth grade at 40 high schools in Romania. Furthermore,
owing to the revision of the Law on National Education in 2011, new history and geography textbooks will be
published and reflect the history and traditions of the national minorities. The Committee of Experts
commends the Romanian authorities on these positive initiatives and looks forward to receiving additional
information in the next periodical report.
918. The Committee of Experts is currently not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this
undertaking. It asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information on
whether also non-speakers benefit from the teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected by the
Turkish language.
h

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of
paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;

919. According to the initial periodical report, the basic training of Turkish teachers is provided by the
Kemal Atatürk National College Medgidia and by the Bucharest and Constanţa universities. Further training of
Turkish teachers is provided by the schools where they teach. Moreover, the umbrella association of the
Turkish minority, the “Turkish Democratic Union in Romania”, organises further training in Romania and
Turkey. In light of its conclusions with regard to Articles 8.1.a-c above, the Committee of Experts notes,
however, that the Romanian authorities do not yet provide for the training of teachers for schools that could
teach essentially in Turkish.
920.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled.

The Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to provide the basic and further
training of teachers who would be able to teach in Turkish.
i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken
and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority
languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be made
public.

921. According to the initial periodical report, a school inspector at the school inspectorate of Constanţa
county monitors the application of the legislation concerning Turkish language education, proposes strategies
on intercultural education development and assesses the need of teacher training. Furthermore, for each
minority there are national committees and working groups that co-operate with the authorities to develop the
curricula and teaching materials. It appears, however, that no periodic report on the measures taken and
progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of Turkish has been drawn up.
69

922. In light of the above, the Committee of Experts underlines that this undertaking requires a
supervisory body or bodies dedicated to looking into minority language education. This body can be an
existing body, or a newly established body covering one or several minority languages, which monitors the
measures taken and progress achieved in minority language education and produces and publishes periodical
reports.
923. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to provide additional information in the next periodical report.
Paragraph 2
With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the regional or
minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional
or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the regional or
minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.

69

See e.g. 1st Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the United Kingdom, ECRML(2004)1, paragraph 131.

134

924. In the initial periodical report, no relevant information on the undertaking was given by the Romanian
authorities.
925. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking. It asks
the Romanian authorities to provide additional information on whether there are sufficient numbers of Turkish
speaking children in areas outside Dobruja that would justify teaching in or of Turkish and to what degree the
needs of these children are taken care of in the educational system.
Article 9 – Judicial authorities
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents using
the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to the situation
of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the present
paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of justice:
a

in criminal proceedings:
...
ii

to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or minority language;
and/or

926. According to Article 128.2 of the Romanian Constitution, “Romanian citizens belonging to national
minorities have the right to express themselves in their mother tongue before the courts of law (…)”.
Furthermore, Article 14 of Law no. 304/2004 on the Judicial System stipulates the right of citizens belonging
to national minorities to express themselves in their own language before courts (paragraph 2). “Where one
or more parties require expressing themselves in their own language, the court shall provide, free of charge,
an authorised interpreter or translator” (paragraph 3). However, the Romanian authorities state in the initial
periodical report that they have no information about the implementation of this undertaking for Turkish in
practice.
927. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It asks the Romanian
authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information about its practical implementation
concerning Turkish.
a

iii to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not be considered
inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a regional or minority language;
and/or

928. According to Article 14.5 of Law no. 304/2004 on the Judicial System, “[a]pplications and procedural
provisions shall be made only in Romanian.” Furthermore, Article 128.1-2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
foresees the free use of an interpreter and the translation of documents only in cases where the party
concerned “does not speak Romanian”.
929. The Committee of Experts understands that “applications” in accordance with Article 14.5 of Law on
the Judicial System cover “requests” within the meaning of this Charter provision, which makes requests in a
minority language inadmissible. In addition, written or oral evidence can only be delivered if the person
concerned does not master Romanian. However, Article 9.1.a.iii of the Charter applies irrespective of whether
a party speaks Romanian, especially since most persons belonging to national minorities in Romania do
speak the majority language. Limiting the possibility to deliver written or oral evidence to persons who do not
speak Romanian would render this undertaking meaningless in most cases. On the other hand, the
Committee of Experts observes that Romanian legislation does not contain this restriction with regard to the
right of the accused to use a minority language (see Article 9.1.a.ii above).
930. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify, in the next periodical report,
whether the legal set-up allows in practice that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, may be
produced in Turkish.

135

b

in civil proceedings:
...
ii

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she
may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional
expense; and/or
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

931. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.ii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
932. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It asks the Romanian
authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information about the practical implementation of
this undertaking for Turkish.
b

iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

933. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.iii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
934. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify, in the next periodical report,
whether the legal set-up allows in practice that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, may be
produced in Turkish.
c

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
...
ii

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she
may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional
expense; and/or
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

935. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.ii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
936. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It asks the Romanian
authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information about the practical implementation of
this undertaking concerning Turkish.
c

iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

937. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.iii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
938. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify, in the next periodical report,
whether the legal set-up allows in practice that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, may be
produced in Turkish.
d

to take steps to ensure that the application of sub-paragraphs i and iii of paragraphs b
and c above and any necessary use of interpreters and translations does not involve extra
expense for the persons concerned.

136

939. In light of the conclusions reached regarding sub-paragraph iii of paragraphs b and c above, the
Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking.
Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake:
a

not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because they
are drafted in a regional or minority language; or

940. The initial periodical report does not contain any information about the implementation of this
undertaking.
941. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information about its implementation.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or minority languages the most important
national statutory texts and those relating particularly to users of these languages, unless they are
otherwise provided.
942. According to the replies submitted by the Romanian authorities to the Committee of Experts’
questionnaire, this provision is only implemented for Hungarian.
943. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to make available in Turkish the most important national statutory texts and those relating
particularly to users of this language, unless they are otherwise provided.
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
944. The Committee of Experts has not received detailed information concerning the demographical
situation of the Turkish national minority at local level, including about whether this minority reaches the 20%threshold in certain localities. This has hampered the examination of the application of Article 10. The
Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to submit, in the next periodical report, a list of the
localities where the Turkish speakers live in numbers relevant for the purposes of Article 10, keeping in mind
its recommendation regarding the 20%-threshold (see under 1.4.2).
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of
regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the situation
of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

...
ii

to ensure that such of their officers as are in contact with the public use the regional
or minority languages in their relations with persons applying to them in these
languages; or

iii to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written
applications and receive a reply in these languages; or
iv to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written
applications in these languages; or
v

945.

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document
in these languages;

Article 10.1 concerns local branches of the central State authorities.

137

946. Provisions a.ii – a.v represent alternative options. As Romania has chosen option a.ii, options a.iii,
a.iv and a.v become redundant. In line with its practice, the Committee of Experts will ex officio examine
option a.ii only.
947. The implementation of this undertaking is hampered by the 20%-threshold. The Committee of Experts
refers in this respect to the observations and recommendation that it has made above (see under 1.4.2).
948. With regard to the Turkish language, the initial periodical report states that the border police in the
area where Turkish is used has Turkish-speaking staff. No additional information is provided.
949. The Committee of Experts welcomes the information from the Romanian authorities on their efforts
undertaken in the police administration. The state report, however, does not contain any information on the
use of Turkish in the realm of other administrative bodies of the state administration. In order to conclude on
fulfilment or non-fulfilment, the Committee of Experts needs more information on the use of Turkish in local
branches of the state administration. It asks the Romanian authorities to provide such information in the next
periodical report.
Paragraph 2
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who are
users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below, the
Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
...
b

the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written
applications in these languages;

950. According to Articles 2.2 and 8.1-2 of Government Decision no. 1206/2001, citizens belonging to
national minorities have the right to address oral or written requests to local authorities and the local and
county councils and to receive an answer in Romanian and the minority language. The exercise of this right is
linked to the 20%-threshold. During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed that in
practice it is not possible for users of Turkish to submit oral or written applications in Turkish to local
authorities.
70

951. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to allow and/or encourage the possibility for users of Turkish to submit oral or written applications
in this language to local authorities.
d

the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in the relevant regional
or minority languages;
71

952. According to the Romanian legislation , citizens belonging to national minorities are entitled to be
informed, in their mother tongue, about the agenda of the local council meetings and of the normative and
individual decisions adopted by them. However, the implementation of this possibility is limited to
municipalities where the national minority in question reaches 20% of the population. In addition, the
Committee of Experts has no indications that it is exercised in practice.
72

953. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to allow and/or encourage the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in
Turkish.
e

70

the use by regional authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

See e.g. 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraphs 479-480.
Articles 39, 50 and 94.8 of the Law on Local Administration no. 215/2001; Articles 2.2 and 7.1-2 of Government Decision
no. 1206/2001 for approving the Rules for implementing the provisions concerning the right of citizens belonging to national minorities
to use their mother tongue in local government, contained in the Law on Local Administration no. 215/2001.
72
See e.g. 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraphs 482-483.
71

138

954. According to the replies by the Romanian authorities to the questionnaire submitted to them by the
Committee of Experts, public administration in Romania is established only at the central and local levels.
However, in the perspective of the Committee of Experts the counties may qualify as regions in the sense of
the Charter. The Committee of Experts would welcome information about the application of this provision
regarding counties.
f

the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

955. With regard to the relevant percentage thresholds, the Committee of Experts refers to the
observations and recommendation that it has made above (see under 1.4.2).
956. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to allow and/or encourage the use by local authorities of Turkish in debates in their assemblies.
g

the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official language(s),
of traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or minority languages.

957. With regard to the 20%-threshold, the Committee of Experts refers to the observations and
recommendation that it has made above (see under 1.4.2).
958. As far as Turkish is concerned, the use of place-names in this language seems to be limited to placename signs in Constanţa county. This was confirmed by representatives of the Turkish speakers during the
on-the-spot visit. However, the Committee of Experts underlines that the term “place-names” within the meaning
of the present undertaking concerns not only the name of the municipality, but all topographical names (“la
toponymie” in the French version of the Charter) of that municipality that can be officially used, for example in
texts produced by the local authority (e.g. documents, forms, public relations material, websites) or in the
73
signage (e.g. street name signs, signposts and public transport signs, inscriptions for tourists).
959. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It asks the Romanian authorities
to provide more information on the use of place-names in Turkish in the next periodical report.
Paragraph 3
With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting on
their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which regional or minority languages are
used, in accordance with the situation of each language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in the provision of the service;
or

b

to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request and receive a reply in
these languages; or

c

to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request in these languages.

960. Undertakings a, b and c represent alternative options. As Romania has chosen option a, options b
and c become redundant. In line with its practice, the Committee of Experts will ex officio examine option a
only. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts wishes to emphasise that “public services” refers to services
provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting on their behalf (e.g. railway, urban transport,
electricity, water and gas, cleaning and sanitation, telephone services, refuse collection and disposal,
cemeteries, sporting facilities, entertainment venues).

73

See e.g. 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraph 232.

139

961. Article 19 of the Law on Local Government no. 215/2001 states that "[i]n the territorial-administrative
units where citizens belonging to national minorities have a share of over 20% of residents, the local
government authorities and public institutions subordinated to them shall ensure their use of decentralized
public services in their mother tongue, according to the Constitution, the present law and international treaties
to which Romania is party." It is not clear to the Committee of Experts whether the “public institutions
subordinated to” local authorities cover public services in conformity with the present Charter provision. Even
if they cover public services, the problem remains that the implementation is linked to the 20%-threshold (see
under 1.4.2 above). Besides, there are no indications that this provision has been applied to Turkish in
practice.
962.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled.

The Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to ensure that Turkish is used in the
provision of public services in practice and asks them to clarify the national legal basis for the
implementation of this provision.
Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the
Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
...
b

recruitment and, where necessary, training of the officials and other public service
employees required;

963. Local authorities and county councils with responsibility for a territorial administrative unit where more
than 20% of the population belong to a national minority must also employ staff speaking the minority
language concerned. However, there is no specific information about whether the Turkish language qualifies
for this and how this provision is implemented for Turkish in relevant municipalities where the 20%-threshold
is not met. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to provide information regarding
measures taken in accordance with this provision.
c

compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a
knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that
language is used.

964. The initial periodical report does not contain any information about the implementation of this
undertaking regarding Turkish. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to provide
information regarding measures taken in accordance with this undertaking.
Paragraph 5
The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or minority
languages, at the request of those concerned.
965. The initial periodical report does not contain any information about the implementation of this
undertaking. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a position to conclude on its fulfilment and asks the
Romanian authorities to submit the relevant information in the next periodical report.
Article 11 – Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in
which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that the
public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this field, and
respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
a

to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:

140

...
iii to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer programmes in the regional or
minority languages;
966. According to the initial periodical report, Radio Constanţa broadcasts one hour per week in Turkish,
covering news and traditional music.
967. With regard to television, the initial periodical report refers to three minority programmes (‘Convieţuiri’
on TVR1 – one hour per week; ‘Autostrada TVR’; ’Telejurnalul Regional’ on TVR3) in Turkish. However, the
duration of the ‘Autostrada TVR’ and ’Telejurnalul Regional’ programmes are not indicated.
968. The Committee of Experts welcomes the presence of the Turkish language on public radio and
television. It notes, however, that the duration of the radio programme of one hour per week is too short in light
74
of the number of Turkish speakers, which reduces the effectiveness and attractiveness of this broadcasting.
The Committee of Experts reiterates the great importance of the electronic media for the promotion of
minority languages in modern societies. In particular, a substantial presence of a minority language on radio
and television can enhance considerably its social prestige.
969. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It asks the Romanian authorities
to submit information about the duration of television programmes in Turkish in the next periodical report.
The Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to extend the duration of radio
broadcasts in Turkish.
b

...
ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;

970. According to the initial periodical report, the Turkish minority has set up “Radio T” (Constanţa) which
broadcasts every day for nine hours in Turkish, Tatar and Romanian. It is, however, not clear how much time
is devoted to the Turkish language. On the basis of the available information, the Committee of Experts is not
in a position to reach a conclusion and asks the Romanian authorities to submit additional information in the
next periodical report.
c

...
ii

971.

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;

There are no private television programmes in Turkish.

972. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to facilitate the broadcasting of private television programmes in Turkish on a regular basis.
d

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in the regional or minority languages

973. According to the initial periodical report, the association of the Turkish minority has produced a CD
with Turkish melodies. The Committee of Experts considers that this undertaking requires additional
measures in order to be fulfilled.
974. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual works in Turkish.
e

74

i

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one
newspaper in the regional or minority languages; or

See 2nd Evaluation Report on the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraph 800.

141

975. The Committee of Experts underlines that a “newspaper” in conformity with the present undertaking
75
has to be published at least weekly. According to the initial periodical report, there exists only a bilingual
monthly publication “Hakses”. However, this monthly is not published sufficiently often to qualify as a
“newspaper”.
976. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one newspaper in
Turkish.
g

to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using regional or minority
languages.

977. According to the initial periodical report, the editors of the bilingual monthly “Hakses” have attended
training courses organised by the Department for Interethnic Relations. Furthermore, training in Romania and
Turkey has been organised for the editors of the Turkish-language radio and television programmes. It is,
however, not sufficiently clear whether these measures have benefited also other media staff using Turkish.
The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled and asks the Romanian authorities to
provide information regarding the training of other media staff in the next periodical report.
Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television broadcasts
from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority
language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from
neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure that no restrictions will
be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of information in the written press in a
language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of the
above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such
formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a
democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the
prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the
reputation or rights of others, for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for
maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
978. According to the initial periodical report, several television channels from Turkey (e.g. Kanal D, Star,
Show, TRT International) can be received in Dobruja.
979. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled regarding television and asks the
Romanian authorities to supply information about radio broadcasts in the next periodical report.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to ensure that the interests of the users of regional or minority languages are
represented or taken into account within such bodies as may be established in accordance with the
law with responsibility for guaranteeing the freedom and pluralism of the media.
980. According to the initial periodical report, the Turkish minority is not represented in the National
Council of Audio-Visual Broadcasts, but its interests are considered according to information submitted by its
umbrella association. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify in more detail in the
next periodical report what procedure exists regarding the implementation of this provision for Turkish.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural centres,
museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production,
vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries, including inter alia the
use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are
used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this
field:
75

See 1st Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of Serbia, ECRML(2009)2, paragraph 267; 2nd Report of the Committee of
Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraph 654.

142

a

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority languages
and foster the different means of access to works produced in these languages;

981. According to the initial periodical report, the Romanian authorities have supported a variety of cultural
events of the Turkish speakers at local, national and international levels. Furthermore, in the last four years,
approximately 30 publications in Turkish covering history, fairy tales for children, culture, religion, anthologies
and fiction have been supported. There are two libraries in Constanţa which have books in Turkish.
982.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
b

to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in regional
or minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, postsynchronisation and subtitling activities;

983. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Turkish language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.
c

to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages
by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling
activities;

984. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Turkish language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.
d

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of
various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of
regional or minority languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for
which they provide backing;

985. Most cultural activities promoting the Turkish language are carried out by the state-funded “Turkish
Democratic Union in Romania”. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
e

to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting
cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of the regional or
minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest of the population;

986. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination under Article 12.1.d, which applies accordingly.
The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
f

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or
minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

987. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination under Article 12.1.d, which applies accordingly.
The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
g

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for collecting,
keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the regional or
minority languages;

988. According to the replies by the Romanian authorities to the questionnaire submitted to them by the
Committee of Experts, the National Library of Romania keeps copies of documents of the national minorities.
The Committee of Experts notes, however, that the scope of this provision extends beyond the collection
activities usually carried out by national libraries. It asks the Romanian authorities to submit information
concerning audiovisual materials and publication of works in Turkish in the next periodical report.

143

h

if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and terminological
research services, particularly with a view to maintaining and developing appropriate
administrative, commercial, economic, social, technical or legal terminology in each
regional or minority language.

989. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information concerning the application of this
provision to the Turkish language.
990. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to submit the relevant information, especially commenting on any need to
develop necessary terminology in Turkish, in the next periodical report.
Paragraph 2
In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are traditionally
used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to
allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in accordance with the
preceding paragraph.
991. According to the initial periodical report, the “Turkish Democratic Union in Romania” has organised
cultural activities also in Hârşova, Brăila, Ghindăreşti, and Galaţi.
992.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.

Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for
regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.
993. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information (including examples) concerning
the application of this provision to the Turkish language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report.
Article 13 – Economic and social life
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole country:
...
b

to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of companies and private documents of
any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or minority languages, at least
between users of the same language;

994. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information as to whether the prohibition
requested by this undertaking exists in Romanian legislation. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit the
relevant information in the next periodical report.
Article 14 – Transfrontier exchanges
The Parties undertake:
a

to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the States in
which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if necessary to seek to
conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster contacts between the users of the
same language in the States concerned in the fields of culture, education, information,
vocational training and permanent education;

144

995. The initial periodical report states that, on the basis of the Exchange Programme on Science, Culture
and Education between Romania and Turkey, teachers from Turkey teach at the Kemal Atatürk National
College in Medgidia. Several twinnings between schools in Romania and Turkey exist. Furthermore, the
“Turkish Democratic Union in Romania” attends regularly cultural and media events in Turkey.
996.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
b

for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or promote co-operation
across borders, in particular between regional or local authorities in whose territory the
same language is used in identical or similar form.

997. The initial periodical report refers to cross-border co-operation with Turkey in general, but does not
specify how co-operation between local and regional authorities promotes the Turkish language in Romania.
The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to submit more specific information in the next
periodical report.
2.2.10. Ukrainian
Article 8 – Education
General issues
998. With regard to the Ukrainian language, Romania has ratified Articles 8.1.a.i, b.i and c.i which put an
obligation on the state party to provide minority-language education irrespective of prior demand by parents
or students. In practice, however, a minimum number of parents or pupils have to demand the provision of
minority-language education. The undertakings chosen oblige the Romanian authorities to provide an offer of
minority language education throughout the whole language area. This does not preclude the possibility of not
establishing specific classes in minority languages if there are too few pupils. The Committee of Experts
refers in this respect to its observations and recommendation under 1.4.3 above, which apply to Ukrainian
accordingly.
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are
used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of
the official language(s) of the State:
a

i

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages;
or

999. According to the initial periodical report, Ukrainian is used in 58 kindergartens. However, there is
unclear information as to whether Ukrainian is the main medium of education or whether the pre-schools
concerned are only bilingual. In view of the undertaking entered into by Romania, the Committee of Experts
asks the Romanian authorities to clarify in the next periodical report how many children are enrolled at
kindergartens that offer pre-school education in Ukrainian.
b

i

to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

1000. According to the replies to the Committee of Experts’ questionnaire, 100 pupils attend primary
education in Ukrainian. As more specific information is lacking, the Committee of Experts asks the Romanian
authorities to indicate in their next periodical report how many lessons in Ukrainian per week correspond to
this educational model.
1001. The Committee of Experts notes that the number of 100 pupils is clearly too low in light of the number
of Ukrainian speakers in Romania. On the other hand, a significantly higher number of primary school pupils
(2 849) learn Ukrainian as a subject. The Committee of Experts is of the view that the Romanian authorities
should, in close co-operation with the representatives of the Ukrainian speakers, develop a strategy which
promotes the model of Ukrainian-medium education among parents and pupils with a view to making
available primary education in Ukrainian.

145

1002. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to promote a shift from the model of teaching Ukrainian only as a subject to teaching in Ukrainian,
in conformity with the undertaking chosen.
c

i

to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority languages;
or

1003. According to the initial periodical report, 274 students attend secondary education in Ukrainian (33 at
secondary schools, 241 at high schools). The “Taras Şevcenko Ukrainian General Education High School” in
Sighetu Marmaţiei (Maramureş county) teaches all subjects in Ukrainian.
1004. A significantly higher number of secondary school pupils (3 237) learn Ukrainian as a subject. The
Committee of Experts is of the view that the Romanian authorities should, in close co-operation with the
representatives of the Ukrainian speakers, develop a strategy which promotes the model of Ukrainianmedium education among parents and pupils with a view to making available secondary education in
Ukrainian.
1005. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to promote a shift from the model of teaching Ukrainian only as a subject to teaching in Ukrainian,
in conformity with the undertaking chosen.
d

i

to make available technical and vocational education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of technical and vocational education in the relevant
regional or minority languages; or

iii

to provide, within technical and vocational education, for the teaching of the relevant regional
or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum; or

iv to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils
who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered sufficient;
1006. According to the initial periodical report, no pupils or parents have requested technical and vocational
education in Ukrainian or teaching of Ukrainian within technical and vocational education.
1007. However, the Committee of Experts is of the view that, owing to the success of the “Taras Şevcenko
Ukrainian General Education High School”, there is good ground for supposing that a number of students
would be interested in learning Ukrainian at least as a subject within technical and vocational education. The
Romanian authorities should therefore, in close co-operation with the representatives of the Ukrainian
speakers, explore the possibility to make available technical and vocational education in Ukrainian or
teaching of Ukrainian in technical and vocational schools.
The Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to develop, in close co-operation
with the representatives of the Ukrainian speakers, a strategy for teaching in or of Ukrainian at the
different levels of education, in conformity with the undertakings entered into under the Charter.
e

i

to make available university and other higher education in regional or minority languages; or

ii

to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher education
subjects; or

146

iii if, by reason of the role of the State in relation to higher education institutions, subparagraphs i and ii cannot be applied, to encourage and/or allow the provision of
university or other forms of higher education in regional or minority languages or of
facilities for the study of these languages as university or higher education subjects;
1008. According to the initial periodical report, Ukrainian can be studied at the universities of Bucharest,
Cluj-Napoca and Suceava. This offer covers the areas where most Ukrainian speakers live.
1009. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
f

iii if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult education, to
favour and/or encourage the offering of such languages as subjects of adult and
continuing education;

1010. According to the initial periodical report, Ukrainian is currently not offered as a subject of adult and
continuing education.
1011. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to favour and/or encourage the offering of Ukrainian as a subject of adult and continuing
education.
g

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is
reflected by the regional or minority language;

1012. The Committee of Experts notes that the present undertaking concerns not only education for pupils
using a minority language, but also education for non-speakers about the specific history and traditions
related to the minority language spoken in the relevant territory. This normally entails including elements of
the history and culture which is reflected by the minority language in the national curriculum, or at least in the
76
curriculum for all pupils within the territories concerned.
1013. According to the initial periodical report, the subject “History and traditions of the Ukrainian minority” is
taught at grades six and seven. Work is underway to draft a bilingual textbook.
1014. It is, however, not clear to the Committee of Experts to what extent also non-speakers of Ukrainian
benefit from the teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected by the Ukrainian language. In their
replies to the Committee of Experts’ questionnaire, the Romanian authorities refer to a new optional subject
“History of National Minorities” which is taught in the tenth grade at 40 high schools in Romania. Furthermore,
owing to the revision of the Law on National Education in 2011, new history and geography textbooks will be
published and reflect the history and traditions of the national minorities. The Committee of Experts
commends the Romanian authorities on these positive initiatives and looks forward to receiving additional
information in the next periodical report.
1015. The Committee of Experts is currently not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this
undertaking. It asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information on
whether also non-speakers benefit from the teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected by the
Ukrainian language.
h

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of
paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;

1016. According to the initial periodical report, the Ministry of Education and the “Union of Ukrainians in
Romania” organise and finance the training of Ukrainian teachers in Ukraine. As no additional information is
available, the Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to elaborate on the organisation of both
basic training as well as further training of Ukrainian teachers in the next periodical report.

76

See for example 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of Croatia, ECRML2005(3), paragraph 100; 2nd Report of the
Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML2009(6), paragraph 322.

147

1017. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this provision. It asks
the Romanian authorities to provide more information on the basic and further training of the teachers
required to implement their undertakings under Article 8.1.a-g.
i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken
and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority
languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be made
public.

1018. According to the initial periodical report, the General Directorate for Education in Minority Languages
and Relations with Parliament of the Ministry of Education, through school inspectorates in the counties with
Ukrainian-language schools, monitors education for the Ukrainian minority. The ministry deals with proposals
for improving the education framework, the curricula and textbooks for education in Ukrainian. In the general
reports of the ministry data are included about the results obtained in examinations. The ministry is supported
by the umbrella association of the Ukrainian minority (“Union of the Ukrainians of Romania”) which draws up
periodical reports about Ukrainian-language education that are published in their own press.
1019. Considering that the present undertaking addresses primarily the authorities, the Committee of
Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify in the next periodical report whether the general reports
drawn up by the Ministry of Education contain comprehensive information about the measures taken and
progress achieved in establishing or developing Ukrainian-language education, at what intervals they are
drawn up, and if they are made public. It is also not clear to the Committee of Experts to what degree the
reports drawn up by the Union of the Ukrainians of Romania possess any authoritative value for the
educational authorities.
Paragraph 2
With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the regional or
minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional
or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the regional or
minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.
1020. According to the initial periodical report, no wishes for teaching in or of Ukrainian in regions other than
those inhabited traditionally by Ukrainian speakers have been expressed. Given that Romania has ratified
this undertaking, the Committee of Experts nonetheless considers that the Romanian authorities should, in
co-operation with the representatives of the Ukrainian speakers, promote this possibility among Ukrainian
speakers with a view to achieving at least a certain level of fulfilment.
Article 9 – Judicial authorities
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents using
the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to the situation
of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the present
paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of justice:
a

in criminal proceedings:
...
ii

to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or minority language;
and/or

1021. According to Article 128.2 of the Romanian Constitution, “Romanian citizens belonging to national
minorities have the right to express themselves in their mother tongue before the courts of law (…)”.
Furthermore, Article 14 of Law no. 304/2004 on the Judicial System stipulates the right of citizens belonging
to national minorities to express themselves in their own language before courts (paragraph 2). “Where one
or more parties require expressing themselves in their own language, the court shall provide, free of charge,
an authorised interpreter or translator” (paragraph 3). However, the Romanian authorities state in the initial

148

periodical report that they have no information about the implementation of this undertaking for Ukrainian in
practice.
1022. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It asks the Romanian
authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information about its practical implementation
concerning Ukrainian.
a

iii to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not be considered
inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a regional or minority language;
and/or

1023. According to Article 14.5 of Law no. 304/2004 on the Judicial System, “[a]pplications and procedural
provisions shall be made only in Romanian.” Furthermore, Article 128.1-2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
foresees the free use of an interpreter and the translation of documents only in cases where the party
concerned “does not speak Romanian”.
1024. The Committee of Experts understands that “applications” in accordance with Article 14.5 of Law on
the Judicial System cover “requests” within the meaning of this Charter provision, which makes requests in a
minority language inadmissible. In addition, written or oral evidence can only be delivered if the person
concerned does not master Romanian. However, Article 9.1.a.iii of the Charter applies irrespective of whether
a party speaks Romanian, especially since most persons belonging to national minorities in Romania do
speak the majority language. Limiting the possibility to deliver written or oral evidence to persons who do not
speak Romanian would render this undertaking meaningless in most cases. On the other hand, the
Committee of Experts observes that Romanian legislation does not contain this restriction with regard to the
right of the accused to use a minority language (see Article 9.1.a.ii above).
1025. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify, in the next periodical report,
whether the legal set-up allows in practice that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, may be
produced in Ukrainian.
b

in civil proceedings:
...
ii

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she
may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional
expense; and/or
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

1026. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.ii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
1027. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It asks the Romanian
authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information about the practical implementation of
this undertaking for Ukrainian.
b

iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

1028. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.iii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
1029. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify, in the next periodical report,
whether the legal set-up allows in practice that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, may be
produced in Ukrainian.
c

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
...

149

ii

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she
may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional
expense; and/or
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

1030. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.ii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
1031. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It asks the Romanian
authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, specific information about the practical implementation of
this undertaking concerning Ukrainian.
c

iii to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

1032. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination concerning Article 9.1.a.iii of the Charter, which
applies accordingly.
1033. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify, in the next periodical report,
whether the legal set-up allows in practice that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, may be
produced in Ukrainian.
d

to take steps to ensure that the application of sub-paragraphs i and iii of paragraphs b
and c above and any necessary use of interpreters and translations does not involve extra
expense for the persons concerned.

1034. In light of the conclusions reached regarding sub-paragraph iii of paragraphs b and c above, the
Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking.
Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake:
a

not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because they
are drafted in a regional or minority language; or

1035. The initial periodical report does not contain any information about the implementation of this
undertaking.
1036. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information about its implementation.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or minority languages the most important
national statutory texts and those relating particularly to users of these languages, unless they are
otherwise provided.
1037. According to the replies submitted by the Romanian authorities to the Committee of Experts’
questionnaire, this provision is only implemented for Hungarian.
1038. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to make available in Ukrainian the most important national statutory texts and those relating
particularly to users of this language, unless they are otherwise provided.

150

Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
1039. The Committee of Experts has not received any detailed information concerning the demographical
situation of the Ukrainian national minority at local level. From the initial periodical report, it appears that the
Ukrainian minority reaches the 20%-threshold in a number of localities. The Committee of Experts asks the
Romanian authorities to submit, in the next periodical report, a list of the localities where the Ukrainian
speakers live in numbers relevant for the purposes of Article 10, keeping in mind its recommendation
regarding the 20%-threshold (see under 1.4.2).
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of
regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the situation
of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

...
ii

to ensure that such of their officers as are in contact with the public use the regional
or minority languages in their relations with persons applying to them in these
languages; or

iii to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written
applications and receive a reply in these languages; or*
iv to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written
applications in these languages; or
v

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document
in these languages;

1040. Article 10.1 concerns local branches of the central State authorities.
1041. Provisions a.ii – a.v represent alternative options. As Romania has chosen option a.ii, options a.iii,
a.iv and a.v become redundant. In line with its practice, the Committee of Experts will ex officio examine
option a.ii only.
1042. The implementation of this undertaking is hampered by the 20%-threshold. The Committee of Experts
refers in this respect to the observations and recommendation that it has made above (see under 1.4.2).
1043. With regard to the Ukrainian language, the initial periodical report states that the police inspectorates
of the Maramureş, Botoşani, Suceava and Tulcea counties have recruited policemen who can speak
Ukrainian. The availability of Ukrainian-speaking staff is particularly developed in Maramureş county (80
policemen and one translator).
1044. The Committee of Experts welcomes the information from the Romanian authorities on their efforts
undertaken in the police administration. The state report, however, does not contain any information on the
use of Ukrainian in the realm of other administrative bodies of the state administration. In order to conclude
on fulfilment or non-fulfilment, the Committee of Experts needs more information on the use of Ukrainian in
local branches of the state administration. It asks the Romanian authorities to provide such information in the
next periodical report.
Paragraph 2
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who are
users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below, the
Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
...
b

the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written
applications in these languages;

151

1045. According to Articles 2.2 and 8.1-2 of Government Decision no. 1206/2001, citizens belonging to
national minorities have the right to address oral or written requests to local authorities and the local and
county councils and to receive an answer in Romanian and the minority language. The exercise of this right is
linked to the 20%-threshold.
1046. As regards the practical implementation, the initial periodical report limits itself to stating that local
authorities in the Caraş-Severin, Maramureş and Tulcea counties have replied in Ukrainian to applications
submitted to them in this language. As this information is very general, the Committee of Experts asks the
Romanian authorities to submit more precise information about the practical implementation in the next
periodical report.
77

1047. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. Considering the problems
related to the 20%-threshold, the Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to allow and/or
encourage the possibility for users of Ukrainian to submit oral or written applications in this language to local
authorities.
d

the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in the relevant regional
or minority languages;
78

1048. According to the Romanian legislation , citizens belonging to national minorities are entitled to be
informed, in their mother tongue, about the agenda of the local council meetings and of the normative and
individual decisions adopted by them. However, the implementation of this possibility is limited to
municipalities where the national minority in question reaches 20% of the population. In addition, the
Committee of Experts has no indications that it is exercised in practice.
79

1049. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to allow and/or encourage the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in
Ukrainian.
e

the use by regional authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

1050. According to the replies by the Romanian authorities to the questionnaire submitted to them by the
Committee of Experts, public administration in Romania is established only at the central and local levels.
However, in the perspective of the Committee of Experts the counties may qualify as regions in the sense of
the Charter. The Committee of Experts would welcome information on the implementation of this provision
regarding counties.
f

the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

1051. With regard to the relevant percentage thresholds, the Committee of Experts refers to the
observations and recommendation that it has made above (see under 1.4.2).
1052. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to allow and/or encourage the use by local authorities of Ukrainian in debates in their assemblies.
g

the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official language(s),
of traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or minority languages.

1053. With regard to the 20%-threshold, the Committee of Experts refers to the observations and
recommendation that it has made above (see under 1.4.2).

77

See e.g. 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraphs 479-480.
Articles 39, 50 and 94.8 of the Law on Local Administration no. 215/2001; Articles 2.2 and 7.1-2 of Government Decision
no. 1206/2001 for approving the Rules for implementing the provisions concerning the right of citizens belonging to national minorities
to use their mother tongue in local government, contained in the Law on Local Administration no. 215/2001.
79
See e.g. 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraphs 482-483.
78

152

1054. As far as Ukrainian is concerned, the use of place-names in this language seems to be limited to
place-name signs. However, the Committee of Experts underlines that the term “place-names” within the
meaning of the present undertaking concerns not only the name of the municipality, but all topographical names
(“la toponymie” in the French version of the Charter) of that municipality that can be officially used, for example
in texts produced by the local authority (e.g. documents, forms, public relations material, websites) or in the
80
signage (e.g. street name signs, signposts and public transport signs, inscriptions for tourists).
1055. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It asks the Romanian authorities
to provide more information on the use of place-names in Ukrainian in the next periodical report.
Paragraph 3
With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting on
their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which regional or minority languages are
used, in accordance with the situation of each language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in the provision of the service;
or

b

to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request and receive a reply in
these languages; or

c

to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request in these languages.

1056. Undertakings a, b and c represent alternative options. As Romania has chosen option a, options b
and c become redundant. In line with its practice, the Committee of Experts will ex officio examine option a
only. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts wishes to emphasise that “public services” refers to services
provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting on their behalf (e.g. railway, urban transport,
electricity, water and gas, cleaning and sanitation, telephone services, refuse collection and disposal,
cemeteries, sporting facilities, entertainment venues).
1057. Article 19 of the Law on Local Government no. 215/2001 states that "[i]n the territorial-administrative
units where citizens belonging to national minorities have a share of over 20% of residents, the local
government authorities and public institutions subordinated to them shall ensure their use of decentralized
public services in their mother tongue, according to the Constitution, the present law and international treaties
to which Romania is party." It is not clear to the Committee of Experts whether the “public institutions
subordinated to” local authorities cover public services in conformity with the present Charter provision. Even
if they cover public services, the problem remains that the implementation is linked to the 20%-threshold (see
under 1.4.2 above). Besides, there are no indications that this provision has been applied to Ukrainian in
practice.
1058. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled.
The Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to ensure that Ukrainian is used in
the provision of public services in practice and asks them to clarify the national legal basis for the
implementation of this provision.
Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the
Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
...

80

See e.g. 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraph 232.

153

b

recruitment and, where necessary, training of the officials and other public service
employees required;

1059. According to the initial periodical report, “some” local authorities in the Botoşani, Caraş-Severin,
Maramureş, Suceava and Tulcea counties have Ukrainian-speaking officials.
1060. The Committee of Experts considers this information too general in order to reach a conclusion. It
asks the Romanian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information on their staffing policy with
regard to State, regional and local authorities as well as public service providers that use Ukrainian.
c

compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a
knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that
language is used.

1061. The initial periodical report does not contain any information about the implementation of this
undertaking regarding Ukrainian. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to provide
information regarding measures taken in accordance with this undertaking.
Paragraph 5
The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or minority
languages, at the request of those concerned.
1062. According to the initial periodical report, Ukrainian family names are spelled only in accordance with
the Romanian spelling. It is unclear to the Committee of Experts whether this remark refers to the use of the
Cyrillic script, transliteration, or use of original versions of names.
1063. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to clarify this issue in the next periodical report.
Article 11 – Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in
which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that the
public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this field, and
respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
a

to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:
...
iii to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer programmes in the regional or
minority languages;

1064. According to the initial periodical report, public radio programmes in Ukrainian are broadcast weekly
by Radio Cluj (15 minutes), Radio Timişoara (30 minutes), Radio Reşiţa (20 minutes) and Radio Iaşi (20
minutes).
1065. Public television programmes in Ukrainian are broadcast on TVR1, TVR2, TVR3, TVR Cultural and
TVR Internaţional as well as on TVR Cluj, TVR Iaşi, TVR Timişoara and TVR Craiova. While the duration of
the programme on TVR3 is 20 minutes per week, there is no such information about the other channels.
1066. According to the initial periodical report, representatives of the Ukrainian speakers have voiced their
dissatisfaction about the limited broadcasting time. In light of this, the Committee of Experts welcomes the
intention of the Romanian authorities to increase the broadcasting time in Ukrainian and encourages them to
pursue such steps in co-operation with the Ukrainian speakers.
1067. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled concerning radio. It asks the
Romanian authorities to provide information about the broadcast time of the television programmes in
Ukrainian in the next periodical report.

154

The Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian authorities to extend the broadcasting time of
programmes in Ukrainian on public radio.
b

...
ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;

1068. The initial periodical report does not contain any information concerning the application of this
provision to the Ukrainian language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a position to conclude on
the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit information about private radio
programmes in Ukrainian in the next periodical report.
c

...
ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;

1069. The initial periodical report does not contain any information concerning the application of this
provision to the Ukrainian language. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a position to conclude on
the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit information about private
television programmes in Ukrainian in the next periodical report.
d

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in the regional or minority languages

1070. The initial periodical report states that the television channel TVR 3 broadcasts, on a weekly basis, an
art film from Ukraine with subtitling in Romanian. The exchange of movies has been agreed in the framework
of a co-operation agreement between the public television services of Romania and Ukraine.
1071. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It asks the Romanian authorities
to submit, in their next periodical report, additional information about measures taken to encourage and/or
facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual works in Ukrainian.
e

i

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one
newspaper in the regional or minority languages; or

1072. The Committee of Experts underlines that a “newspaper” in conformity with the present undertaking
81
has to be published at least weekly. According to the initial periodical report, the Romanian authorities
provide financial assistance to two magazines. However, neither of them is published sufficiently often to
qualify as a “newspaper”.
1073. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one newspaper in
Ukrainian.
g

to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using regional or minority
languages.

1074. The initial periodical report acknowledges a lack of minority-language journalists. However, the
Department for Interethnic Relations has organised journalism courses for editors belonging to the Ukrainian
minority. It is, however, not sufficiently clear whether these measures have benefited also journalists as well
as other media staff using Ukrainian. The Committee of Experts is currently not in a position to conclude on
the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to clarify this in the next periodical report.

81

See 1st Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of Serbia, ECRML(2009)2, paragraph 267; 2nd Report of the Committee of
Experts in respect of the Slovak Republic, ECRML(2009)8, paragraph 654

155

Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television broadcasts
from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority
language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from
neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure that no restrictions will
be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of information in the written press in a
language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of the
above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such
formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a
democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the
prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the
reputation or rights of others, for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for
maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
1075. According to the initial periodical report, radio and television broadcasts from Ukraine may be directly
received by cable or satellite in the areas where the Ukrainian speakers in Romania live. The retransmission
of radio and television programmes from Ukraine is based on an agreement concluded by the Romanian
National Council for the Audiovisual with the Ukrainian authorities.
1076. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to ensure that the interests of the users of regional or minority languages are
represented or taken into account within such bodies as may be established in accordance with the
law with responsibility for guaranteeing the freedom and pluralism of the media.
1077. According to the initial periodical report, journalists belonging to different minorities were appointed in
the Boards of Administration of the public Radio and Television Societies. Moreover, in the management of
the National Council for the Audiovisual experts belonging to minorities were appointed to represent their
interests. It is, however, not sufficiently clear to what extent the Ukrainian speakers benefit from such
arrangements. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to specify, in the next periodical
report, how this provision is applied to Ukrainian.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural centres,
museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production,
vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries, including inter alia the
use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are
used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this
field:
a

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority languages
and foster the different means of access to works produced in these languages;

1078. According to the initial periodical report, the Romanian authorities have provided financial support to
the publication of books in Ukrainian (up to 15 per year) covering fiction, linguistics, history, folklore and
poetry, and to book presentations and poetry contests. Furthermore, financial support has been provided to
various cultural events of the Ukrainian minority and to four magazines in Ukrainian. There is also a
magazine for children in Ukrainian.
1079. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
b

to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in regional
or minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, postsynchronisation and subtitling activities;

156

1080. According to the initial periodical report, the state-funded “Union of Ukrainians in Romania” has
carried out book translations from Ukrainian, especially poetry.
1081. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to also support dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities.
c

to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages
by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling
activities;

1082. According to the initial periodical report, the state-funded “Union of Ukrainians in Romania” has also
carried out book translations into Ukrainian.
1083. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It encourages the Romanian
authorities to also support dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities.
d

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of
various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of
regional or minority languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for
which they provide backing;

1084. Most cultural activities promoting the Ukrainian language are carried out by the state-funded “Union of
Ukrainians in Romania”. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
e

to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting
cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of the regional or
minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest of the population;

1085. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination under Article 12.1.d, which applies accordingly.
The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
f

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or
minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

1086. The Committee of Experts refers to its examination under Article 12.1.d, which applies accordingly.
The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
g

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for collecting,
keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the regional or
minority languages;

1087. According to the replies by the Romanian authorities to the questionnaire submitted to them by the
Committee of Experts, the National Library of Romania keeps copies of documents of the national minorities.
The Committee of Experts notes, however, that the scope of this provision extends beyond the collection
activities usually carried out by national libraries. It asks the Romanian authorities to submit information
concerning audiovisual materials and publication of works in Ukrainian in the next periodical report.
h

if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and terminological
research services, particularly with a view to maintaining and developing appropriate
administrative, commercial, economic, social, technical or legal terminology in each
regional or minority language.

1088. The initial periodical report does not contain any specific information concerning the application of this
provision to the Ukrainian language.
1089. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
asks the Romanian authorities to submit the relevant information, especially commenting on any need to
develop necessary terminology in Ukrainian, in the next periodical report.

157

Paragraph 2
In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are traditionally
used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to
allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in accordance with the
preceding paragraph.
1090. According to the initial periodical report, folk music ensembles of the Ukrainian minority attend
festivals, with the support of the Romanian authorities, in different parts of the country, including areas where
Ukrainian is not traditionally present.
1091. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for
regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.
1092. The initial periodical report states that, on the basis of the protocol of co-operation between the
ministries of culture of Romania and Ukraine, a series of annual joint cultural activities are carried out.
Moreover, a series of activities related to libraries, museums and festivals are carried out, based on the
bilateral treaty of friendship and co-operation.
1093. However, it is not clear to what extent these activities contribute to increasing awareness of the
Ukrainian language in Romania in the context of Romania’s cultural policy abroad, including countries other
than Ukraine. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian authorities to clarify this aspect in the next
periodical report.
Article 13 – Economic and social life
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole country:
...
b

to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of companies and private documents of
any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or minority languages, at least
between users of the same language;

1094. The initial periodical report does not contain any information about whether Romanian legislation
contains the prohibition requested by this provision. The Committee of Experts is therefore not in a position to
conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and asks the Romanian authorities to submit such information
in the next periodical report.
Article 14 – Transfrontier exchanges
The Parties undertake:
a

to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the States in
which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if necessary to seek to
conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster contacts between the users of the
same language in the States concerned in the fields of culture, education, information,
vocational training and permanent education;

1095. According to the initial periodical report, the bilateral treaty concluded between Romania and Ukraine
in 1997 also includes a chapter concerning the protection of the persons belonging to the Romanian minority
in Ukraine and to the Ukrainian minority in Romania respectively. Based on this treaty, regular meetings of
the joint committees or commissions for co-operation take place. In the field of education, teachers from
Ukraine teach in the Ukrainian language in Suceava county, in conformity with a protocol of co-operation
signed by Romania and Ukraine for the 2008-2011 school years. An additional bilateral protocol has been
concluded which gives students belonging to the Ukrainian minority in Romania the possibility to obtain

158

scholarships for study in Ukraine. In the field of the media, the retransmission of radio and television
programmes from Ukraine is based on an agreement concluded by the Romanian National Council for the
Audiovisual with the Ukrainian authorities.
1096. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.
b

for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or promote co-operation
across borders, in particular between regional or local authorities in whose territory the
same language is used in identical or similar form.

1097. It is not clear to what extent the cross-border co-operation referred to in the initial periodical report is
to the benefit of the Ukrainian language in Romania. The Committee of Experts asks the Romanian
authorities to submit more specific information in their next periodical report.

Chapter 3 Findings of the Committee of Experts in the initial monitoring cycle
A.
When preparing ratification of the Charter, the Romanian authorities adopted a transparent and
inclusive approach. They consulted the minority associations with regard to the instrument of ratification and
kept the Council of Europe informed about the progress. After the entry into force of the Charter, the minority
associations were invited to contribute to the drafting of the initial periodical report. The co-operation with the
authorities and minority associations during the on-the-spot visit was exemplary.
B.
Romania has a long tradition in promoting minority languages and shows best practice in a number
of cases. Examples include teaching in several minority languages, the trilingualism of the Babeş-Bolyai
University, the developed offer of private radio and television broadcasts in Hungarian, the Jewish State
Theatre performing in Yiddish and the involvement of the national minorities in the decision-making process
(guaranteed representation of each minority in Parliament and in the Council of National Minorities).
C.
The initial periodical report was submitted by Romania with a delay of 18 months. However, it does
not provide sufficient information on the application of the Charter provisions. It contains no information on
the practical application of Articles 9 and 13 and only partial information on Article 10. Moreover, the
information was frequently too general to permit the Committee of Experts to reach a conclusion on the
fulfilment of each undertaking. The Committee of Experts is in need of more concrete information on the
application of a large number of undertakings in respect of each regional or minority language.
D.
There exists no structured approach for the application of each of the obligations entered into by
Romania under the Charter, involving the different levels of institutions and clarifying their responsibilities for
its implementation. In some cases, the information regarding the obligations arising from the Charter provided
by the State to the responsible local authorities is insufficient. There is a need to define, in co-operation with
the representatives of the minority language speakers as well as local authorities, concrete steps and a timeframe to implement all the undertakings which are not yet fulfilled. Furthermore, measures taken by the
Government in response to the financial crisis may disproportionately affect the promotion of minority
languages.
E.
Regarding Part II, the Romanian authorities support a basic infrastructure for almost each of the
languages concerned, comprising associations, libraries, cultural groups, publishing houses and print media.
Considering the low number of speakers, the Romanian authorities take commendable steps in promoting
Yiddish. Apart from Albanian, Ruthenian and Yiddish, all Part II languages are taught in school. However, the
educational offer in Tatar is inadequate in view of the number of speakers.
F.
Romania supports a high number of projects to the benefit of Romani, especially in the media and in
higher education. Romani can also be used in dealings with the authorities. There is a need to continue
developing a comprehensive offer of Romani teaching, taking account of the needs and wishes of the
speakers of regional and local varieties of Romani.

159

G.
Regarding the Part III languages, Romania has undertaken commendable steps in providing an
infrastructure for minority language education. On the whole, the Romanian educational system guarantees a
high level of support for minority languages. In most cases, education in the minority language as a medium
of instruction is provided at all levels. However, for Turkish and Ukrainian the existing offer does not
correspond to Romania‘s undertakings under the Charter. The educational offer in Turkish is particularly
underdeveloped and needs decisive efforts to live up to the undertakings under the Charter, reflecting the
relatively high number of speakers. Concerning the smaller language groups such as Bulgarian, Croatian,
Czech, Serbian and Slovak, the traditional educational model of teaching in the minority language seems to
cover only a relatively small part of the language group. There is a need to develop a viable model of teaching
these languages outside the strongholds of these language communities. With regard to Hungarian and
German, there is a shortage of teachers which significantly hampers the educational system and in particular
the continuity between the different levels of education. Concerning Ukrainian and Turkish, there is a clear
shortage of teachers trained to teach in the minority language as a medium of instruction.
H.
Romanian legislation limits the application of several provisions of Article 10 to municipalities where
20% of the population belong to a national minority. In light of the Committee of Experts’ standing
interpretation of the Charter, the 20%-threshold appears too high as it deprives minority languages whose
speakers do not attain it in a single municipality, or only in some municipalities, of full protection under Article
10. Therefore, the implementation of Article 10 presupposes that the Romanian authorities reconsider the
existing thresholds. Even in places where the threshold is met, practical implementation of the undertakings is
mostly lacking. Furthermore, the use of place-names in minority languages needs to become more consistent
in the municipalities concerned. The minority languages appear to be largely absent from the provision of
public services.
I.
In the broadcast media, the offer of minority language broadcasting exists for all Part III languages,
and for some of them the offer is quite satisfactory. However, in regard of other minority languages, the
programming time is too limited. For some languages, the presence on television remains merely symbolical.
Furthermore, with regard to some Part III languages (Bulgarian, Czech, Russian, Turkish and Ukrainian), there
are no daily or weekly newspapers.
J.
For most minority languages, there exists a comprehensive offer of cultural activities. The authorities
fund cultural associations and cultural activities as well as activities involving all or most minority languages.
K.
Textbooks about the history and culture of most of Romania’s national minorities have been
developed to serve as a basis for history and culture courses in minority language education. Mutual
understanding between the majority and the minorities as well as among minorities, however, seems to be
hampered by deficiencies in the teaching of the history and culture of national minorities in mainstream
education. More efforts are needed to promote knowledge about the history and culture of Romania’s
national minorities in the textbooks and educational materials designed for pupils belonging to the majority
population.

The Romanian government was invited to comment on the content of this report in accordance with Article
16.3 of the Charter. The comments received are attached in Appendix II.
On the basis of this report and its findings the Committee of Experts submitted its proposals to the
Committee of Ministers for recommendations to be addressed to Romania. At the same time it emphasised
the need for the Romanian authorities to take into account, in addition to these general recommendations,
the more detailed observations contained in the body of the report.
At its 1145th meeting on 13 June 2012, the Committee of Ministers adopted its Recommendation
addressed to Romania, which is set out in Part B of this document.

160

Appendix I: Instrument of Ratification

Romania:

Declaration contained in the instrument of ratification deposited on 29 January 2008 - Or. Engl.
Romania declares that:
1. The provisions of the Charter shall apply to the following minority languages used on the territory of
Romania:
a) Albanian language;
b) Armenian language;
c) Bulgarian language;
d) Czech language;
e) Croatian language;
f) German language;
g) Greek language;
h) Italian language;
i) Yiddish language;
j) Macedonian language;
k) Hungarian language;
l) Polish language;
m) Romany language;
n) Russian language;
o) Ruthenian language;
p) Serbian language;
q) Slovak language;
r) Tatar language;
s) Turkish language;
s) Ukrainian language.
2. For the purpose of the Romanian law, the regional or minority languages refer to the languages of the
national minorities.
Period covered: 1/5/2008 The preceding statement concerns Article(s) : 3

Declaration contained in the instrument of ratification deposited on 29 January 2008 - Or. Engl.
Romania declares that, in accordance with Article 2, paragraph 1, of the Charter, the provisions of Part II of
the Charter shall apply to the following regional or minority languages:
a) Albanian language;
b) Armenian language;
c) Greek language;
d) Italian language;
e) Yiddish language;
f) Macedonian language;
g) Polish language;
h) Romany language;
i) Ruthenian language;
j) Tatar language.
Period covered: 1/5/2008 The preceding statement concerns Article(s) : 2

161

Declaration contained in the instrument of ratification deposited on 29 January 2008 - Or. Engl.
Romania declares that, in accordance with Article 2, paragraph 2, and Article 3, paragraph 1, of the Charter,
the following provisions included in Part III of the Charter shall apply to the following national minorities
languages:
a) Bulgarian language:
. Article 8 - Education:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(ii), b(ii), c(iii), d(iv), e(ii), g, h, i;
- paragraph 2;
. Article 9 - Justice:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(ii), a(iii), b(ii), b(iii), c(ii), c(iii), d;
- paragraph 2, sub-paragraph a;
- paragraph 3;
. Article 10 - Administrative authorities and public services:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(ii), a(iii), a(iv), a(v);
- paragraph 2, sub-paragraphs b, c, d, e, f, g;
- paragraph 3, sub-paragraphs a, b, c;
- paragraph 4, sub-paragraphs b, c;
- paragraph 5;
. Article 11 - Media:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(iii), b(ii), c(ii), d, e(i), g;
- paragraph 2;
- paragraph 3;
. Article 12 - Cultural activities and facilities:
- paragraph 1;
- paragraph 2;
- paragraph 3;
. Article 13 - Economic and social life:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a, b;
. Article 14 - Transfrontier exchanges:
- paragraph a;
- paragraph b;
b) Czech language:
. Article 8 - Education:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(ii), b(ii), c(iii), d(iv), g, i;
- paragraph 2;
. Article 9 - Justice:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(ii), a(iii), b(ii), b(iii), c(ii), c(iii), d;
- paragraph 2, sub-paragraph a;
- paragraph 3;
. Article 10 - Administrative authorities and public services:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(ii), a(iii), a(iv), a(v);
- paragraph 2, sub-paragraphs b, c, d, e, f, g;
- paragraph 3, sub-paragraphs a, b, c;
- paragraph 4, sub-paragraphs b, c;
- paragraph 5;
. Article 11 - Media:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(iii), b(ii), c(ii), d, e(i), g;
- paragraph 2;
- paragraph 3;

162

. Article 12 - Cultural activities and facilities:
- paragraph 1;
- paragraph 2;
- paragraph 3;
. Article 13 - Economic and social life:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a, b;
. Article 14 - Transfrontier exchanges:
- paragraph a;
- paragraph b;
c) Croatian language:
. Article 8 - Education:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(i), b(i), c(ii), e(iii), g, h, i;
- paragraph 2;
. Article 9 - Justice:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(ii), a(iii), b(ii), b(iii), c(ii), c(iii), d;
- paragraph 2, sub-paragraph a;
- paragraph 3;
. Article 10 - Administrative authorities and public services:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(ii), a(iii), a(iv), a(v);
- paragraph 2, sub-paragraphs b, d, f, g;
- paragraph 3, sub-paragraphs a, b;
- paragraph 4, sub-paragraphs b, c;
- paragraph 5;
. Article 11 - Media:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(iii), c(ii), d, e(i), g;
- paragraph 2;
. Article 12 - Cultural activities and facilities:
- paragraph 1;
- paragraph 2;
- paragraph 3;
. Article 13 - Economic and social life:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a, b;
. Article 14 - Transfrontier exchanges:
- paragraph a;
- paragraph b;
d) German language:
. Article 8 - Education:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(i), b(i), c(i), d(i), e(i), f(iii), g, h, i;
- paragraph 2;
. Article 9 - Justice:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(ii), a(iii), b(ii), b(iii), c(ii), c(iii), d;
- paragraph 2, sub-paragraph a;
- paragraph 3;
. Article 10 - Administrative authorities and public services:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(ii), a(iii), a(iv), a(v), b, c;
- paragraph 2, sub-paragraphs b, c, d, e, f, g;
- paragraph 3, sub-paragraphs a, b, c;
- paragraph 4, sub-paragraphs b, c;
- paragraph 5;

163

. Article 11 - Media:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(iii), b(ii), d, e(i), f(i), g;
- paragraph 2;
- paragraph 3;
. Article 12 - Cultural activities and facilities:
- paragraph 1;
- paragraph 2;
- paragraph 3;
. Article 13 - Economic and social life:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a, b, c;
- paragraph 2, sub-paragraphs c, d, e;
. Article 14 - Transfrontier exchanges:
- paragraph a;
- paragraph b;
e) Hungarian language:
. Article 8 - Education:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(i), b(i), c(i), d(i), e(i), f(i), g, h, i;
- paragraph 2;
. Article 9 - Justice:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(ii), a(iii), b(ii), b(iii), c(ii), c(iii), d;
- paragraph 2, sub-paragraph a;
- paragraph 3;
. Article 10 - Administrative authorities and public services:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(ii), a(iii), a(iv), a(v), b, c;
- paragraph 2, sub-paragraphs b, c, d, e, f, g;
- paragraph 3;
- paragraph 4, sub-paragraphs b, c;
- paragraph 5;
. Article 11 - Media:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(ii), b(i), c(i), d, e(i), f(i), g;
- paragraph 2;
- paragraph 3;
. Article 12 - Cultural activities and facilities:
- paragraph 1;
- paragraph 2;
- paragraph 3;
. Article 13 - Economic and social life:
- paragraph 1;
- paragraph 2, sub-paragraphs c, d, e;
. Article 14 - Transfrontier exchanges:
- paragraph a;
- paragraph b;
f) Russian language:
. Article 8 - Education:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(iii), b(iii), c(iii), d(iv), e(ii), f(iii), g, h, i;
- paragraph 2;
. Article 9 - Justice:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(ii), a(iii), b(ii), b(iii), c(ii), c(iii), d;
- paragraph 2, sub-paragraph a;
- paragraph 3;

164

. Article 10 - Administrative authorities and public services:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(ii), a(iii), a(iv), a(v);
- paragraph 2, sub-paragraphs b, d, f, g;
- paragraph 3, sub-paragraphs a, b;
- paragraph 4, sub-paragraphs b, c;
- paragraph 5;
. Article 11 - Media:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(iii), b(ii), c(ii), d, e(i), g;
- paragraph 2;
- paragraph 3;
. Article 12 - Cultural activities and facilities:
- paragraph 1;
- paragraph 2;
- paragraph 3;
. Article 13 - Economic and social life:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a, b;
. Article 14 - Transfrontier exchanges:
- paragraph a;
- paragraph b;
g) Serbian language:
. Article 8 - Education:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(ii), b(i), c(i), d(iv), e(ii), g, h, i;
. Article 9 - Justice:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(ii), a(iii), b(ii), b(iii), c(ii), c(iii), d;
- paragraph 2, sub-paragraph a;
- paragraph 3;
. Article 10 - Administrative authorities and public services:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(ii), a(iii), a(iv), a(v);
- paragraph 2, sub-paragraphs b, d, f, g;
- paragraph 3, sub-paragraphs a, b;
- paragraph 4, sub-paragraphs b, c;
- paragraph 5;
. Article 11 - Media:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(iii), b(ii), c(ii), d, e(i), g;
- paragraph 2;
- paragraph 3;
. Article 12 - Cultural activities and facilities:
- paragraph 1;
- paragraph 2;
- paragraph 3;
. Article 13 - Economic and social life:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a, b;
. Article 14 - Transfrontier exchanges:
- paragraph a;
- paragraph b;
h) Slovak language:
. Article 8 - Education:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(i), b(i), c(i), d(iv), e(ii), g, h, i;
- paragraph 2;

165

. Article 9 - Justice:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(ii), a(iii), b(ii), b(iii), c(ii), c(iii), d;
- paragraph 2, sub-paragraph a;
- paragraph 3;
. Article 10 - Administrative authorities and public services:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(ii), a(iii), a(iv), a(v);
- paragraph 2, sub-paragraphs b, d, f, g;
- paragraph 3, sub-paragraphs a, b;
- paragraph 4, sub-paragraphs b, c;
- paragraph 5;
. Article 11 - Media:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(iii), b(ii), c(ii), d, e(i), g;
- paragraph 2;
- paragraph 3;
. Article 12 - Cultural activities and facilities:
- paragraph 1;
- paragraph 2;
- paragraph 3;
. Article 13 - Economic and social life:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a, b;
. Article 14 - Transfrontier exchanges:
- paragraph a;
- paragraph b;
i) Turkish language:
. Article 8 - Education:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(i), b(i), c(i), d(iv), e(ii), f(iii), g, h, i;
- paragraph 2;
. Article 9 - Justice:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(ii), a(iii), b(ii), b(iii), c(ii), c(iii), d;
- paragraph 2, sub-paragraph a;
- paragraph 3;
. Article 10 - Administrative authorities and public services:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(ii), a(iii), a(iv), a(v);
- paragraph 2, sub-paragraphs b, d, e, f, g;
- paragraph 3;
- paragraph 4, sub-paragraphs b, c;
- paragraph 5;
. Article 11 - Media:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(iii), b(ii), c(ii), d, e(i), g;
- paragraph 2;
- paragraph 3;
. Article 12 - Cultural activities and facilities:
- paragraph 1;
- paragraph 2;
- paragraph 3;
. Article 13 - Economic and social life:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraph b;
. Article 14 - Transfrontier exchanges:
- paragraph a;
- paragraph b;

166

j) Ukrainian language:
. Article 8 - Education:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(i), b(i), c(i), d(iv), e(iii), f(iii), g, h, i;
- paragraph 2;
. Article 9 - Justice:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(ii), a(iii), b(ii), b(iii), c(ii), c(iii), d;
- paragraph 2, sub-paragraph a;
- paragraph 3;
. Article 10 - Administrative authorities and public services:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(ii), a(iii), a(iv), a(v);
- paragraph 2, sub-paragraphs b, d, e, f, g;
- paragraph 3, sub-paragraphs a, b, c;
- paragraph 4, sub-paragraphs b, c;
- paragraph 5;
. Article 11 - Media:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a(iii), b(ii), c(ii), d, e(i), g;
- paragraph 2;
- paragraph 3;
. Article 12 - Cultural activities and facilities:
- paragraph 1;
- paragraph 2;
- paragraph 3;
. Article 13 - Economic and social life:
- paragraph 1, sub-paragraph b;
. Article 14 - Transfrontier exchanges:
- paragraph a;
- paragraph b.
Period covered: 1/5/2008 The preceding statement concerns Article(s) : 2, 3

Declaration contained in the instrument of ratification deposited on 29 January 2008 - Or. Engl.
Romania declares that the phrase "number considered sufficient" provided for by Article 8, paragraph 1, subparagraph a(iii), of the Charter, means the minimum number of pupils necessary to establish a classroom or
group, according to the provisions of Article 158 of the Educational Law no. 84 of 1995, republished with
subsequent completions and modifications.
Period covered: 1/5/2008 The preceding statement concerns Article(s) : 8

Declaration contained in the instrument of ratification deposited on 29 January 2008 - Or. Engl.
Romania declares that the phrase "territory in which the regional or minority languages is used" provided for
by Article 1, paragraph b, of the Charter, means the administrative-territorial units in which a regional or
minority language is used by at least 20% of the population of these administrative-territorial units.
Period covered: 1/5/2008 The preceding statement concerns Article(s) : 1

167

Declaration contained in the instrument of ratification deposited on 29 January 2008 - Or. Engl.
Romania declares that the provisions of Article 9 of the Charter shall apply according to the stipulations of
Article 128 of the Romanian Constitution, republished, as well as of Article 14 of the Law on the judicial
organization no. 304 of 2004, republished with subsequent completions and modifications.
Period covered: 1/5/2008 The preceding statement concerns Article(s) : 9

Declaration contained in the instrument of ratification deposited on 29 January 2008 - Or. Engl.
Romania declares that the provisions of Article 10 of the Charter shall apply according to the stipulations of
the Romanian Constitution, republished, and the Local Public Administration Law no. 215 of 2001,
republished, as well as of the Framework Convention on the Protection of National Minorities, adopted at
Strasbourg, on 1 February 1995, ratified by Romania by the Law no. 33 of 1995.
Period covered: 1/5/2008 The preceding statement concerns Article(s) : 10

Declaration contained in the instrument of ratification deposited on 29 January 2008 - Or. Engl.
Romania declares that the provisions of Article 11, paragraph 1, sub-paragraph f(i), of the Charter shall apply
according to the provisions of the Law on the organization and functioning of the Romanian Radio Compagy
and the Romanian Television Company no. 41 of 1994.
Period covered: 1/5/2008 The preceding statement concerns Article(s) : 11

168

Appendix II: Comments by the Romanian authorities
1.

General issues

The ratification of the European Charter for Regional and Minority Languages in Romania through Law no.
282/2007, the smooth entry into force of the document, followed by the first monitoring exercise performance
by a large participation and consultation of stakeholders showed that there is a great interest and a lot of
expectations regarding the implementation impact of the convention herein in Romania. The first stage
challenges of the process herein proved to be multiple:
-

the reaction to the document implementation was positive but regarding certain fields, when the
practical implementation of some already assumed commitments or evidence collection was
considered, the capacity of local authorities and directly interested organisations to act effectively
proved to be weak;

-

some provisions are implemented de facto for a long time and they are sometimes considered
ordinary in the regions with large minority population; therefore, data accounting and more precise
statistics were not considered necessary, wherefore upon the first monitoring exercise, the authorities
did not find/receive accurate and significant statistics;

-

in Romania, no statistics were made up to date in justice and social and economic life using the
criterion of language; their implementation continues to be difficult; thus, examples were often used
in the report concluded by the Romanian authorities, because there were no available statistics and
they could not be collected in such a short time for such a large number of languages; partial data
under chapters 8, 11 and 12 are due to the same phenomenon;

-

although the ratification law elaboration lasted many years, whereas Romania adopted a complex
and differentiated ratification formula (10 out of 20 minority languages being included within Part III),
some problems were identified within the implementation and monitoring process, particularly related
to languages spoken by a very small number of persons; actually, out of symbolic grounds and
respect to all national minorities, languages like Ruthene and Macedonian were included within Part
II, differently analysed languages by linguistics specialists, for which the achievement of
commitments is extremely difficult due to the very small number of speakers;

-

the ratification formula was based to a great extent on political criteria, considering not only linguistic
standards, the Charter of Languages being considered in Romania as a legal instrument providing
extra guarantees to the speakers – persons belonging to national minorities – and not only as a
useful instrument to maintain linguistic diversity and cultural heritage; therefore, following recurrent
consultations with minorities, the Romanian authorities deliberately assumed very high standards,
reflecting landmarks for the future rather than actual opportunities to use languages at present; the
Romanian authorities made all necessary efforts to ensure upon the moment of ratification a balance
between the groups of speakers requirements and the actual protection opportunities for minority
languages, having the expectation that, through the implementation and monitoring process, the
landmarks taken into consideration shall gradually represent an input for every involved parties to act
in order to reach superior standards in the use of the languages herein;

-

within the experts report it is rightfully emphasized the inconsistency of certain languages between
the relatively great number of speakers and the limited number of instruments for language use and
promotion (for example, a small number of publications written in Tatar, Bulgarian and even Romani
languages is forecast); thus, we consider that not only the number of speakers must be taken into
account, but the social-economic background as well, which might determine the use of language in
different fields to a greater or lower extent; for example, Tatar speakers aim overwhelmingly to
Turkish language with respect to education and services, having at their disposal more facilities and
opportunities to reach a better life standard;

-

an inverted phenomenon can be observed in relation to Italian and Greek languages – despite the
very small number of speakers, the ethnics and Romanians interest in the languages herein is
currently increasing, whereas the influence of Italian and Greek citizens acting in the capacity of
business persons in Romania, as native speakers and culturally and linguistically connected to
traditional minorities, is more and more observable;

169

within the monitoring process it could have been observed that some provisions of the Charter were
not sufficiently known or, if they are, the data provided with reference to them are general and very
imprecise; a certain inertia could be observed among the involved institutions and organisations for
minorities; we consider that it represents the result of the fact that, after the entry into force of
ratification law (in 2008), the effects of economic-financial crisis became perceptible, whereas the
first expenses reduced out of the budgets of institutions were those for information, dissemination
and promotion.

-

In spite of the problems herein, the first monitoring of the Charter of Languages determined a
significant unprecedented research, assessment, promotion process in the field. The connection of
institutions to organisations for minorities became stronger due to joint activities on languages area, whereas
the intercultural dialogue became more and more analysed. Undeniably, the Charter of Languages proves to
be not only an innovative legal instrument, but an element of creativity and input regarding the use of
languages as well – the consolidation of the used languages by large groups and in significant fields; the
encouragement of the original cultural phenomenon specific to the regions and/or groups of speakers in the
majority of cases.
2.

Measures and evolutions following the first monitoring visit (March 2011)

In 2011, through its non-repayable funds financed system of projects, the Department for Interethnic
Relations within the Government (DIR) promoted more offensively the subject of minority languages
promotion. The projects developed or supported by DIR last year, focused mostly on language and culture,
are mentioned within the Appendix 1. Regarding the competition of interethnic projects announced in March
2012, one of the main subjects proposed by DIR is the continuous promotion of minority languages through
different types of activities.
DIR consultation and collaboration with the organisations of citizens belonging to national minorities was
maintained by the Council for National Minorities (CNM), advisory body of the Government. The activities
from 2011 of CNM specialised commissions, permanently supported activities by DIR, included
study/promotion programmes of minority languages as well. Among the herein, we mention:
Regarding the Commission on education and youth:
September
October

September 26th – The European day of languages “MALLtrilinguals,
voices and colour”
German teachers Conference – minority languages teaching
workshop

Bucharest
Brasov

Regarding the Commission on culture, cults and mass-media:
September

November

December

May
March

- Participation in the international festival of Turkish – Tatar folklore,
organised by the Union of Tatars
- INTERETNICA publication launching
- Participation in the film and book festival
- Participation in Gaudeamus book fair with stands of minorities. Invited
country Italy, focus on the Italian language and culture.

Constan a

National minority day. Musical Confluences CD launching, containing a
traditional song in each minority language, performed by the professional
chorus – Acapella.
Participation with minority stands in Bookfest book fair
Participation with minority stands in the Book, press and music fair

Bucharest

Media
Bucharest

Bucharest
Bucharest

Regarding Art. 12 – Cultural activities and facilities – the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage (MCNH)
sent updated data, as follows:

170

Pursuant to the provisions of Government Ordinance no. 51/1998 regarding the financing system of cultural
programmes, projects and actions improvement, including subsequent amendments and additions, and in
compliance with GD no. 90/2010 regarding the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage organisation and
activity, including subsequent amendments and additions, the organisations for national minorities are entitled
to request and receive financial support for cultural projects through the National Priority Cultural Programme
and by non-repayable funds for emergency cultural needs. The programmes for minorities financed by MNCH
are mentioned within Appendix 2.
At the same time, national minorities have the right to cooperate with public cultural institutions subordinate to
MNCH by organising events in partnership with them, being entitled to participate in the selection sessions for
cultural projects. Thus, the National Cultural Fund Administration provides annually non-repayable funds to
public institutions, non-governmental organisations, private law entities carrying out cultural activities.
National minorities can participate in the sessions herein for the following financing fields: visual arts and new
media, architecture and design, museum activities, performance arts, national cultural heritage, immaterial
heritage, cultural professional training (including cultural management), cultural education.
Romano Kher National Centre for Roma Culture organises selection session for cultural projects as well. The
selection applies to certain associations, foundations, cultural public institutions, companies carrying out
cultural activities, with precise social-educational or cultural objective in Roma benefit. Financing fields:
-

editorial projects – books, magazines and other publications, with literary-artistic character, edited on
any type of support;

-

visual arts and new media – Rom topic-based picture, sculpture, photography, DVDs, documentary
film exhibitions.

The proposed cultural projects must emphasize less approached topics of Rom cultural identity: Rom folklore
and customs (both in Romanian and in Romani), cult literature, Roma slavery, Holocaust, antiracism,
portraits of certain figures, identity pedagogy.
Regarding cultural activities and facilities – museums, archives, folklore, festivals – we can mention as an
example the Romanian Peasant Museum, having within the permanent exhibition structure a hall called
“Together”, where contemporary life aspects of ethnic people living together with the Romanians are
presented. Also, the museum published two editions of “Together” calendar album, illustrated with objects
belonging to the Romanian ethnics. Approximately 8000 treasured objects are kept in the collections of the
museum herein, as a consequence of certain field research conducted by the institution museum curators,
key objects for minorities’ life in Romania.
“Dimitrie Gusti” National Village Museum promotes through its programmes the activity of groups or persons
belonging to the national minorities in Romania. Within the Dialogue of Civilisations Programme or by
exhibitions, fairs, festivals, creation workshops, the institution presented the culture of national minorities, like
– Bulgarian, Armenian, Czech, Serb, Slovak, Croatian, Jewish, Macedonian, German, Italian, Greek,
Albanian, Hungarian, Turkish, Tatar, Ukrainian, Polish, and Lipovans. We mention as an example “The days
of Czech and Slovak culture” in 2011 and the participation of folk craftsmen belonging to national minorities in
the annual fairs of Palm, Saints Peter and Paul, White Flowers holidays, etc.
In relation to different access means in other languages regarding the works created in regional or minority
language, as a result of Alexander Csoma de Körösi – Three Stations project developed in 2010, within the
International Year of Cultures Closeness, declared by UNESCO, a volume of studies dedicated to the great
researcher’s life was translated from Hungarian into Romanian and English.
Another project developed in 2011, under the coordination of UNESCO is „Sharing the same taste: Turkish
and Romanian common traditional cuisine”, within the context of UNESCO Convention for immaterial cultural
heritage saving. The programme implied two research stages, in Romania and Turkey, whereas the results
shall be mentioned within a three languages volume – Romanian, Turkish and English.

171

Romano Kher National Centre for Roma Culture encouraged the “Roma history notes” publication in
Romani language (written by the European Commission), the publication of bilingual books “Manro
Amaro/Our bread” by Marian Ghiţă and Pakivale Bukiake Chiba – ROMANIPE as “cultural matrix” of an
intercultural, multilingual language, in an wider Europe” (within the Session of cultural projects 2011).
Moreover, it supported Romani language learning, through the project “Sikloven romanes. Roma language
and culture course”, in 15 lessons. The Centre promoted the Romani music, creating therefore two bilingual
CDs: “You are my love” and “Bittersweet”.
“German literature days”, “German theatre festival for youth” and “National minority theatre festival” represent
other examples, which shall be financed in 2012 by MNCH as well.
Regarding the collection, storage and promotion of works created in regional or minority languages, MNCH
mentions:
- the collections of National Library of Romania have an encyclopaedic profile, whereas regional and minority
languages can be found among the works published in Romania and stored according to the legal storage
law, by purchasing documents written in the languages herein and in publications received through the
international exchange of publications;
- the annual average of works written in regional and minority languages, according to the national
bibliography of Romania, is the following:
- Hungarian – 380 works
- Serb and Croatian – 14 works
- Czech – 12 works
- Bulgarian – 8 works
- Albanian – 3 works
- Greek – 4 works
-Italian – 36 works
-Polish – 10 works
-Russian – 18 works
-Slovak – 3 works
-Turkish – 5 works
-Ukrainian – 15 works.
- through its exchange policy approved by the Scientific Board, the National Library of Romania belongs to an
international network of publications exchange, having as objective the support and development of foreign
books collections.
- within the Selection criteria for books proposed by exchange partners, the Library is interested in the original
language for mainstream languages, quality translations, and in minority languages as cultural diversity
expression as well.
- the average of publications exchange, books and periodicals is, as follows:
No.
1.

Country
Bulgaria

2.

Czech Republic

3.

Croatia

4.

Germany

5.

Poland

6.

Russia

7.

Serbia

8.
9.

Slovakia
Turkey

10.

Hungary

10.

Ukraine

Partners
Relations with BN [*National Library], medical
library – 2 partners
Relations cu BN, economy institution,
specialised library
Relations with BN, specialised library, institute –
5 partners
Relations with BN, BU [*University Library],
specialised libraries, school libraries, Institute, 10
partners
Relations with BN and the Science Academy
Relations with BN, public library, specialised
library – 4 partners
Relations with BN, specialised libraries, BU – 3
partners
Relations with BN – 1 partner
Relation with BN and the Studies Academy – 2
partners
Relations with 5 active partners – BN, BU,
academic libraries
Relations with the Academic Library

Book
20 works/year

Periodicals
2 periodicals

50 works/year
5 works/year

20
works/year
4 works/year

100
works/year

48
works/year

30
books/years
155
works/year
40 works/year

10
works/year
40
works/year
5 works/year

10 works/year
5 works/year

3 works/year
2 works/year

50 works/year

25
works/year
5 works/year

10 works/year

172

Regarding translation and terminology research services, for minority languages in Romania, the Centre for
Professional Training in Culture subordinate to MNCH organises national assessment examinations of skills
in Bulgarian, Czech, German, Greek, Italian, Yiddish, Hungarian, Polish, Romani, Russian, Serb, Slovak,
Turkish, and Ukrainian languages. The examination focuses both on languages and individualised
specialised fields (technical, legal sciences, medicine, geography, economic sciences, philosophy, etc). All
language-based examinations are equally treated, without differentiating the applicants, examination periods
or the assessment criteria.
CPTC is also entitled to issue the sworn translator certificate for the above mentioned languages. Starting
with 2010, examinations for Romani language were also organised, focusing on the introduction of Serb
language examination. In 2011 there were the following requests which were taken into consideration:
2011

Bulgarian 3 candidates
Czech 4 candidates
Greek 22 candidates
Romani 12 candidates.
Slovak 3 candidates

Hebrew (Yiddish) 15 candidates
Italian 88 candidates
Polish 2 candidates
Turkish 27 candidates

German 36 candidates
Hungarian 13 candidates
Russian 36 candidates
Ukrainian 3 candidates

Up to date, there were no requests regarding Serb, Ruthenium, Tatar, Croatian, Armenian and Albanian
languages. In order to encourage mother tongue high school graduates, both in Romania and abroad, to
obtain the translator certificate, it is no longer necessary taking the examination, but only certain documents
submission to the Ministry of Justice. The certificate is issued based on the Baccalaureate Degree. The
Hungarian and German students who studied in Romania in high schools teaching in the respective mother
tongues are found in the same situation.
3.

Additions regarding the recommendation proposed by the European experts

Adopting a structured approach for the implementation of each commitment upon ratification, in
cooperation with the representatives of minority languages speakers
A new element from the monitoring visit is represented by the temporary results of population and dwellings
census, conducted in 2011, which shall be made public at the beginning of 2012. The results regarding the
Romanian population according to the ethnicity criterion registered significant changes in the demographic
evolution of groups – the majority registers an important decrease, including the majority group, of
Romanians (it is also a consequence of the fact that over 2 billion citizens left to work abroad or they have
settled permanently there). The temporary results according to the mother tongue criterion were not
published yet and, therefore, a comparative analysis of the current situation concerning regional or minority
languages groups of speakers is impossible to be delivered with reference to the situation registered during
the 2002 census.
Following the consultations with the institutions and organisations involved in the implementation and
monitoring process, two working groups were created, with which the Department for Interethnic Relations
(DIR) within the Romanian Government permanently liaise (one inter-institutional group and another for
minority NGOs consultation). Following the first report concluded by the European experts and received by
the Romanian authorities, DIR organised a meeting with ministries upon February 9th 2012 and a new data
collection session in writing, until March 9th 2012. Furthermore, the organisations for minorities were notified
during the meetings held in March 2012 with respect to the monitoring process current stage.
The discussions with both working groups shall be continued by DIR after the Committee of Ministers of the
Council of Europe has adopted the recommendations provided to the Romanian authorities, establishing
therefore an action plan and a schedule for assumed commitments implementation and rectification of
shortcomings until the following monitoring cycle.
The implementation of broad educational models used to teach / in Tatar and Turkish languages, in
cooperation with the representatives of these minority languages speakers
Regarding the academic level, the Turkish language is studied at the department of Turkish language and
literature within the Faculty of Foreign Languages and Literatures – the University of Bucharest. From 2000 –
2010, approximately 80 Turkish elementary school teachers and teachers were trained for pre-school,
primary, middle school and secondary education at the University of Bucharest, Ovidius University of
Constan a, within the Faculty of letters and College of elementary school teachers, and at “Kemal Ataturk”
College of elementary teachers of Medgidia. Starting with 2009, young people can also study Turkish
language at Babes – Bolyai Multicultural University of Cluj-Napoca, within the Institute of Turcology.

173

With respect to the pre-university level, 3-4 hours of Turkish language are continued to be weekly taught from
1st to 12th grade. At the same time, pupils study the history and traditions of the Turkish and Tatar people in
Dobrogea, for one hour per week, in 6th and 7th grades. Out of the 4,700 Turkish people (pre-school children
and pupils from 1 – 12th grades), having Turkish and Tatar language and history classes, a smaller number
of approximately 380 pre-school children study in kindergartens. During the 2011-2012 school year, there are
2 kindergartens using the bilingual teaching approach.
Continuous efforts are made in order to ensure posts and necessary financing for Turkish and Tatar
language and history teachers, who teach in Turkish. During the 2010-2011 school year, 45 teachers
provided the teaching of language, history and traditions of the Turkish and Tatar people in Romania.
A very good experience proved to be the educational private institutions – in Constan a and Bucharest there
is a high school of computer science where the Turkish language is studied, being coordinated by Lumina
foundation of the Turkish Republic and in collaboration with the Ministry of Education in Romania. The
collaboration extended in 2010 by founding Lumina Private University of South-East Europe in Bucharest.
Within the Methodist teachers network for minority languages, there are 1 – 2 Methodists in Constanta and
Tulcea counties, in charge with the Turkish-Tatar language, history and community traditions teaching and
Turkish and Tatar children enrolment.
MERYS finances annually school competitions on subjects, like the school national Olympiad of Turkish
language. The 16th edition takes place this year (January – April 2012, including 40 candidates in the
national stage), whereas a Romanian team shall participate in the International Olympiad of Turkish language
in Turkey (May – June 2012).
It continues the elaboration of curriculum, educational materials and auxiliary school manuals editing in/for
Turkish and Tatar language, history and traditions, for intercultural education and diversity etc., together with
other partners. In Romania M.E.R.Y.S. has the use of set of manuals of Turkish language and literature (18th grades), Turkish and Tatar history and traditions in Romania (6-7th grades).
Within the context of the new Law of national education no. 1/2011, different regulations were elaborated or
re-examined with respect to the educational offer for ethnical pupils, including Turkish and Tatar. For
example, the Methodology regarding mother tongue language teaching/in mother tongue was revised by
M.E.R.Y.S.
Regarding Tatar language at the level of M.E.RY.S., there were not until now an approved curriculum and
homologated school manuals, but with reference to the community there are Tatar language classes within
the branches of the Democratic Union of Turkish-Muslim Tatars in Romania and in some schools. Language
teaching groups were created at Constan a, Medgidia, Cobadin, Valu lui Traian, Eforie Nord, Tuzla, Lumina,
M. Kogălniceanu and Techirghiol. The Union of Tatars purchased for the groups herein blackboards,
notebooks, books and provides transportation free of charge to pupils by minibuses. Turkish and Tatar
languages speaking teachers speaking ensure optional courses, being paid by the Union of Tatars as well.
The union has encouraged children to learn their mother tongue during summer holiday, organising various
mountain camps of Tatar language (Predeal). With the same input purpose, a Tatar poetry competition has
been organised for two years in December. In order to provide quality teaching, both community-created
manuals for primary grades and additional materials from the Autonomous Republic of Crimea – Ukraine are
used. The planning of courses was made by professionals – prof. Ene Ulgean, Turkish language inspector at
the School Inspectorate of Constan a and prof. Neriman Ibraim (1-4th grades), both members of the Tatar
ethnicity. The herein represent only some achievements of 2011, after many years of Tatar language study
interruptions.
The first counsels of Tatar language and traditions teachers providing education within the branches of the
Tatar Union and in schools took place in 2011(in the above mentioned system). Two teachers training
activities were carried out in collaboration with the Teaching-Staff Resource Centre of Constan a.

174

On the Tatar Union deputy’s initiative, the Parliament adopted the Law 256/2010, implementing May 5th as
the Tatar language Day in Romania. Upon its first celebration, distinctions were granted (medals and
degrees) to the greatest figures who contributed to Tatar language promotion – writers, journalists, manual
authors, school inspectors.
The Tatar language was also promoted during different cultural events organised by DIR – in 2010 a group of
kindergarten children in Constan a participated in the Musical festival of children for the Alliance of
Civilisation (December, Bucharest), whereas the Tatar women chorus of Cobadin participated in the
European Day of Languages (Bucharest, September 25 – 26th 2011). Supported by DIR, the Tatar Union
organises annually books, publications, CDs exhibitions at the Book, press and music Fair (March), EthnoRustic minority tradition exhibition (May) and Gaudeamus book fair (November), all taking place in Bucharest.
Using its own budget (allocated by the Romanian Government), the Tatar Union organised in 2010 – 2011
many cultural activities promoting Tatar language – activities dedicated to children, women, some historical
figures, main traditional holidays, festivals in Romania, Turkey or Ukraine, scientific meetings, etc. On
December 13th the entire community celebrates annually the Tatars Day in Romania. Every year in
September a large Tatar folklore festival is organised at Constan a, where Tatar groups in Romania,
Ukraine, the Russian Federation, Kazakhstan, Azerbaijan, etc take part to.
It is worthy of mentioning that the demand for Turkish and also the dynamics for studying Turkish is more
accentuated in comparison to the demand for Tatar. This can be explained by the attention and support
granted by the Turkish state offers to learning Turkish in Romanian schools by means of the General
Consulate of Turkey in Constanta. Due to the agreements settled with the Ministry of Education, each year
groups of Turkish and Tatar young people receive scholarships to study at academic centres in Turkey. Upon
graduating studies young people benefit of numerous work opportunities in Romania as speakers of Turkish,
which gives then an advantage.
Despite the very good collaboration relationship between the Tatar Union of Romania and Crimea
Autonomous Region from Ukraine, the support regarding the study and use of Tatar language is much more
limited.
Assuring basic training and continuous improvement of a sufficient number of teachers aiming to achieve
undertaken obligations, according to art. 8, especially for German, Hungarian, Turkish and Ukrainian
languages.
For German, we mention: The Centre for Continuous Improvement in German (CFCLG) from Mediaş
(www.zfl.ro), unit which functions under the Ministry of Education, Research, Youth and Sports and it is the
result of the collaboration with German authorities, its main purpose being to supply further training
programmes for teachers who teach in German or teach German in kindergartens, schools, gymnasiums and
high schools. In time, the centre opened an office in Sibiu and a branch in Timişoara, centres where they hold
training programmes, similar to the one in Medias. The training courses are taught by teachers from Romania
and Germany (experts from Germany which work temporarily in schools where they teach German in
Romania). It is worthy to mention that the Training Centre also prepares its own publication with useful data
for the ones interested, both in German and in Romanian. The Centre also promotes within the training
activity the work on projects, together with teachers, thus stimulating the use of modern teaching methods in
schools.
The table below reflects the number of activities and participants during the last two years.
School
year

20092010
20102011

pre-school education

primary education

German
language
Activitie Participant
s
s

Subject in German

Activities participants

Activities

participants

18

313

19

401

41

1125

8

150

18

400

20

391

42

1019

7

113

Activities Participants

For the Hungarian language we mention the following training activities:
- in order to obtain the teaching degree – courses organised by „Babeş-Bolyai” University, for various
specialisations, in Hungarian;
- training courses in Hungarian organised by the Hungarian Union of Educators from Romania within
„Bolyai Nyári Akadémia” Summer Academy;

175

-

training courses organised within school Inspectorates and Teaching-Staff Resource Centre from the
counties;
During the last years, more and more training courses took place within some projects financed from
European funds, having the purpose to develop human resources (POSDRU).

For Turkish we mention: Intensive initial training carried out within improvement courses for language
and methodology for Turkish language teaching for the potential Turkish and Tatar language, as well
as history teachers – Annually, 40 persons enrolled within the courses organised by MECTS at CCD
Constanţa. In collaboration with the Consulate of the Turkish Republic in Constanţa, we organise annually
improvement courses and methodology studies for Turkish language in Turkey (this year during June 25th –
July 7th in Istanbul).
For Ukrainian language we mention: Improvement internships carried out by teachers of Ukrainian/in
Ukrainian within Romanian schools in academic centres from Ukraine, by the Ukrainian Embassy in
Romania, at the request of the Ukrainian council at D.G.Î.L.M.R.P.P.S. – MECTS. In 2010 they have taken
improvement courses at Cernauţi (20 professors from the 8 counties in which Ukrainian is studied), in 2011 at Lvov (20 teachers from all 8 counties). Also in 2011 courses have been held at Ivano-Frankivsk, to which
10 teachers have participated from Maramures County, based on the partnership between the region IvanoFrankivsk from Ukraine and Maramures County Inspectorate. Also, meetings have taken place on subjects of
teaching, advising, experience exchanges of teachers which teach (in) Ukrainian. The teachers have got
involved in the same time in schools participation at contests and festivals for the Ukrainian minority.
The teachers of different minority languages – Polish, Serbian, Slovakian etc. - usually participate at
improvement activities, language camps organised by the NGOS, courses organised by the County School
Inspectorates Teaching-Staff Resource Centre. In the majority of cases the professors also participate in
summer schools or courses organised in their native countries, based on bilateral agreements.
The further development of a broad offer related to teaching of/in Romani language, taking into account the
needs and requirements of Romani speakers
Regarding the activities carried out in Romania for the conservation and development of Romani language,
especially from the educational perspective, we set out the following evolutions:
- Granting 21 distinct positions, annually, to young Romani for their admission at the section for
Romani language and literature (from 2005 section A, prior to section B, initially – 1992-1997 - as an optional
course), within the Faculty of Foreign Languages and Literatures – Bucharest University. In the same time,
during 2000 – 2010 approximately 600 Romani schoolmasters and teachers for the primary and pre-school
education were trained, as well as Romani teachers, at the same University (The Department for distance
learning CREDIS), respectively at Babes – Bolyai University from Cluj Napoca (between 2006-2010, at the
Faculty for Psychology and Education Sciences).
Intensive initial training carried out within summer language courses and methodology studies
for Romani language, for the potential Romani language and history teachers – annually, 56 persons
were trained within the courses organised by MECTS, financed by UNICEF. The program is held starting with
1999.
- Romani language preservation, history and culture for education(assuring teaching for 3-4
hours/week of Romani native language for grades I-XII, respectively 1 hour/week of Romani history and
traditions, for grades VI and VII). From over 220.000 - 260.000 students with recognized Romani identity,
annually (students from pre-school and high-school), approx. 26.000 – 31.000 students (11-13%) have
classes of Romani language and history, which are even held entirely in Romani language (with a smaller
number, of approx. 900 students in preschools and schools).
- The continuous support, where teaching in Romani as native language is required, at pre-school
level, by bilingual approaches (Romani-Romanian, Romani-Hungarian). During the school year 2011-2012,
20 kindergartens are teaching in Romani as native language, using bilingual teaching approaches.
- Assuring position and the corresponding financing for teachers of Romani language and history
or primary school teachers of Romani. During the school year 2011-2012, 443 professors provide Romani
language teaching, history and Romani traditions or integral teaching in Romani as native language.

176

- The methodical teachers network for language, history, traditions and school for Romani is
maintained (at the level of each county, between 2-6 methodology teachers, of which at least one for
Romani language, history and traditions; amounting a total of 146 methodology teachers).
- Continuing financing several national school contests in Romani language and history, again
within the school year 2011 - 2012 (for the national school Olympics for Romani language, XIIIth edition
(January-April 2012, 72 contestants at the national phase), the National school contest for Roma history and
th
traditions (V edition, April 2012), for 36 students. The first edition for a new school contest will be carried out
as well - The national contest for artistic creation in Romani language – during April 2012.
- Continuing to elaborate curriculum and education materials, as well as auxiliary text books in/for
Romani language, history and traditions, intercultural education and diversity etc., together with partners. In
Romania, MECTS has en entire set of text books for Romani language and literature, history and traditions,
all for the mandatory education (grades I-X), but also for the academic level. Both constitute absolute
performances in Europe. Also, in 2011 The guide for the school mediator (for Romani communities) was
edited and printed, material drawn up by MECTS and UNICEF in order to support education for Romani
children.
- Continuing to issue new legislative acts and to revise the existing ones, initiated by MECTS,
regarding the educational offer for Roma, including in the context of the New Law for national education
No. 1/ 2011. One example would be the revision of the Methodology regarding language teaching/in the
native language at MECTS level.
By G.D. no. 1221/2011, the Government has adopted the second strategy of Romania for Roma - Inclusion
strategy for Romani citizens belonging to Roma minority for the period 2012-2020. The education
chapter includes measures for further promotion of Romani language by the construction of a national
network of school mediators, by training and employing professors for Romani language and by implementing
a curriculum for Romani language.
The National Agency for Romani is currently implementing two educational projects financed from European
Funds:
Project 1. “Education of Roma children - the path to a stable job”
The main expected results:
- 2400 scholarships awarded over a three year period;
- 42 employed and trained mentors;
- 800 scholarship pupils receiving on a yearly basis mentoring services during a three year period;
- 2400 Roma people who have left the education system, identified and directed to "Second Chance" type of
programmes;
- 800 scholarship pupils receiving on a yearly basis two intensive training sessions for single subject national
tests, during the 3 years of the project implementation.
Project 2. “School – a chance to everyone”
Results:
- 1415 pupils participating in “after school” educational programmes in 85 schools of 20 counties;
- 1500 persons participating to “Second Chance” educational programmes in 100 schools of 20 counties;
- 500 teachers trained in teaching techniques tailored on the pupil’s needs;
- 500 persons trained for providing the “after school” services;
- 8.000 parents trained and counselled in order to involve them in their children’s education;
- 8.000 pupils counselled and guided in order to attend the school;
- an interregional network of Roma NGO-s which will activate in the education field has been set up.
- 20 cooperation networks at the county level to prevent early school leaving have been set up.
For the promotion of minority languages in the educational system we carry out, each year school contests
(Olympics). The most well-known are for Native language and literature, which is concluded with the national
phase in April. The students receive awards in money, books, sport equipment and trips. Starting a few years
ago, a competition on intercultural themes was also introduced, including also artistic tests in different
languages - the national contest „Diversitatea - o sansă în plus pentru viitor” *Diversity – a chance for the
th
future, carried out by MECTS and „Divers” Association from Targu Mures. In 2012, the VI edition will take
place, the final being scheduled for December, at Bucharest.

177

Without being related to the educational field, Romani language has started to be promoted in other fields:
- The Ministry of Justice has certified 7 persons, Romani speakers, as translators to accompany Roma in the
Courts of law.
- The National Agency for Roma and the department for Interethnic Relations have financed in 2011, from
funds allocated from the state budget, a play in Romani language, for Roma and non-Roma actors. We have
organised shows in Bucharest and in the country.
- The Roma organisation represented in the Romanian Parliament – Roma Pro Europe Party - has a weekly
broadcast of 2.5 hours on a private TV Channel (OTV). The broadcast presenters are Romani speakers, and
some interviews are in Romani language.
- Upon the initiative of Roma minority representative in the Romanian Parliament, the Law no. 28/2011
regulated the day of February 20th as the commemoration day for Roma manumission. The nongovernmental organisations have organised diverse commemoration actions, including the ones belonging to
the Hungarian ones from Targu Mures.
- with the support of DRI, the “Impreuna” Association from Bucharest organises yearly The gala of Rrom
women, also the national contest for the art of debate – Young people debate - at which Roma students
participate.
Regarding the languages included in the 3rd part, MECTS and the Union of Bulgarians from Banat have
presented certain new data and have made the following specifications:
- for the Bulgarian language there was no request for full study in Bulgarian or the study of several
disciplines in this language;
- a. at „Sfinţii Kiril şi Metodiu High School” from Dudeştii Vechi, Timiş county, in 2010-2011, a total
number of 607 students were enrolled, of which 583 have studied Bulgarian starting with Ist grade, up to the
XIIth grade;
- in 2012:
- at the all-day kindergarten study, 130 children are enrolled, of which 50 are Bulgarians. Out of the
total of 8 teachers, 7 are Bulgarian. During the classes they use partially Bulgarian language from Banat;
- in the I-IV classes study a number of 140 students, out of which 70 are Bulgarians. Out of the total
of 7 teachers, 6 are Bulgarians. Starting with the Ist grade they teach literary Bulgarian, 4 hours/week;
- in the grades V-VIII, a total of 160 students are enrolled, of which 80 are Bulgarian. From a total of
24 teachers, 14 are Bulgarian. During grades V-VIII, they teach literary Bulgarian, 4 hours/week. Also, in the
grades VI and VII the subject „Istoria minorităţii bulgare din România” *The history of Bulgarian minority from
Romania is taught, in the Bulgarian from Banat.
- during grades IX-XII, a total of 135 students are enrolled, of which 50 are Bulgarian. From a total of
22 teachers, 12 are Bulgarian. In grades IX-XII, they teach literary Bulgarian, 4 hours/week.
b. In Breştea locality, Timiş county, Bulgarian language is studied at kindergarten, where 20 children
are enrolled; at the school with grades I-IV (15 children, of which 12 are Bulgarian).
In Denta locality, Timis County, at the kindergarten, a total of 91 children are enrolled, of which 8 are
Bulgarian. At the class activities they also use the Bugarian from Banat.
d. In Vinga locality, Arad County, they study literary Bulgarian during grades I-VIII, 3 hours per week.
e. At Izvoarele, Dâmboviţa county, Bulgarian language is studied at school, 5 hours/week, in grades
I-VIII, having 7 groups of 20-25 students. The courses are taught by the Bulgarian teacher from the Bulgarian
Theoretical High-School "Hristo Botev" from Bucharest.
f. At Băleni Sârbi, Dâmboviţa county, Bulgarian language is studied at school, 5 hours/week, in
grades I-VIII, having 5 groups of 10-15 students. The courses are taught by a Bulgarian teacher from the
Bulgarian Theoretical High-School "Hristo Botev" from Bucharest.
g. At Târgovişte, Dâmboviţa county, „Zaedno” Association organises annually Bulgarian courses, at which
100-150 persons participate. The courses are taught by a member of the association.
h. Bulgarian is also studied at the Bulgarian Theoretical High School "Hristo Botev" from Bucharest,
in IX-XII grade, 4 hours/week.
- At German:
Paragraph 1 a i point 377 - we mention that, in 2011, 6.039 children were enrolled in a German kindergarten.
Point 379 - we mention that, in 2011, 5.724 students were enrolled in German primary schools.
Point 381 - we mention that, in 2011, 4.788 students were enrolled in German gymnasium and 3.575 in high
school.
Point 384 - we mention that the number of possibilities to study in German and Germanic studies has
increased in the last years. 19 universities from Romania provide 73 choices for study in 11 cities;

178

- at Hungarian:
Under art. 491, we specify that the number of pre-school students is 39.192.
Under art. 493, we specify that the number of primary school students is 44.917.
Under art. 496, we specify that the number of gymnasium students is 43.316, and from high school students
36.261.
Under art. 491, we specify that the number of students from professional education is 16.776, and post-high
school is 625.
Under art. 497, we specify that the professional education is held in Hungarian in the following counties Alba,
Arad, Bacău, Bihor, Bistriţa-Năsăud, Braşov, Cluj, Covasna, Hunedoara, Harghita, Mureş, Sibiu, Sălaj, Satu
Mare, Timiş, having more students in counties like Bihor, Covasna, Harghita, Mureş şi Satu Mare.
Art. 507 can be amendedn with the following training activities:
- training in order to obtain the teaching degree, organised by „Babeş-Bolyai” University, for various
majors, in Hungarian;
- training courses in Hungarian organised by the Hungarian Union of Educators from Romania within
„Bolyai Nyári Akadémia” Summer Academy;
- Training courses within POSDRU projects (with European funds);
- training courses organised within school Inspectorates and Teaching-Staff Resource Centre of the
counties;
- At Slovak language, training activities:
- the courses organised by Bucharest University, The Faculty of Foreign Languages, The department for
Slovak language and literature;
- the training of teachers from schools with Slovak teaching is ensured also by the County school
inspectorate, which organised education for the Slovak minority;
- the professors from Romania participate, also, at improvement courses organised by the methodology
centres from Bratislava and Banska Bystrica (Slovakia).
Reviewing the limits settled in what concerns the official use of minority languages in the local
administration (over 20% of the population)
Regarding this problem, in the response received from the Ministry of Administration and Interns (MAI) –
General Directorate for European Business and International Relations emphasizes that, up to the present
time, the amendment of Law 215/ 2001 was not brought to discussion. „Taking into account the fact that the
law is organic, its alteration supposes an ample process of consultation and public debate”. Underlining the
great number of languages for which Romania has ratified Carta, MAI considers that this modification would
involve the increase of costs regarding the implementation of the respective provisions, supported by local
authorities.
The Institute for Studying National Minorities Problems (ISPMN) – believes that, in the light of preliminary
data of the population and dwelling census from 2011, in several localities, there is a risk that the minority
population will not achieve the 20% limit provisioned by the law in force. This would lead to losing certain
linguistic rights in those localities. In order to avoid this situation, ISPMN thinks that the revision of the 20%
limit would be necessary for the future. According to the ISPMN researches, the situation of administrative
units in which the minority population has decreased under 20% is the following:

Minority

Number of administrative
units with over 20% of the
people… (Census 2002)

The number of administrative
units where the minority
population has decreased
under 20% (Census 2011)

Hungarian
Romani
German
Ukrainian
Serbian
Turkish
Tatar

338
87
5
15
3
1
0

15
13
0
1
0
0
0

179

It is worthy of mentioning that the demand for Turkish and also the dynamics for studying Turkish is more
accentuated in comparison to the demand for Tatar. This can be explained by the attention and support
granted by the Turkish state offers to learning Turkish in Romanian schools by means of the General
Consulate of Turkey in Constanta. Due to the agreements settled with the Ministry of Education, each year
groups of Turkish and Tatar young people receive scholarships to study at academic centres in Turkey. Upon
graduating studies young people benefit of numerous work opportunities in Romania as speakers of Turkish,
which gives then an advantage.
Despite the very good collaboration relationship between the Tatar Union of Romania and Crimea
Autonomous Region from Ukraine, the support regarding the study and use of Tatar language is much more
limited.
Assuring basic training and continuous improvement of a sufficient number of teachers aiming to achieve
undertaken obligations, according to art. 8, especially for German, Hungarian, Turkish and Ukrainian
languages.
For German, we mention: The Centre for Continuous Improvement in German (CFCLG) from Mediaş
(www.zfl.ro), unit which functions under the Ministry of Education, Research, Youth and Sports and it is the
result of the collaboration with German authorities, its main purpose being to supply further training
programmes for teachers who teach in German or teach German in kindergartens, schools, gymnasiums and
high schools. In time, the centre opened an office in Sibiu and a branch in Timişoara, centres where they hold
training programmes, similar to the one in Medias. The training courses are taught by teachers from Romania
and Germany (experts from Germany which work temporarily in schools where they teach German in
Romania). It is worthy to mention that the Training Centre also prepares its own publication with useful data
for the ones interested, both in German and in Romanian. The Centre also promotes within the training
activity the work on projects, together with teachers, thus stimulating the use of modern teaching methods in
schools.
The table below reflects the number of activities and participants during the last two years.
School
year

20092010
20102011

pre-school education

primary education

German language

Subject in German

Activities

participants

Activities

participants

Activities

Participants

Activities Participants

18

313

19

401

41

1125

8

150

18

400

20

391

42

1019

7

113

For the Hungarian language we mention the following training activities:
- in order to obtain the teaching degree – courses organised by „Babeş-Bolyai” University, for various
specialisations, in Hungarian;
- training courses in Hungarian organised by the Hungarian Union of Educators from Romania within
„Bolyai Nyári Akadémia” Summer Academy;
- training courses organised within school Inspectorates and Teaching-Staff Resource Centre from the
counties;
- During the last years, more and more training courses took place within some projects financed from
European funds, having the purpose to develop human resources (POSDRU).
For Turkish we mention: Intensive initial training carried out within improvement courses for language
and methodology for Turkish language teaching for the potential Turkish and Tatar language, as well
as history teachers – Annually, 40 persons enrolled within the courses organised by MECTS at CCD
Constanţa. In collaboration with the Consulate of the Turkish Republic in Constanţa, we organise annually
improvement courses and methodology studies for Turkish language in Turkey (this year during June 25th –
July 7th in Istanbul).
For Ukrainian language we mention: Improvement internships carried out by teachers of Ukrainian/in
Ukrainian within Romanian schools in academic centres from Ukraine, by the Ukrainian Embassy in
Romania, at the request of the Ukrainian council at D.G.Î.L.M.R.P.P.S. – MECTS. In 2010 they have taken
improvement courses at Cernauţi (20 professors from the 8 counties in which Ukrainian is studied), in 2011 at Lvov (20 teachers from all 8 counties). Also in 2011 courses have been held at Ivano-Frankivsk, to which

180

10 teachers have participated from Maramures County, based on the partnership between the region IvanoFrankivsk from Ukraine and Maramures County Inspectorate. Also, meetings have taken place on subjects of
teaching, advising, experience exchanges of teachers which teach (in) Ukrainian. The teachers have got
involved in the same time in schools participation at contests and festivals for the Ukrainian minority.
The teachers of different minority languages – Polish, Serbian, Slovakian etc. - usually participate at
improvement activities, language camps organised by the NGOS, courses organised by the County School
Inspectorates Teaching-Staff Resource Centre. In the majority of cases the professors also participate in
summer schools or courses organised in their native countries, based on bilateral agreements.
The further development of a broad offer related to teaching of/in Romani language, taking into account the
needs and requirements of Romani speakers
Regarding the activities carried out in Romania for the conservation and development of Romani language,
especially from the educational perspective, we set out the following evolutions:
- Granting 21 distinct positions, annually, to young Romani for their admission at the section for
Romani language and literature (from 2005 section A, prior to section B, initially – 1992-1997 - as an optional
course), within the Faculty of Foreign Languages and Literatures – Bucharest University. In the same time,
during 2000 – 2010 approximately 600 Romani schoolmasters and teachers for the primary and pre-school
education were trained, as well as Romani teachers, at the same University (The Department for distance
learning CREDIS), respectively at Babes – Bolyai University from Cluj Napoca (between 2006-2010, at the
Faculty for Psychology and Education Sciences).
Intensive initial training carried out within summer language courses and methodology studies
for Romani language, for the potential Romani language and history teachers – annually, 56 persons
were trained within the courses organised by MECTS, financed by UNICEF. The program is held starting with
1999.
- Romani language preservation, history and culture for education(assuring teaching for 3-4
hours/week of Romani native language for grades I-XII, respectively 1 hour/week of Romani history and
traditions, for grades VI and VII). From over 220.000 - 260.000 students with recognized Romani identity,
annually (students from pre-school and high-school), approx. 26.000 – 31.000 students (11-13%) have
classes of Romani language and history, which are even held entirely in Romani language (with a smaller
number, of approx. 900 students in preschools and schools).
- The continuous support, where teaching in Romani as native language is required, at pre-school
level, by bilingual approaches (Romani-Romanian, Romani-Hungarian). During the school year 2011-2012,
20 kindergartens are teaching in Romani as native language, using bilingual teaching approaches.
- Assuring position and the corresponding financing for teachers of Romani language and history
or primary school teachers of Romani. During the school year 2011-2012, 443 professors provide Romani
language teaching, history and Romani traditions or integral teaching in Romani as native language.
- The methodical teachers network for language, history, traditions and school for Romani is
maintained (at the level of each county, between 2-6 methodology teachers, of which at least one for
Romani language, history and traditions; amounting a total of 146 methodology teachers).
- Continuing financing several national school contests in Romani language and history, again
within the school year 2011 - 2012 (for the national school Olympics for Romani language, XIIIth edition
(January-April 2012, 72 contestants at the national phase), the National school contest for Roma history and
th
traditions (V edition, April 2012), for 36 students. The first edition for a new school contest will be carried out
as well - The national contest for artistic creation in Romani language – during April 2012.
- Continuing to elaborate curriculum and education materials, as well as auxiliary text books in/for
Romani language, history and traditions, intercultural education and diversity etc., together with partners. In
Romania, MECTS has en entire set of text books for Romani language and literature, history and traditions,
all for the mandatory education (grades I-X), but also for the academic level. Both constitute absolute
performances in Europe. Also, in 2011 The guide for the school mediator (for Romani communities) was
edited and printed, material drawn up by MECTS and UNICEF in order to support education for Romani
children.
- Continuing to issue new legislative acts and to revise the existing ones, initiated by MECTS,
regarding the educational offer for Roma, including in the context of the New Law for national education
No. 1/ 2011. One example would be the revision of the Methodology regarding language teaching/in the
native language at MECTS level.

181

By G.D. no. 1221/2011, the Government has adopted the second strategy of Romania for Roma - Inclusion
strategy for Romani citizens belonging to Roma minority for the period 2012-2020. The education
chapter includes measures for further promotion of Romani language by the construction of a national
network of school mediators, by training and employing professors for Romani language and by implementing
a curriculum for Romani language.
The National Agency for Romani is currently implementing two educational projects financed from European
Funds:
Project 1. “Education of Roma children - the path to a stable job”
The main expected results:
- 2400 scholarships awarded over a three year period;
- 42 employed and trained mentors;
- 800 scholarship pupils receiving on a yearly basis mentoring services during a three year period;
- 2400 Roma people who have left the education system, identified and directed to "Second Chance" type of
programmes;
- 800 scholarship pupils receiving on a yearly basis two intensive training sessions for single subject national
tests, during the 3 years of the project implementation.
Project 2. “School – a chance to everyone”
Results:
- 1415 pupils participating in “after school” educational programmes in 85 schools of 20 counties;
- 1500 persons participating to “Second Chance” educational programmes in 100 schools of 20 counties;
- 500 teachers trained in teaching techniques tailored on the pupil’s needs;
- 500 persons trained for providing the “after school” services;
- 8.000 parents trained and counselled in order to involve them in their children’s education;
- 8.000 pupils counselled and guided in order to attend the school;
- an interregional network of Roma NGO-s which will activate in the education field has been set up.
- 20 cooperation networks at the county level to prevent early school leaving have been set up.
For the promotion of minority languages in the educational system we carry out, each year school contests
(Olympics). The most well-known are for Native language and literature, which is concluded with the national
phase in April. The students receive awards in money, books, sport equipment and trips. Starting a few years
ago, a competition on intercultural themes was also introduced, including also artistic tests in different
languages - the national contest „Diversitatea - o sansă în plus pentru viitor” *Diversity – a chance for the
th
future, carried out by MECTS and „Divers” Association from Targu Mures. In 2012, the VI edition will take
place, the final being scheduled for December, at Bucharest.
Without being related to the educational field, Romani language has started to be promoted in other fields:
- The Ministry of Justice has certified 7 persons, Romani speakers, as translators to accompany Roma in the
Courts of law.
- The National Agency for Roma and the department for Interethnic Relations have financed in 2011, from
funds allocated from the state budget, a play in Romani language, for Roma and non-Roma actors. We have
organised shows in Bucharest and in the country.
- The Roma organisation represented in the Romanian Parliament – Roma Pro Europe Party - has a weekly
broadcast of 2.5 hours on a private TV Channel (OTV). The broadcast presenters are Romani speakers, and
some interviews are in Romani language.
- Upon the initiative of Roma minority representative in the Romanian Parliament, the Law no. 28/2011
regulated the day of February 20th as the commemoration day for Roma manumission. The nongovernmental organisations have organised diverse commemoration actions, including the ones belonging to
the Hungarian ones from Targu Mures.
- with the support of DRI, the “Impreuna” Association from Bucharest organises yearly The gala of Rrom
women, also the national contest for the art of debate – Young people debate - at which Roma students
participate.
Regarding the languages included in the 3rd part, MECTS and the Union of Bulgarians from Banat have
presented certain new data and have made the following specifications:

182

- for the Bulgarian language there was no request for full study in Bulgarian or the study of several
disciplines in this language;
- a. at „Sfinţii Kiril şi Metodiu High School” from Dudeştii Vechi, Timiş county, in 2010-2011, a total
number of 607 students were enrolled, of which 583 have studied Bulgarian starting with Ist grade, up to the
XIIth grade;
- in 2012:
- at the all-day kindergarten study, 130 children are enrolled, of which 50 are Bulgarians. Out of the
total of 8 teachers, 7 are Bulgarian. During the classes they use partially Bulgarian language from Banat;
- in the I-IV classes study a number of 140 students, out of which 70 are Bulgarians. Out of the total
of 7 teachers, 6 are Bulgarians. Starting with the Ist grade they teach literary Bulgarian, 4 hours/week;
- in the grades V-VIII, a total of 160 students are enrolled, of which 80 are Bulgarian. From a total of
24 teachers, 14 are Bulgarian. During grades V-VIII, they teach literary Bulgarian, 4 hours/week. Also, in the
grades VI and VII the subject „Istoria minorităţii bulgare din România” *The history of Bulgarian minority from
Romania is taught, in the Bulgarian from Banat.
- during grades IX-XII, a total of 135 students are enrolled, of which 50 are Bulgarian. From a total of
22 teachers, 12 are Bulgarian. In grades IX-XII, they teach literary Bulgarian, 4 hours/week.
b. In Breştea locality, Timiş county, Bulgarian language is studied at kindergarten, where 20 children
are enrolled; at the school with grades I-IV (15 children, of which 12 are Bulgarian).
In Denta locality, Timis County, at the kindergarten, a total of 91 children are enrolled, of which 8 are
Bulgarian. At the class activities they also use the Bugarian from Banat.
d. In Vinga locality, Arad County, they study literary Bulgarian during grades I-VIII, 3 hours per week.
e. At Izvoarele, Dâmboviţa county, Bulgarian language is studied at school, 5 hours/week, in grades
I-VIII, having 7 groups of 20-25 students. The courses are taught by the Bulgarian teacher from the Bulgarian
Theoretical High-School "Hristo Botev" from Bucharest.
f. At Băleni Sârbi, Dâmboviţa county, Bulgarian language is studied at school, 5 hours/week, in
grades I-VIII, having 5 groups of 10-15 students. The courses are taught by a Bulgarian teacher from the
Bulgarian Theoretical High-School "Hristo Botev" from Bucharest.
g. At Târgovişte, Dâmboviţa county, „Zaedno” Association organises annually Bulgarian courses, at
which 100-150 persons participate. The courses are taught by a member of the association.
h. Bulgarian is also studied at the Bulgarian Theoretical High School "Hristo Botev" from Bucharest,
in IX-XII grade, 4 hours/week.
- At German:
Paragraph 1 a i point 377 - we mention that, in 2011, 6.039 children were enrolled in a German kindergarten.
Point 379 - we mention that, in 2011, 5.724 students were enrolled in German primary schools.
Point 381 - we mention that, in 2011, 4.788 students were enrolled in German gymnasium and 3.575 in high
school.
Point 384 - we mention that the number of possibilities to study in German and Germanic studies has
increased in the last years. 19 universities from Romania provide 73 choices for study in 11 cities;
- at Hungarian:
Under art. 491, we specify that the number of pre-school students is 39.192.
Under art. 493, we specify that the number of primary school students is 44.917.
Under art. 496, we specify that the number of gymnasium students is 43.316, and from high school students
36.261.
Under art. 491, we specify that the number of students from professional education is 16.776, and post-high
school is 625.
Under art. 497, we specify that the professional education is held in Hungarian in the following counties Alba,
Arad, Bacău, Bihor, Bistriţa-Năsăud, Braşov, Cluj, Covasna, Hunedoara, Harghita, Mureş, Sibiu, Sălaj, Satu
Mare, Timiş, having more students in counties like Bihor, Covasna, Harghita, Mureş şi Satu Mare.
Art. 507 can be amendedn with the following training activities:
- training in order to obtain the teaching degree, organised by „Babeş-Bolyai” University, for various
majors, in Hungarian;
- training courses in Hungarian organised by the Hungarian Union of Educators from Romania within
„Bolyai Nyári Akadémia” Summer Academy;
- Training courses within POSDRU projects (with European funds);
- training courses organised within school Inspectorates and Teaching-Staff Resource Centre of the
counties;

183

- At Slovak language, training activities:
- the courses organised by Bucharest University, The Faculty of Foreign Languages, The department for
Slovak language and literature;
- the training of teachers from schools with Slovak teaching is ensured also by the County school
inspectorate, which organised education for the Slovak minority;
- the professors from Romania participate, also, at improvement courses organised by the methodology
centres from Bratislava and Banska Bystrica (Slovakia).
Reviewing the limits settled in what concerns the official use of minority languages in the local
administration (over 20% of the population)
Regarding this problem, in the response received from the Ministry of Administration and Interns (MAI) –
General Directorate for European Business and International Relations emphasizes that, up to the present
time, the amendment of Law 215/ 2001 was not brought to discussion. „Taking into account the fact that the
law is organic, its alteration supposes an ample process of consultation and public debate”. Underlining the
great number of languages for which Romania has ratified Carta, MAI considers that this modification would
involve the increase of costs regarding the implementation of the respective provisions, supported by local
authorities.
The Institute for Studying National Minorities Problems (ISPMN) – believes that, in the light of preliminary
data of the population and dwelling census from 2011, in several localities, there is a risk that the minority
population will not achieve the 20% limit provisioned by the law in force. This would lead to losing certain
linguistic rights in those localities. In order to avoid this situation, ISPMN thinks that the revision of the 20%
limit would be necessary for the future. According to the ISPMN researches, the situation of administrative
units in which the minority population has decreased under 20% is the following:

Minority

Number of administrative units
with over 20% of the people…
(Census 2002)

The number of administrative units
where the minority population has
decreased under 20% (Census 2011)

Hungarian
Romani
German
Ukrainian
Serbian
Turkish
Tatar

338
87
5
15
3
1
0

15
13
0
1
0
0
0

The Public Official National Agency (PONA) specifies that for occupying a public position in localities having
more than 20% minority population, the candidates shall achieve several general and specific requirements. The
general requirements for obtaining a public position are standardized by art. 54 of Law no.188/1999, the specific
requirements being regulated by each authority or public institution, depending on its own needs.
The specific requirements for obtaining public positions are provided in the job description, its drawing up being
the task each authority or public institution, or the supervised personnel. For public officials having direct contact
with the citizens, in accordance with the job description, it is mandatory to know the minority language in
questions, minority citizens having the right to receive, as well, an answer to a request in their mother tongue.
To the extent to which the recalculation of the limits imposed regarding the official use of minority languages in
administration will be the object of new internal regulations (by amending Law no. 215/2001 and G.D. no.
1206/2001, the competent authorities initiating this legislative procedure), PONA will take into consideration
the harmonization of provisions stipulated by Law no. 188/1999 regarding The Status of Public Officials with
the revised framework, as an authority having competence to initiate regulations in the field of public positions
and public officials.
The improvement of radio and television broadcasts offer in protected languages according to The Third Part of
the Charter (Bulgarian, Czech, Croatian, German, Hungarian, Russian, Serbian, Slovak, Turkish and Ukrainian).
Thereby, The National Audiovisual Council (NAC) made available the attached document, which contains the
updated list of audiovisual content offer in national minorities’ languages, including the duration and broadcasting
frequency of these audiovisual contents. The document was structured on the following audiovisual media
services provider categories and by services distributors:

184

o
o
o
o

radio and television stations;
cable television channels;
radio channels;
satellite television channels.

Regarding the recommendation stated by the experts committee regarding the improvement of radio and
television programmes offer for languages in the Third Part: (Bulgarian, Croat, Czech, German, Hungarian,
Russian, Serb, Slovak, Turkish, Ukrainian), in the sense that “it encourages Romanian authorities to facilitate the
periodical radiobroadcast of commercial programmes in these languages”, NAC stated that art. 11 of the
ratification law refers to radio and television public services.
However, NAC considers that it would be advisable for the Romanian audiovisual field to be more generous and
to comprise also commercial channels which broadcast radio and television programmes in national minority
languages, but it does not have the right to a decision in implementing these procedures. As it was mentioned, as
well, on March 2011, on the occasion of the monitoring visit of international experts at Bucharest, The National
Audiovisual Council stated its’ entire availability of supporting requests for frequency applications for channels
dedicated to regional minority languages, but it did not receive this kind of requests. This limit is considered by
NAC as being due to the financial problems which the audiovisual market faces and all those interested in the
programmes. NAC states that however, due to internet, more and more alternatives to the linear radio and
television channels will exist, being are able to make available, for all national minorities of Romania, specific
audiovisual contents, accessible in nonlinear format. This kind of programmes advanced through new media
resorts would allow the broadcasting of a more generous information volume, and the problems related to access
and broadcast hour would significantly decrease, the internet allowing the distribution of a greater volume of
information, at any time and in any place. A discussion related to this topic is held by DRI, between NAC
specialists and national minorities’ representatives, at Bucharest on March 28th, 2012.
Regarding the public television programmes for Hungarian minority language, TVR sent amended data,
illustrated in the following chart:
Weekly television programmes in Hungarian broadcast on TVR national channels
Broadcast
day

Time
schedule

Duration/effective

Producer

“Pulse – The Critics club”

Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday

15.30-17.00
16.00-17.00
14.35-15.35

90min./74 min.
60min./49 min.
60min./48 min.

“The Hungarian on two”
“All together”- Hungarian

Thursday
Monday

14.35-15.35
11.55-12.40

60min./48 min.
55min./48 min.

“All together”- Hungarian

Tuesday

11.55-12.40

55min./48 min.

Bucharest
Bucharest
Cluj
Territorial
Studio
Bucharest
Tg.-Mureş
Territorial
Studio
Cluj
Territorial
Studio

“All together”- Hungarian

Wednesday

11.55-12.40

55min./48 min.

Tg.-Mureş
Territorial
Studio

“All together”- Hungarian

Thursday

11.55-12.40

55min./48 min.

Cluj
Territorial
Studio

“Friday Hungarian”

Friday

11.55-12.40

55min./48 min.

Bucharest

“The Hungarian –
selection”

Thursday

16.45-17.15

30min./27 min.

Bucharest

Total:

485 min./week

Channel

Title

TVR 1

“The Hungarian on one”

TVR 2

TVR 3

TVR
Cultural

185

TVR considers as a positive fact the constant maintaining of duration and starting hours of television
programmes in Hungarian, which is advantageous for target public maintaining. Broadcast hours remain
however outside prime-time, the active population being unable to watch the programmes, a fact which is
shown both in weaker audience data and in the availability of potential coproduction or sponsorship partners.
On TVR1 and TVR2, due to some sport or parliamentary broadcasts, special editions etc. a few television
programmes are yearly cancelled, without the possibility of rescheduling. On TVR2 and TVR3, in the summer
schedule (3-4 months), materials are being rebroadcast due to the diminished or non-existent budget.
Through summarizing data illustrated in the Yearly activity reports of SRTV (provided by production editorial
offices of television programmes in Hungarian) a chart which represents the total broadcast hours on the
national channels can be drawn as follows:
The dynamics of television programmes in Hungarian with national broadcast between the years
2005-2011:

TV shows in Hungarian
(in broadcast hours)

year

Notes:
- in the national total, habitual television programmes in Hungarian were also included, being produced
by territorial studios (Cluj, Tîrgu-Mureş, Timişoara) for TVR2 and TVR3;
- the substantial growth from 2008 is due to TVR3 foundation;
- since the summer of 2010 TVR International has no longer television programmes in Hungarian, but
as a matter of fact it doesn’t broadcast on Romania’s territory.
Besides the national covered television programmes cited earlier, there are television programmes in
Hungarian produced by Minority Editorial Offices of some TVR Territorial Editorial Offices and broadcast
on local (regional) frequencies, as follows:
Studio

Day

Hour

Duration

Total week

TVR Cluj

M-F

16.00-16.55

55 min.

275 min.

TVR
Tg.-Mureş
TVR Timişoara

M-F
S,S
Wednesday

17.00-17.55
8.00-10.00
17.30-18.00

55 min.
120 min.
30 min.

395 min.
30 min.

186

These television programmes are earthly broadcast on the coverage area of adequate regional frequencies.
Because the signals are high and unencryptioned broadcast from the satellite, theoretically the television
programmes of regional channels can be received in the whole country (even abroad).
Regarding The Experts Committee report, TVR signals an error: (point. 165, page 27):
„Moreover, the television channel TVR3, which is dedicated to national minorities, broadcasts a ten-minute
program in Bulgarian. It is, however, unclear at what intervals this program is broadcast, what content it
covers and which age groups it addresses”. TVR specifies that, through its strategy, TVR3 is the channel
dedicated to regional (local) communities and not exclusively to national minorities. Among local
communities there are also the ethnic ones, which benefit from the television program “Toţi împreună” [All
together], which is dedicated to them, and it is broadcast on Monday- Friday from 11,55 to 13,20 (85 minutes,
out of which 82 useful minutes), respectively on Friday from 17,00 to 18,25 (85 min).
Regarding the conclusion from point 575 page 85 - „The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking
fulfilled for radio and not fulfilled for television…The Committee of Experts encourages the Romanian
authorities to set up a television channel in Hungarian” – TVR considers that the recommendation is still valid,
a public television channel in Hungarian being unavailable.
Regarding the broadcasts in German, the broadcasts schedule has also continuity for several years.
Because of the way the broadcast audience is measured, clear information concerning the broadcast
consumers group is not available, but we can estimate that it exceeds numerically the German minority from
Romania (due to the spread of German language).
German editors defend as well the idea of training sessions for journalists as the ones from the Hungarian
and other minorities editorials do. In 2011 there was only one such program - ”The minorities expression in
audiovisual”, developed in partnership by TVR Timisoara studio and DRI.
Regarding the Experts Committee request for the Romanian part to make available information for the
following monitoring concerning the audiovisual material made in German, it is stated that all television
programmes broadcast until now are kept in the TVR video archive.
The TVR’s Editorial Directorship, the Broadcast Editorial Office for Other Minorities, are in charge of
implementing programmes with and for all minorities, except Hungarians and Germans. The current program
schedule is the following:
• “Intercommunity” (Convieţuiri) - TVR 1, Wednesday, 16.00-17.00 - news, magazine;
• “The first step” (Primul pas) - TVR 2, Monday, 14.35-15.30 - magazine dedicated to the Roma minority;
• “Together in Europe” (Împreună în Europa) - TVR 2, Friday, 14.35-15.30 - reportage magazine;
• “All together” (Toţi împreună) - TVR 3, Wednesday, 12.40-13.20 – magazine in minority languages;
– TVR 3, Monday, fortnightly, 12.40-13.20 – multiethnic magazine;
• “Together in Romania” (Toţi în România) – TVR 3, Friday, 17.30-19.00 – multiethnic magazine in
collaboration with the regional studios;
• “Identities”(Identităţi) -TVR Cultural, Monday – Wednesday, 16.45-17.15 - documentaries, portraits,
monographies.
Through its editorial program, the office for other minorities focuses on the following ethnic communities:
Albanian, Armenian, Bulgarian, Czech, Croatian, Greek, Jewish, Italian, Macedonian, Polish, RussianLippovean, Roma, Ruthenian, Serbian, Slovak, Tatar, Turkish, Ukrainian, which are all recognised and
enjoy Parliamentary representation. Through these programmes TVR promotes the image of each minority,
accurately presenting the problems they are facing, as well as aspects of their social and cultural life. The
programmes are being done in both Romanian and the languages of the ethnic communities, the Romanian
subtitles being mandatory. The national minorities constitute the main audience of these programmes along
with the majority population.

187

According to the legislation in force, the editorial office Department for other minorities, through its objective
and impartial programmes, presents the realities of the socio-politic and economic life of the national
minorities in Romania and assures the proper information of minority citizen on issues of public interest, while
at the same time guaranteeing a non-discriminatory content on grounds of ethnicity, race or religion. TVR
programmes promote social, cultural and traditional fundamental values of the national minorities in both
Romanian and the respective languages of the minorities, having an equally informative, cultural, educational
and entertaining aim. In this respect, the editorial productions of the office for other minorities depict key
aspects of the life of specific ethnic groups (history, art, tradition), while also presenting famous minority
personalities.
These programmes cover most of the EBU genre scheme: newsletter – weekly events chronicles (10%);
infotainment – reportages (35%); art and culture – documentaries, interviews (20%); entertainment –
traditional music and dances (10%); education – school, interviews (10%); religion (10%); others (5%).
Reportages and documentaries about the minorities living in Dobrogea and Muntenia constitute the essence
of or main program, „All Together”, which is produced in the following minority languages: Turkish, Tatar,
Greek, Russian, Roma. This TV show promotes the language, folk costumes, traditions, customs and culture
of each individual minority, targeting as main audience members of the ethnic groups we are referring to, but
also the general public, that is to say everyone who wishes to discover and learn more about his/her fellow
citizens. Each program is produced in the language of the national minorities and is being broadcasted with
Romanian subtitles, thus trying to foster and enhance the conservation of the living, spoken native languages
of Romania’s national minorities, while also encouraging the young generation to preserve their mother
tongue.
The reports are being filmed both within the communities in question and in TVR studios. Presenting
publications issued by these communities is part of the TVR effort to help and sustain the language of each
national minority. The program “All Together” is being broadcasted twice a week, on Mondays and
Wednesdays at 12.45 PM and are being re-ran at 00.50 AM. A multitude of aspects relating to the life,
language and culture of the minorities, as well as to the realities of an interethnic existence in Romania are
being presented during 40 minutes
It should also be mentioned that the TV regional studios in Cluj, Timisoara and Targu Mures are responsible
for producing programmes in the languages of the minorities living in those geographical areas.

188

Appendix 1 – EXAMPLES OF PROJECTS WHICH WERE ACHIEVED / SUSTAINED BY DRI IN 2011
In 2011 DRI bore through allotment of irredeemable funds a number of 76 projects, it organized in
partnership with other institutions/organizations 37 activities and achieved 17 activities and own
programmes. The majority of the projects promoted directly or indirectly the languages, culture, and
traditions of national minorities from Romania. Among these projects the following are included:
- The second edition of Hungarian Days in Hunedoara County. Corvin Savaria association from
Hunedoara organized The Hungarian Days of Hunedoara County, which developed along 8 days in 23
localities from the County.
- Steps towards diversity – educational intercultural workshop for the promotion of approach
between cultures, organized by The Center for Education and Social Development Association, which
proposed to contribute to consolidation of dialogue among majority students and Rom students from Călăraşi
County.
-The diversity calendar, Sighişoara and Mădăraş, Mureş County, June 18th - 24th 2011, organized by
Divers Association.
- Preparatory camp for young Csango from Bacău county, June 30th 2011 – July 7th 2011, Miercurea
Ciuc, Harghita county, organized by The Hungarian Csangos Association from Romania.
- Romanian-Russian bilingualism and interculturality, a program with Russian mother tongue professors,
Brăila, August, 1st-7th.
-Youth educational camps, organized by Communio Foundation, from Satu Mare at Socond, Satu Mare
County, July 25th – September 19th.
- The 10th edition of Summer Academy MIERT had as main theme the future perspectives of young
minoritary from Romania.
- The National Minority Theater Colloqui –the 10th edition, Gheorgheni, September 29th – October 10th
2011, organized by Figura Association.
- ETHNIC 2011, manifestation series organized by The German Democrat Forum Re i a (Bilingual photo
album; Interethnic choral music festival, 8th edition; Philatelic exhibition with international character).
ALTER-NATIVE 19 Short International Festival organized by Hungarian Youth Democratic Union in
November at Tg. Mureş.
- Education in mother tongue, a chance and an opportunity. How do we use it? organized by Dr.
Bernady GyorgyCultural Foundation, Tg. Mure .
- One for the other and all together. Tolerance, morality and communication. FureinanderMiteinander. Toranz, Moralitat und Kommunikation, programme organized by German Teachers
Association from Romania; October, Bra ov.
- Hellenism Festival from Romania, organized by Hellenic Union from Romania at Galaţi.
- Old Music Festival organized by Cultura Nostra Association Egyesulet at Miercurea Ciuc, July.
- Diversity – An extra chance for the future, national intercultural competition organized by Ministry of
Education and Divers Association.
- The Interethnic Film Week, 6th edition, organized by European Centre for Diversity Association EU Divers,
Tulcea.
- The ethnic, linguistic, cultural and religious diversity promotion in Romania media, initiator: Free
Press Romania Foundation (supplements of some publications in Hungarian).
-The Russian Culture Days, initiator: Community of Russian Lipovans from Romania.
- Cultural heritage promotion of Harghita county, initiator: The Association for Harghita County.
- MALLtilingualism –voices and colour, film made on the occasion of European Language Day by The
European Commission Representation at Bucharest and DRI.
- A book for the school library, scholastic book donation program initiated and developed by DRI
- Minority expression in audiovisual,TVR Timişoara and DRI partnership.
- National debate contest „The young debate”- partners: Ministry of Education, Community Development
Association „Together" and other organizations.
- Children’s Winter Music Intercultural Festival, Spain Embassy – Education Attachẻ Office, PNUD –
Romania, Bucharest City Hall, DRI partnership.
- Parol monser - Caragiale Romani Language Theatre shows in the country, DRI and Amphitheatrrom
Association from Bucharest partnership.

189

Appendix 2 – Programmes and cultural manifestation for minorities financially supported by the
Ministry of Culture and National Heritage in 2011
No.

Designation of cultural manifestation

Date and place of
development

Applicant

1.

„”International Day of All Roms in the
World”

April, 8th 2011, Târgovişte

„Romanes”
Association

2.

Jewish and Israelian Dance School festival “Machol Romania 2011”

April 13th – 17th, Predeal

FCER

3.

“International Slovak Youth folk festival”
7th edition

June 3 -5th , Soplacu de
Barcău

4.

„ Szejke Folcloric Festival”, 45th edition

June 3 -7th , OdorheiuSecuiesc – Băile Szejke

5.

“EMKE Folcloric Festival”, 7th edition

May 28th – 30th Târgu-Mureş

SMCT Târgu- Mureş

6.

„Saving research regarding the
ethnografic heritage from multiethnic
localities from Braşov county

September 15th - 25th , Braşov
and surroundings

Ethnografic Museum
Braşov

7.

„German Literature Days at Reşiţa”,21st
edition

May 13th -15th , Reşiţa

German Democrat
Forum

8.

National Minorities Festival
„Intercommunities” ,8th edition

June, 18th – 19th Siret and
Negostina

Ukrainian’s Union
from Romania

9.

„From emigration to integration” – photo
exhibition

May, 30th Bucharets

Italians’ Association
from Romania

10.

“German Culture Days at Satu-Mare”

May 6th – 8th at Satu-Mare

German Democratic
Federation from Satu
Mare county

11.

”The Day of one thousand Szekelys girls
2011”

July, 2nd , Miercurea Ciuc,
Şumuleu Ciuc

Miercurea Ciuc City
Hall Harghita County

12.

“International Theater Festival for
highschool in German”

April 14th – 19th Timişoara

“Nikolaus Lenau”
Theoretical
Highschool

13.

“International dance camp from Ghimeş”

July 24th – 31st Lunca de Jos,
Harghita County

The Young Csangos
Association from
Lunca de Jos

14.

“International dance camp from Ocna de
Sus”

July, 17th – 24th Ocna de Sus,
Harghita County

Dance Group
PIPACSOK Cultural
Association

15.

“The 20th edition of International Folk
Dance and Music Camp from Răscruci

August 17th – 24th, Răscruci
village, Cluj County

Kallos Zoltan
Foundation

16.

“Hunedorian Days” 2nd edition

May 28th – June 5th Deva
(Hunedoara county)

Corvin Savaria
Tarsasag Association

17.

Folkloric International Festival “Sf.
Ştefan”, 7th edition

Auhgust 18th – 22nd, ClujNapoca and localities from Sălaj
county, Cluj

Heltai Gaspar
Library Foundation

18.

“Cultural Hungarian Days from Cluj”

August 15th – 21st Cluj-Napoca

“ Kincses Kolozsvar
Egyesulet Treasure
Cluj Association”

rd

rd

Democratic Union of
Slovak and Czech
from Romania
Odorheiu-Secuiesc

190

No.

Designation of cultural manifestation

Date and place of
development

Applicant

19.

„Festum Varadinum 2011”, 20th edition

May 15th 22nd, Oradea

Varadinum
Cultural Foundatio n

20.

“Tracing back the ancestors”– excursion
in Italy

September 20th Milano,
Bolzano, Venice

Italians’ Association
from Romania
ROASIT

21.

“German culture decade at Reşiţa”

October 7th – 16th Reşiţa

German Democratic
Federation from
Caraş-Severin County

22.

“International Ukrainian folk Festival”, 6th
edition

July 15th – 18th Tulcea

Ukrainian Union from
Romania

23.

“Calvin Week”

June 27th –July 3 Chiurus, Tg.
Secuiesc, Cernat

24.

”Bernady Days 2011”

October 20th – 22nd TârguMureş

25.

“Suffering, pain, human solidarity”
dedicated to “The Holocaust Days”
memory
“Turkish-Tatar Song, Dance and Folk
Clothing International Festival”, 15th
edition

October 9th , Bucharest (Odeon
Theater)

27.

”Ars Hungarica Festival”

November 2nd – 6th Sibiu

„HID” – Hungarians’
Association from
Sibiu

28.

“Interethnic Clothing and Folk Traditions
Festival”, 10th edition

September 2nd – 5th Constanţa

Russian Lipovans’
Community

29.

”11th edition of Hellenism Festival from
Romania”

September 2nd – 5th Galaţi

Hellenic Union from
Romania

30.

“The Delta Festivities” National Minorities
Festival, 11th edition

August 12th – 14th Sulina

Culture Hall Sulina,
Tulcea County

31.

“Folkloric Festival of Minorities at
Bogdand”, 21st edition

September 11th Bogdand –
Satu-Mare county

The centre for
Traditional Culture
Promotion Satu-Mare

32.

‘Polish Culture Days”, 14th edition

September 8th – 10th

Polish Union from
Romania

33.

Youth Festival: “Active through diversity”,
7th edition

August 22nd – September 4th
Jupiter, Constanţa

Daria’ S
Cultural Association

34.

“International dance camp”

August 7th – 18th Călugăreni
(Mureş county)

Association for
Eremieni and Drojdii

35.

“International camp from Călata region
for the knowledge and conservation of
traditional values”
“International Hungarology Congress” –
7th edition

Uly 31st –August 7th, Sâncraiu

Archivum Cultural
Foundation

August 21st – 27th 2011,
Cluj-Napoca

The Association of
Ardelean Museum

“National minorities Theatres colloquy”,
9th edition

September 30th – October 9th
Gheorgheni

„Figura” Association

26.

36.
37.

rd

September 8th – 11th ,
Constanţa

„Haromszeki Mara
Szocialis es
Kozmuvelodesi
Egyesulet”
Association
Dr. B. Gyorgy
Cultural Foundation
Jewish Communities
Federation from
Romania
Democratic Union of
the Turkish- Moslem
Tatars

191

No.

Designation of cultural manifestation

Date and place of
development

Applicant

38.

Symposium “Following the sevcenchian
destiny” at 150 years since the death of
the poet Taras Şevcenco

October 6th – 8th Bucharest

The Ukrainian’s Union
from Romania

39.

Symposium “The Romanian – Ukrainian
relations. History and contemporaneity”,
the 5th edition

November 3th – 5th Satu-Mare

Satu-Mare
County Museum

40.

“Europa dansează – Europe is dancing”

December 9th – 13th ClujNapoca and localities from Cluj
county

SZARKALAB
Cultural Association

41.

“Serb Culture Days”, 5th edition

November 7th – 14th,
Timişoara

Serb Union from
Romania

42.

“Jewish Culture Days”

October 30th – November
5th Târgu-Mureş

Equal Chances
Without Borders
Association

43.

“Saving research regarding the
ethnographic heritage in multiethnic
localities from Braşov county”

August 10th - September
30th Braşov county

Ethnographic
Museum from
Braşov

192

Appendix 3 – The condition of audiovisual programmes in national minorities’ languages
TELEVISION (TV)
Locality/ county
CLUJNAPOCA/CLUJ

Station / association
Minority
TVR CLUJ/
Hungarian
ROMANIAN
TELEVISION
ASSOCIATION
German
Ukrainian
Rom
About Jewish
STANDARD QM SRL/
HUNGARIAN
TV SIGHET

Duration and content
Thematic: General-regional
10 hours/week
Program Content: information, educational,
cultural, religious, movies, entertainment
10 min/week - information
10 min/week -information
30 min/week- information
10 min/week- information
100 min/week
news+ entertainment

FENY TV/ ENTEL SRL

HUNGARIAN

ARAD/ARAD

TV ARAD/
RADIOTELEVISION
ARAD SRL

German

ARAD/ARAD

TV ARAD/
RADIOTELEVISION
ARAD SRL

Bulgarian

BISTRIŢA/
BISTRIŢA
NĂSĂUD

AS TV/ ARD SAT SA

Hungarian

TIMIŞOARA/ TIMIŞ

TERRITORIAL
STUDIO TIMIŞOARA /
SRTV

TÂRGU
MUREŞ/MUREŞ
TÂRGU
MUREŞ/MUREŞ

ANTENA 1 / ANTENA
TV GROUP SA
TERRITORIAL
STUDIO TÂRGU
MUREŞ - SRTV

Hungarian
German
Serb
Croat
Slovak
Ukrainian
Bulgarian
Romani
Hungarian

100% in Hungarian
- broadcasts educational, cultural,
entertainment and videotext information
programmes. The videotext structure is
made of commercials, own promos,
exchange rate programmes, news,
classified ad with purchase page,
deployment, cultural manifestations
Aprox. 39 min./week
The TV show “My German neighbour”, with
100% cultural content, submitting cultural
events and/or specific cultural-religious
events.
Aprox. 39 min./week
The TV show “The Bulgarians from Banat”,
with 100% cultural content, submitting e
cultural events and/or specific culturalreligious events.
120 minutes weekly
The TV show is called Together and it is
broadcast every Sunday between 19-20
and it is rebroadcast on Tuesday between
13-14. The TV show presents some
aspects from Hungarian community life
from the county through reportages
interviews and guests from the Hungarian
community.
80 minutes/week, general program
120 minutes/month, general program
120 minutes/month, general program
40 minutes/month, general program
40 minutes/month, general program
40 minutes/month, general program
40 minutes/month, general program
120 minutes/six weeks, general program
90 min/week - talk show, information, news

SIGHETU
MARMAŢIEI/
MARAMUREŞ
M-CIUC /
HARGHITA

TÂRGU
MUREŞ/MUREŞ

ERDELY TV / ETV
CENTER SRL

Hungarian

1920 min/week– general program
120 min / week– magazine type TV show

German
Hungarian

5250 min/week– general program
The station broadcasts the entire program
in Hungarian.

193

RADIO (R)
LOCALITY/
COUNTY
CLUJNAPOCA/CLUJ

STATION/ASSOCIATION

MINORITY

RADIO VOCEA
SPERANŢEI/ SC DINAMIC
STUDIO SERV SRL

Hungarian

CLUJNAPOCA/CLUJ

RADIO AGNUS/ SC
MULTIRADIX SRL

Hungarian

CLUJNAPOCA/CLUJ

RADIO PAPRIKA/ SC
PAPRIKA RADIO SRL

Hungarian

CLUJNAPOCA/CLUJ

RADIO CLUJ/ ROMANIAN
BROADCASTING
ASSOCIATION

Hungarian

REŞIŢA/ CARAŞSEVERIN

RADIO ROMÂNIA
REŞIŢA/ROMANIAN
BROADCASTING
ASSOCIATION

Ukrainian

REŞIŢA/ CARAŞSEVERIN

RADIO ROMÂNIA
REŞIŢA/ ROMANIAN
BROADCASTING
ASSOCIATION

Serb

REŞIŢA/ CARAŞSEVERIN

RADIO ROMÂNIA REŞIŢA
ROMANIAN
BROADCASTING
ASSOCIATION

Hungarian

REŞIŢA/ CARAŞSEVERIN

RADIO ROMÂNIA
REŞIŢA/ ROMANIAN
BROADCASTING
ASSOCIATION

Rromani

REŞIŢA/CARAŞSEVERIN

RADIO ROMÂNIA REŞIŢA
/ROMANIAN
BROADCASTING
ASSOCIATION

German

REŞIŢA/ CARAŞSEVERIN

RADIO ROMÂNIA REŞIŢA
/ ROMANIAN
BROADCASTING
ASSOCIATION

Croat

PROGRAM DURATION+
PROGRAM CONTENT COMMENTS
Thematic: Religious, Cultural
Total broadcast local program 2460
min/week. Out of which 840 in Hungarian
Program Content: information,
educational, cultural, religious ,
entertainment, publicity
Thematic: Religious, Cultural
Total broadcast local program 3360
min/week.
Program Content: information,
educational, cultural, religious ,
entertainment, publicity
Thematic: General
Total broadcast local program 10.080
min./week
Program Content: information,
educational, cultural, religious ,
entertainment, publicity
Thematic: General
Hungarian program 48 hours/week
Program Content: information,
educational, cultural, religious ,
entertainment, publicity
-Monday, at 14.20 and rebroadcast on
Tuesday, at 04.10 (30 minutes)
-Producer: Simona Liber
-Public interest information, present
subjects from coverage area and
traditional music
- Tuesday, at 14.20 and rebroadcast on
Wednesday, at 04.10 (30 minutes)
-Producer: Anca Popovici
- Public interest information, present
subjects from coverage area and
traditional music
-Wednesday, at 14.20 and rebroadcast
on Thursday, at 04.10 (30 minutes)
-Producer: Ileana şi Makay Botond
- Public interest information, present
subjects from coverage area and
traditional music
-Wednesday, at 15.20 and rebroadcast
on Thursday at 02.10 (30 minutes)
-Producer: Adrian Constantin
- Public interest information, present
subjects from coverage area and
traditional music
-Thursday, at 14.20 and rebroadcast on
Friday at 04.10 (30 minutes)
-Producer: Hardy Chwoika
- Public interest information, present
subjects from coverage area and
traditional music
-Friday, at 14.20 and rebroadcast on
Saturday at 04.10 (30 minutes)
-Producer: Anca Popovici
- Public interest information, present
subjects from coverage area and
traditional music

194

LOCALITY/
COUNTY
REŞIŢA/CARAŞSEVERIN

STATION/ASSOCIATION

MINORITY

RADIO ROMÂNIA REŞIŢA
/ROMANIAN
BROADCASTING
ASSOCIATION

Slovak

REŞIŢA/CARAŞSEVERIN

RADIO ROMÂNIA REŞIŢA
/ROMANIAN
BROADCASTING
ASSOCIATION

Czech

SATU MARE
/SATU MARE
CAREI /SATU
MARE
CAREI /SATU
MARE

MEDIA SAT SRL/CITY
RADIO
MEDIA SAT SRL/CITY
RADIO
RADIO TRANSILVANIA
LBM/RADIO
TRANSILVANIA
RADIO BLAJ /
MITROMEDIA SRL

Hungarian

BISTRIŢA/
BISTRIŢA
NĂSĂUD

RADIO TRANSILVANIA/
RADIO TRANSILVANIA
LBM

Hungarian

ORADEA / BIHOR

PARTIUM RADIO /
STIREA SRL

Hungarian

MARGHITA /
BIHOR

PARTIUM RADIO /
STIREA SRL

Hungarian

ORADEA / BIHOR

MARIA RADIO /
MARIA RADIO ERDELY
SRL

Hungarian

ORADEA / BIHOR

RADIO VOCEA
EVANGHELIEI /
RADIO VOCEA
EVANGHELIEI SRL
RADIO VOCEA
EVANGHELIEI /
RADIO VOCEA
EVANGHELIEI SRL
RADIO TRANSILVANIA /
RADIO TRANSILVANIA
LBM SRL

Hungarian

BLAJ / ALBA

ORADEA /
BIHOR

ALESD / BIHOR

Hungarian
Hungarian

Hungarian

Rromani

Slovak

PROGRAM DURATION+
PROGRAM CONTENT COMMENTS
-Saturday, at 14.20 and rebroadcast on
Sunday at 04.10 (30 minutes)
-Producer: Jana and Ludovic Mleziva
- Public interest information, present
subjects from coverage area and
traditional music
-Sunday, at 14.20and rebroadcast on
Monday at 04.10 (30 minutes)
-Producer: Jana and Ludovic Mleziva
- Public interest information, present
subjects from coverage area and
traditional music
10080 min/week
general
10080 min/week
general
900 min/week
news + entertainment
The TV show “Ebredes”, broadcast on
Tuesday at 11:15 on air and rebroadcast
on Friday at 11:15, medium duration / TV
show~ 40 min., theme - general (news,
music, culture)
20 minutes weekly
5 minutes from Monday -Friday between
16.15-16.20 in the guise of information
10080 minutes / week;
General format;
It broadcasts music, news and publicity
840 minutes / week;
General format;
It broadcasts music, news and publicity;
PARTIUM RADIO Oradea rebroadcasts–
91,67 %
5040 minutes / week;
Thematic: Confessional ;
It broadcasts religious music interest
news for believers and cultural-Christian
broadcasts;
Radio Maria Oradea rebroadcasts– 50 %
105 minutes / week;
Thematic: Confessional;
It broadcasts religious music and
cultural- spiritual broadcasts
30 minutes / week;
Thematic: Confessional;
It broadcasts cultural-spiritual shows.
55 minute / week;
General format;
It broadcasts music, information and
publicity;
RADIO TRANSILVANIA Oradea
rebroadcasts– 94,54 %

195

LOCALITY/
COUNTY
HUNEDOARA/
HD

STATION/ASSOCIATION

MINORITY

RADIO COLOR/
PUBLIDIVERS SRL

Hungarian

TIMIŞOARA/
TIMIŞ

RADIO TIMIŞOARA/ SRR
–ULTRASHORT WAVES
(105,9 MHZ)

TIMIŞOARA/
TIMIŞ

RADIO TIMIŞOARA/ SRR
–MEDIUM WAVE
(630 KHZ)

TIMIŞOARA/
TIMIŞ

RADIO BANAT
LINK/SERB-ROMANIAN
DEVELOPMENT CENTER
RADIO VOCEA
EVANGHELIEI /VOCEA
EVANGHELIEI SRL

Hungarian
German
Serb
Italian
Hungarian
German
Serb
Slovak
Ukrainian
Czech
Rromani
Serb

SIBIU/SIBIU

TÂRGU
MUREŞ/MUREŞ

Hungarian
Rromani

PROGRAM DURATION+
PROGRAM CONTENT COMMENTS
90 min/week, Friday from 18:30-20:00.
Magazine type broadcasts(religion, the
doctor’s advice, children column, history,
news, etc) which address to all ages
public from Hunedoara municipality and
surroundings
420 minutes /week, general program
420 minutes /week, general program
420 minutes/week, general program
60 minutes/month, general program
420 minutes /week, general program
420 minutes /week, general program
420 minutes /week, general program
60 minutes /week, general program
60 minutes /week, general program
30 minutes /week, general program
30 minutes /week, general program
8064 minutes/week, general program
(radio station in Serb, aprox. 20%
programmes in Romanian are broadcast)
30 min/week
Magazine type broadcast which contains
informative, religious columns and music.
60 min/week
Magazine type broadcast which contains
informative, religious columns and music

RADIO TÂRGU
MUREŞ/ROMANIAN
BROADCASTING
ASSOCIATION

Hungarian
German
Rromani

3000 min/week–General program
390 min/week- General program

TÂRGU
MUREŞ/MUREŞ

ERDELY FM / ETV
CENTER SRL

Hungarian

TÂRGU MUREŞ,
SIGHIŞOARA,
SOVATA,
REGHIN/MUREŞ
CONSTANŢA/
CONSTANŢA

RADIO GAGA / ALAMO
IMPEX 97 SRL

Hungarian

TERRITORIAL STUDIO
RADIO
CONSTANŢA/ROMANIAN
BROADCASTING
ASSOCIATION

Greek
Turkish
Tatar
Armenian
RussiansLipovans

Every ethnic minorities makes a program
in its’ language one hour/, so a total of 6
hours/week attached to minorities.
Specific shows contain information,
interviews, reportages and music
belonging to ethnicities.

CONSTANŢA/
CONSTANŢA

RADIO T/ DEMOCRATIC
TURKISH UNION FROM
ROMANIA

Turkish
Tatar

BRAŞOV/
BRAŞOV

RADIO VOCEA
SPERANŢEI /SC
DINAMIC AUDIO - SERV
SRL

Hungarian

In Turkish a 49 hours/week program is
broadcast, and in Tatar 10 hours/week,
so a total of 59 hours/week, in cultural,
religious shows, traditions of the two
ethnicities.
MONADAY-THURSDAY:16.30-17.00,
Religious content shows in Hungarian

60 min/week , 3 weeks /month –
utilitarians, customs and music program
10080 min/week– general program –
news, entertainment magazine type
shows, talk show. The entire program in
Hungarian
5040 min/week –general program –
news, entertainment, talk show

196

CABLE TELEVISION (TV-C)
LOCALITY/
STATION/ASSOCIATION
COUNTY
IZVORUL
SC AIRKAB SERV SRL
CRIŞULUI/CLUJ

MINORITY
Hungarian

FLOREŞTI/CLUJ

SC ATLAS MEDIA SRL

Hungarian

BAIA
MARE/MARAMUREŞ
SATU MARE /SATU
MARE
ARAD/ARAD

CANAL 7 SRL/TL+

Hungarian

NEW IMAGE SRL/TV1
SATU MARE
INFO TV/ INFOTON SRL

Hungarian

DAREGHIN TV /PR
DAVIDSON SRL

Hungarian

REGHIN / MUREŞ

Serb

German

PROGRAM DURATION+
PROGRAM CONTENT COMMENTS
Thematic: General
Program Content: Videotext 10.080
min/week out of which 3.024 in Hungarian,
information
Thematic: General
Total local program broadcast 10.080
min/week
Program Content : information,
educational, cultural, religious,
entertainment, publicity
And a weekly news culture and education
show in Hungarian
310 min/week
debate + entertainment
60 min/week
entertainment
Aprox. 58 min./week
“The show in Serb”, with 100% cultural
content presenting cultural and/or culturalreligious specific events. Sometimes,
when such events are missing specific
Serb music is broadcast becoming 100%
entertainment.
50 min / week- talk show dedicated to
Hungarian community from Reghin
Municipality
20 min /week - show dedicated to the
young
30 min / week - talk show dedicated to
Germane community from Reghin
Municipality
The program is bilingual (RomanianHungarian)
40 min/week – Euro Muzic Club –
music/entertainment.
100 min/week – news
240 min/week - talk show
60 min/week- sport

TÂRGU
MUREŞ/MUREŞ

STII TV /INFO
STATISTICS SRL

Hungarian

TÂRGU
MUREŞ/MUREŞ

TÂRGU MUREŞ
TELEVISION/MARKETIN
G POLITIC SI SONDAJE
SRL

Hungarian

SOVATA, SĂRĂŢENI
/ MUREŞ
PRAID, OCNA DE
JOS, OCNA DE SUS,
CORUND /
HARGHITA
BRAŞOV/ BRAŞOV

SOVIDEK TV / DIGI
COMMUNICATION SRL

Hungarian

240 min / week
Entertainment, cultural shows, music

TVS/SC FASTPROMO
SRL

Hungarian

APAŢA/ BRAŞOV

APAŢA TV / APAŢA
VILLAGE

Hungarian

Monday: 12.00-13.00 ;15.00-16.00
Tuesday: 13.30-14.30
Saturday: 13.00-14.00 The First
Broadcast
Sunday: 0.00-01.00;09.00-10.00;5.00-6.00
Producer: Balint Ferenc
420 min/week, with reportages
rebroadcasts,, interview , news
concerning the Hungarian community
INFOTEXT in Hungarian and Romanian
Shooting on the occasion of events
development from the community,. Ex.
Carnavalul Farşang, Împuşcatul
Cocoşului.

197

SATELLITE TELEVISION (S-TV)
LOCALITY/
STATION/ASSOCIATION
COUNTY
CLUJTVR CLUJ/ROMANIAN
NAPOCA/CLUJ
BROADCASTING
ASSOCIATION

ARAD/ARAD

WEST TV/ ASTRA
VAGOANE CĂLĂTORI SA

TIMIŞOARA/TIMIŞ

ALFA OMEGA TV/ALFA
OMEGA TV PRODUCTION
SRL

MINORITY
Hungarian

German
Ukrainian
Rromani
About Jewish
Hungarian

Hungarian
German
Serb
Bulgarian

TIMIŞOARA/TIMIŞ
TIMIŞOARA/TIMIŞ

TVT 89/MCT IMPEX SRL
TIMIŞOARA TERRITORIAL
STUDIO/ SRTV

Hungarian
Hungarian
German
Serb
Croat
Slovak
Ukrainian
Bulgarian
Romani

TÂRGU
MUREŞ/MUREŞ

TÂRGU MUREŞ
TERRITORIAL STUDIO /
ROMANIAN TELEVISION
ASSOCIATION

Hungarian

SATELLITE RADIO (S-R)
LOCALITY/
STATION
COUNTY
/ASSOCIATION
ORADEA /
MARIA RADIO /
BIHOR
MARIA RADIO
ERDELY SRL
ORADEA /
BIHOR

ORADEA /
BIHOR

ORADEA /
BIHOR

RADIO VOCEA
EVANGHELIEI /
RADIO VOCEA
EVANGHELIEI SRL
RADIO VOCEA
EVANGHELIEI /
RADIO VOCEA
EVANGHELIEI SRL
RADIO VOCEA
EVANGHELIEI /
RADIO VOCEA
EVANGHELIEI SRL

MINORITY
Hungarian

Hungarian

Rromani

Arabian

PROGRAM DURATION+
PROGRAM CONTENT COMMENTS
General
10 hours/week
Program Content: information,
educational, cultural, religious, movies,
entertainment
10 min/week - information
10 min/week-information
30 min/week- information
10 min/week- information
Aprox.50 min/week
„Mozaic Duminical”, with 100%
informational content: news from the
complete week and reportages
60 minute/week, cultural-religious
program
60 minute/week, cultural-religious
program
60 minute/week, cultural-religious
program
60 minute/week, cultural-religious
program
50 minutes/month, cultural program
80 minutes/week, general program
120 minutes/month, general program
120 minutes/month, general program
40 minutes/month, general program
40 minutes/month, general program
40 minutes/month general program
40 minutes/month, general program
120 minutes/six weeks, general
program
1920 min/week– general program

PROGRAM DURATION+
PROGRAM CONTENT COMMENTS
5040 minutes /week;
Thematic: Confessional; religious music,
interest news for believers, cultural
shows. Radio Vatican rebroadcasts– 5 %
105 minutes / week;
Thematic: Confessional;
It broadcasts religious music and
cultural-spiritual shows.
30 minutes / weeks;
Thematic: Confessional;
It broadcasts cultural-spiritual shows.
30 minutes / week;
Thematic: Confessional;
It broadcasts cultural-spiritual shows.

198

B.
Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on the application
of the Charter by Romania
Recommendation RecChL(2012)3
of the Committee of Ministers
on the application of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages by Romania
(Adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 13 June 2012
at the 1145th meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies)

The Committee of Ministers,
In accordance with Article 16 of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages;
Having regard to the instrument of ratification submitted by Romania on 29 January 2008;
Having taken note of the evaluation made by the Committee of Experts on the Charter with respect to the
application of the Charter by Romania;
Bearing in mind that this evaluation is based on information submitted by Romania in its initial periodical
report, supplementary information given by the Romanian authorities, information submitted by bodies and
associations legally established in Romania and the information obtained by the Committee of Experts during
its on-the-spot visit,
Having taken note of the comments made by the Romanian authorities on the contents of the Committee of
Experts' report;
Recommends that the Romanian authorities take account of all the observations and recommendations of the
Committee of Experts and, as a matter of priority:
1.
adopt a structured approach for the implementation of each undertaking under the Charter, in
co-operation with representatives of the minority language speakers;
2.
develop comprehensive educational models for teaching in/of Tatar and Turkish, in co-operation with
representatives of the minority language speakers;
3.
provide the basic and further training of a sufficient number of teachers to fully implement the
undertakings under Article 8 with regard to German, Hungarian, Turkish and Ukrainian;
4.
continue to develop a comprehensive offer of teaching in/of Romani, taking account of the needs and
wishes of the Romani speakers;
5.

reconsider the thresholds for official use of minority languages in administration;

6.

improve the offer of radio and television broadcasts in the Part III languages.

