Strasbourg, 26 October 2010

MIN-LANG/PR (2010) 11

EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES

Initial periodical report
presented to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe
in accordance with Article 15 of the Charter

ROMANIA

CONTENTS

Part I

1

Part II
1) The Albanian Language
2) The Armenian Language
3) The Greek Language
4) The Italian Language
5) The Yiddish Language
6) The Macedonian Language
7) The Polish Language
8) The Romani Language
9) The Ruthenian Language
10) The Tartar Language

21
27
32
39
45
52
56
61
74
76

Part III
Introductory Remarks
a) The Bulgarian Language
b) The Czech Language
c) The Croat Language
d) The German Language
e) The Hungarian Language
f) The Russian Language
g) The Serb Language
h) The Slovak Language
i) The Turkish Language
j) The Ukrainian Language

81
85
104
116
130
153
193
211
227
248
261

Resources

279

2

Initial Periodical Report on the Implementation
of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages in Romania

Introduction
PART I
1. The main regulations by which the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages has been implemented in Romania. General considerations on which
the decision of the Romanian state to ratify this legal instrument was based

Legal regulations by which the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages has been implemented in Romania
In discussions concerning Eastern and Central Europe, we must take into account the
fact that this region was one of the most ethnically divided areas. The complex ethnic
composition of eastern and central European states makes it extremely difficult to
establish the historical roots of minority issues. The number of nationalities is not
only three times higher than that in Western Europe, but the legacy of this ethnic
model shows an unprecedented wealth. This area has been the subject of much tension
and conflict in history, but it also knew periods of peaceful coexistence among
different minority groups.
According to the Romanian Constitution, international treaties become part of the law
after ratification and have precedence over domestic law. Furthermore, in preparing
for accession and then as member of the European Union (since January 2007),
Romania pledged to ensure the existence of adequate mechanisms for the
implementation of European standards.
Romania has ratified or signed several international documents for the protection of
human rights, including the protection of persons belonging to national minorities,
with special attention to preserving and promoting their languages.
Romania is party to several international legal instruments, just a few being listed
below:
- The International Convention on Civil and Political Rights, adopted by the
UN General Assembly on December 16, 1966;
- The Convention on the Rights of the Child, adopted by The United Nations
General Assembly on November 20, 1989;
- The Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide, adopted on December 9, 1948;
- The International Convention for the Suppression and Punishment of the
Crime in Apartheid, adopted on November 30, 1973;
- The International Convention for the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, adopted on December 21, 1965;

3

- The Universal Declaration of Human Rights adopted by The United Nations
General Assembly on December 10, 1948;
- The Convention on the Rights of the Child, adopted by the United Nations
General Assembly on November 20 1989;
- The Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, adopted on December 10, 1984;
- The Convention on Refugees, 1951;
- The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, adopted by the United Nations United to December 18, 1979;
- The UNESCO Convention on the protection of world cultural and natural
heritage, from November 23, 1972;
- The International Convention on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on December 16, 1966;
- The Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities of 1
February 1995;
- The European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages of 5 November
1992;
- The Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms of 4 November 1950.
The basic principle of Romanian law is that all citizens are equal before the law and
that Romanian citizens who are members of national minorities enjoy the same rights
- primarily the same political rights and fundamental rights - as all other Romanian
citizens. In addition, Romanian law contains a number of normative acts addressing
exclusively national minority rights. These acts are listed in the following pages and
will be discussed in detail in the respective articles of the Charter.
There is no definition of "national minorities" in the law nor is there any specific
legislation on the right to be recognized as a minority group separately. In practice,
the concept of national minority is understood as referring to "historical minorities"
who have lived in Romania for hundreds of years.
Main rules and regulations prior to the ratification of the European Charter for
Regional or Minority Languages adopted by the Romanian state are:
The Constitution of Romania, republished, guarantees citizens belonging to national
minorities the right to identity. According to art. 6:
"(1) The State recognizes and guarantees the right of persons belonging to
national minorities to the preservation, development and expression of their ethnic,
cultural, linguistic and religious identity
(2) The protection measures taken by the Romanian state for the preservation,
development and expression of identity of the persons belonging to national minorities
shall conform to the principles of equality and non-discrimination in relation to other
Romanian citizens."
In courts:
Article 128 para.s (2) and (3) of the Romanian Constitution, republished, stipulate the
right of citizens belonging to national minorities to use their mother tongue and to
benefit from interpreters in court:

4

2) Romanian citizens belonging to national minorities have the right to
express themselves in their mother tongue before the courts of law, under the terms of
the organic law.
(3) The ways for exercising the right stipulated under para. (2), including the
use of interpreters or translations, shall be stipulated so as not to hinder the proper
administration of justice and not to involve additional expenses to those interested.
Article 14 of Law no. 304/2004 on the judicial system, republished, stipulates the
right of citizens belonging to national minorities to express themselves in their own
language before courts:
"(1) Proceedings shall be conducted in Romanian.
(2) The Romanian citizens belonging to national minorities have the right to
express themselves in their language before the courts, in accordance with this law.
(3) Where one or more parties require expressing themselves in their own
language, the court shall provide, free of charge, an authorized interpreter or
translator.
(4) Where all parties agree to express themselves in their own language, the
court must ensure this right and proper administration of justice, with the principles
of adversarial and advertising.
(5) Applications and procedural provisions shall be made only in Romanian.
(6) The proceedings held by the parties in their mother tongue are recorded,
being registered in Romanian. The objections raised by those concerned about the
translation and their record is resolved by the court before the conclusion of the
discussions in that case, and will be registered at the end of the meeting.
(7) The interpreter or translator will sign all documents for compliance,
declating that the written documents or the recordings were based on his/her
translation."
Article 7(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides:
"(1) criminal proceedings shall be conducted in Romanian.
(2) In the judicial proceedings, all parties at the trial shall benefit from the use
of minority languages, while the compiling of the procedural provisions will be
carried out in Romanian."
Article 8 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides:
"Parties who do not speak or understand the Romanian language or cannot
express themselves shall, free of charge, have the opportunity to inspect parts of the
file, the right to speak and the right to express conclusions in court through an
interpreter."
Article 128 para.s (1) and (2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure:
"(1) When a party or other person to be heard does not speak Romanian or
cannot express himself in the Romanian language, the criminal prosecution body or
court shall ensure the free use of an interpreter. The interpreter may be appointed or
chosen by the parties; in the latter case, the interpreter must be legally authorized.
(2) The provisions of the preceding para. shall apply accordingly also where
some of the documents in the case file or those presented before the court are written
in a language other than Romanian.”
Article 137 para.(1), para.(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure:

5

"(1) A person detained or arrested shall be promptly informed, in the
language they understand, the reasons for their detention or arrest and prosecution,
as soon as possible. Charges shall be made only in the presence of a lawyer, elected
or appointed.
(2) When ordering the preventive detention of the accused, the judge notifies a
family member or another person who the accused designates within 24 hours, this
being recorded in the minutes.
(3) The detained may require to warn a family member or one of the persons
shown in para. 2 of the measures being taken. Exceptionally, if the criminal
investigation body appreciates that this would affect the criminal prosecution, the
prosecutor will be informed and will decide on the notice requested by the detained. "
Article 142 of the Code of Civil Procedure:
"(1) If the party or witness do not speak Romanian, an authorized translator
will be used or, failing that, a person of trust, in which case the provision of the
experts will be applied.
(2) The judge may perform the translation without oath."
Article 30 para.(6) of Law no.303/2004 on the status of judges and prosecutors,
republished. "(6) In courts and prosecutor's offices, where a national minority
accounting for at least 50% of the population, the candidates who know the language
of that minority shall have priority."
In public administration:
Article 120 para. (2) of the Romanian Constitution, republished: "In those territorialadministrative units where citizens belonging to national minorities have a significant
proportion, it shall be ensured that the national minority language is used in written
and oral relations with local government authorities and the decentralized public
services, as provided by the organic law."
Article 19 of Law of local government no. 215/2001: "In the territorial-administrative
units where citizens belonging to national minorities have a share of over 20% of
residents, the local government authorities and public institutions subordinated to
them shall ensure their use of decentralized public services in their mother tongue,
according to the Constitution, the present law and international treaties to which
Romania is party."
Article 39 of Law on local administration no. 215/2001; article 50 of Law on local
administration no. 215/2001; art. 94 para. (8) of Law on local administration no.
215/2001; art. 2. (2) of G.D. no. 1206/2001; art. 7 para. (1) and para. (2) of GD no.
1206/2001 for approving the Rules for implementing the provisions concerning the
right of citizens belonging to national minorities to use their mother tongue in local
government, contained in the Law on local administration no. 215/2001:
Local Council / County Council. Romanian citizens belonging to national minorities
are entitled to be informed, in their mother tongue, about the agenda of the local or
county council meetings and of the normative and individual decisions adopted by
them. Decisions of an individual character in the local council or county council shall
also be communicated in their mother tongue only if a request was made in writing to
that effect.

6

Article 39. (7) "In villages or towns where citizens belonging to national
minorities have a share of over 20% of the people, the agenda is also published in the
language of that minority."
Article 2. (1) "When dealing with local government authorities, the citizens
belonging to national minorities in those administrative-territorial units in which they
amount to over 20% of the total population have the right to be notified, in their
mother tongue, about the local agenda or county council meetings and the decisions
taken by them"
Article 94 para. (8) "In those districts where citizens belonging to national
minorities have a share of over 20% of the people, the public is informed about the
agenda in the language of that minority."
Article 42. (1) and para.s (2) of Law no. 215/2001, art. 3 of Government Decision no.
1206/2001, art. 6. (1) and para.s (2) of GD no. 1206/2001.
The local council / county council. Romanian citizens belonging to national
minorities have the right to use their mother tongue in the local or county council
meetings, where advisers belonging to national minorities are at least one third of
their total number.
Article 42 (1) Public local council meetings.
(2) Working meetings are held in Romanian. Where local councillors
belonging to national minorities are at least a fifth of the total number the mother
tongue may also be used. In these cases it will be ensured, by the mayor, the
translation into Romanian. In all cases, the council meeting documents are drawn up
in Romanian. “
Art 3 "In the local or county councils in which councillors belonging to
national minorities are at least one third of the total number of councilors, meetings
may also take place in their mother tongue."
Article 2, para. (2), article, 8 para. (1) and para. (2) of GD no. 1206/2001
Local council / board of county. The right of citizens belonging to national
minorities to address oral or written requests to the local government authorities and
the local and county councils, and to be answered both in Romanian and language.
Article 9 para. (1) of GD no. 1206/2001. The right to use one’s mother tongue,
alongside Romanian, in official ceremonies organized by local government
authorities.
Article 9 para. (2) of GD no. 1206/2001. The marriage ceremony will take place in the
mother tongue at the request of the marrying couple if the justice of the peace knows
the language.
Article 4 para. (1) of GD 1206/2001, article 11 para. (1) of GD no. 1206/2001
The right to write the name of the locality also in the mother tongue. "Art 4 (1) In
localities where people belonging to national minorities have a share of over 20% of
the total population, the authorities will ensure writing the town name in the language
of that minority citizens." Writing the locality name in the mother tongue is made both
on entry road signs, and those of locality exit.
Article 4 (2) of GD no. 1206/2001

7

The right to write the name of public institutions under the authority of local
government authorities and to display public interest announcements also in mother
tongue. "Art 4. (2) The territorial-administrative units where citizens belonging to
national minorities have a share of over 20% of the total population, local public
administration authorities will ensure the inscription of the name of public institutions
under their authority, and public interest announcements in the mother tongues of
those minority citizens under the law. “
Article 19. (1). m) of Law no. The prefect and the prefect’s institution 430/2004,
republished. "The Prefect, as representative of the Government, ensures the use,
under the law, of the mother tongue in the relations between citizens belonging to
national minorities and decentralized public services, in those administrative
territorial units in which they have a share of over 20%."
Regarding the access to information of public interest:
Article 12 of Government Decision no. 123/2001 for approving the Methodological
Norms for applying Law no. 544/2001 on the free access to information of public
interest: In administrative-territorial units in which a national minority has a weight of
at least 20% of the population, information is communicated in the minority language
as well.
In education:
Article 32 para. (3) of the Romanian Constitution, republished, states: "The right of
people belonging to national minorities to learn their mother tongue and the right to
be educated in this language is guaranteed; the ways to exercise these rights are
established by law."
Art 118 of the Education Law no. 84/1995, republished, stipulates the right of people
belonging to national minorities to study and be educated in their mother tongue at all
levels and forms of education and types of education: "People belonging to national
minorities have the right to study and to learn in their mother tongue at all levels and
forms of education and types of education for which there is sufficient demand, under
the law."
Article 16. (3) of Law no. 448/2006 on the protection and promotion of disabled
people covers forms of education for people with disabilities that may take place in
minority languages:
a) special education institutions;
b) schools for the re-integration of the individual, including units teaching in minority
languages;
c) compact groups or special classes, preschool and integrated schools;
d) educational services through itinerant teachers / support;
e) home school until graduation from high school, but not later than the age of 26
years, in the care of the Ministry of Education and Research;
f) education 'in bed hospital, during hospitalization;
g) educational alternatives.
Article 12 para. (6) of the Treaty of understanding, cooperation and good neighborly
relations between Romania and the Republic of Hungary - 1996 states: "Each
Contracting Party shall encourage the teaching of the other Contracting Party

8

language in universities, schools and other institutions and to that end, provide
assistance for teacher training and organization of education.”
Article 11 of the Treaty of understanding, cooperation and good neighborly relations
between Romania and Albania - 1994 states: "Each Contracting Party shall act
towards enlarging the possibilities of studying the language of the other Contracting
Party in school, and institutes of higher education and to this end, will assist each
other in providing for the study of the language and the raising of qualifications of
teachers. They will also support initiatives to expand opportunities for learning and
teaching in the language of the other party, taking into account the traditions in this
area, in order to increase knowledge."
Article 4 of Law no. 419/2003 for the ratification of Agreement between the
Romanian and the Federal Government of Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on
cooperation in protection of national minorities, signed in Belgrade on November 4,
2002 states: "Contracting Parties shall ensure, through appropriate legislative
measures for persons belonging to national minorities, the possibility for
institutionalized learning or to be educated in their mother tongue at all levels of
education, where necessary. Contracting Parties shall promote the exchange of
educational experience by creating conditions for teachers who live in a Contracting
Party to participate in training courses organized by the other Contracting Party and
will provide scholarships and other facilities at all levels of education."
Article 10 of Treaty of friendship and good neighborly cooperation between Romania
and Bulgaria - 1992, states: "Each Contracting Party shall act for enlarging the
possibilities of teaching the other party’s language in schools, higher education
institutes and other institutions and, to this end, will support the other party with
language teaching and raising of the qualification of teachers."
Article 9 of the Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation between Romania and the
Republic of Macedonia – 2001 states: "The Contracting Parties shall support the
conclusion of agreements between universities and other educational institutions,
research institutes, institutions of culture and information dissemination. Each
Contracting Party shall facilitate the possibility of studying the Romanian language
and respectively its Macedonian educational institutions, according to the legislation
of that country."
Regarding Children’s Rights:
Article 27. (2) of Law no. 272/2004 on the protection and promotion of the rights of
the child, with subsequent amendments and supplements stipulates the following:
"The child belonging to national, ethnic, religious or linguistic minorities is entitled to
use her own language in community with other members of the community to which
she belongs."
Regarding the audiovisual:
Article 82 para. (4) of the Audiovisual Law no. 504/2002 states that: "In localities
where a national minority has a share higher than 20% of the total population,
distributors will ensure that transmission services are free for retransmiting programs
in the minority language."

9

Means of communication:
National law provides the right to carry out programs television or radio broadcasting
in minority languages. Article 15 lit. a) of Law no. 41/1994 on the organization and
functioning of the Romanian Radio Society and the Romanian Society of Television,
republished, with subsequent modifications and additions states that:
"Romanian Radio Society and the Romanian Television Society each have as
the profile or, as activity:
a) making radio or television programs in Romanian, in minority languages or
other languages, for information, cultural, educational and entertaining purposes."
Police:
Article 79 of Law no. 360/2002 on the status of the policeman, with changes and
additions, provides that the administrative-territorial units in which people belonging
to national minorities have a share of over 20%, shall employ officers who know the
language.
Patient Rights:
The national legislation stipulates the right of the patient to have the medical
information communicated in mother tongue. Thus, the article 8 of the Law on patient
rights no. 46/2003 provides that "the information is made known to the patient in a
respectful language, clearly, to minimize the specific terminology; if the patient does
not speak Romanian, the information is made known in their mother tongue or in a
language that he/she knows or, where appropriate, they will seek another form of
communication."

Road Code:
Article 24 para. (3) of Government Emergency Decision no. 195/2002 concerning
road traffic, with subsequent modifications and additions and art. 6. (2) of the Order
of the Minister of Administration and the Interior no. 1497/2006 concerning the
examination procedure for obtaining a driving license, concerning the right to take
theoretical examinations for driving in the mother tongue.
"Art 24 (3) In localities where the minority population amounts to at least
20% of the total population the competent authority for carrying out driving training
courses and exams can organize them, upon request, in the national minority
language.”
“Art 6 (1)In the case of Romanian citizens candidates belonging to national
minorities, the theoretical examination can be organised, on request, in their mother
tongue language, under Art. 17 of Law on local administration 215/2001, with
amendments and completions."
Information technology (IT):
Article 5 of Law no. 183/2006 on the use of standardized coding of the characters set
in the documents in electronic form provides the right to use mother tongue in
relations with notaries and public authorities, through standardized encoding of the
characters set specific to the national minority language, to work to develop
documents in electronic form:
"Art 5 (1) The authorities, the public institutions and the public notaries as
well, in dealing with citizens belonging to national minorities, when, under the law, it

10

is necessary to ensure that national minority language use, have to use standardized
coding language characters set specific to the national minority, to work to develop
electronic documents.
(2) For the drafting of documents in electronic form in the language of
national minorities, using standard coding characters set specific to language
national minority, there is no obligation of the Romanian authorities and public
institutions, and public notaries to use the keyboard appropriate to that language."
In the area of tax administration:
Article 8 of the Government Decision no. 92/2003 regarding the Fiscal Procedure
Code, republished and the Government Decision no. 1050/2004 for approving the
methodological norms of application of Government Decision no. 92/2003 regarding
the Fiscal Procedure Code, governing the right to submit written documents in
minority languages, accompanied by certified translations into Romanian translators,
at the tax bodies.
“Art 8 Official language in tax administration
(1) Official language in tax administration is Romanian.
(2) If fiscal authorities receive petitions, documents, certificates or other
documents in a foreign language, they shall require that they be accompanied by
certified translations into Romanian carried out by translators.
(3) The legal provisions regarding the use of language minorities shall be
applied."
Specification: "The territorial-administrative units where citizens belonging to
national minorities have a share of over 20% of the number of residents, the fiscal
entities will apply the legal provisions regarding the right of the citizens belonging to
national minorities to address orally or in writing in their mother tongue and to
communicate the responses both in Romanian and in themother tongue. Fiscal
administrative acts issued in such cases are necessarily drawn in Romanian."
Emergency calls:
Article 10 lit. f) of the Emergency Decision no. 34/2008 on the organization and
functioning of the single national emergency provides the right to communicate
emergency in the single national system for emergency calls:
"In the integrated structure of distribution, the only center for emergency calls
that transfers emergency and associated data to the emergency centers of
intervention, located in different offices, has the following main tasks:
f) receives emergency calls in the minority languages of the administrative
unit of the area."
Social inspection:
Article 19 align (2) of the Government Decision no. 1059/2007 regarding the
approval of the Organization and Functioning of Social Inspection states that: "In the
activity of social inspection and in drafting control documents the Romanian
language shall be used. Legal provisions regarding the use of minorities’ language
are applied accordingly."
Special protection and promotion of the rights of disabled people:
Para. 1.2. of Order No. 559/2008 for approving the specific standards of quality for
the residential centers, day care centers and protected housing for adults with
disabilities states the right to be informed in writing, in the mother tongue about the

11

conditions offered to disabled adults in residential centers, day care centers and
protected housing.
"1.2. The Residential Center uses the beneficiary’s guide as informative
material, written in Romanian or, where appropriate, in minority languages, which
including updated information about the objectives, services, resources, facilities,
costs, housing, staff qualifications, number of places and procedure for making
complaints."

General considerations on the ratification of the Language Charter
Romania became a member of the Council of Europe on October 7, 1993. Determined
to join the most important legal instruments of that body in the process of establishing
the rule of law and democratization in all spheres of economic, political, social and
cultural life, Romania signed and ratified within a few years many European
Conventions on human rights and fundamental freedoms. The European Charter for
Regional or Minority Languages was signed in 1995. This step took place after the
establishment of the Council of National Minorities in Romania, in 1993, after the
Ratification of the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities of
the Council of Europe, which was achieved in 1995. The Romanian State obliged
itself in front of its citizens and European partners to take special measures to protect
regional or minority languages spoken within its territory, all of the standards applied
on the continent.
Due to the large number of regional or minority languages used on its territory
corresponding to a relative large number of traditional national minorities (20 ethnic
groups with a specific history and tradition, represented by 19 organizations
represented in parliament and government, through the Council of National
Minorities), the preparation of the ratification process took several years. Moreover,
as the situation of minority languages varies greatly from case to case, their coverage
in a coherent scheme is quite difficult. Consulted on the issue, the national minority
organizations called for all the measures to protect minority languages, to a maximum
standard, which does not reflect the realities and possibilities of practical application.
Also, there were warnings of certain institutions in connection with the ratification,
the implementation of certain measures to protect the language being associated to
possible higher costs than those which they could support the Romanian authorities at
that time.
The consultancy and the support offered by the Council of Europe to the
Romanian side, through the Secretariat of the Languages Charter, lead to a
differentiated approach that was the basis for ratification on a realistic assessment of
current opportunities to protect each language, in accordance with legislation
introduced in Romania in various fields.
The general objective for the organizations of citizens belonging to national
minorities and institutions with responsibilities in the protection of this category of
people was the ratification of European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
with a view to cultural considerations: the preservation and promotion of linguistic
and cultural heritage of national minorities of Romania, some of them quite

12

vulnerable due to the small number of members and their being spread in very
different areas of the country. The Charter offers additional guarantees, and an
ongoing monitoring system that assures the minority speakers that their languages will
be supported not only in private but also in various areas of public life. The interest of
minorities in Romania for an effective educational system, which they consider the
main instrument for perpetuating the identity of each group, the interest in language as
vehicle of their culture have made their support for ratification among organizations
to be consistent and unanimous.
At the institutional level, it was considered that because of the experience it has
gained in the management of ethnic relations, because of the valuable heritage of
languages and cultures, Romania can achieve good ratification law of the Charter,
useful for future developments. With such a multicultural and cultural baggage, the
Romanian government wanted to contribute - offering best practices in various areas –
to the general European effort to retain and enhance the traditional languages and
cultures of the continent, strengthening the bridge and increase social cohesion
between countries.

Essential steps for preparing the ratification
In the first months of 2002, the Department for Interethnic Relations, governmental
structure specialized in the protection of national minorities and promoting ethnocultural diversity, took steps to ratify the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages by consulting with the Directorate for OSCE, Council of Europe and
Human Rights within the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. There were two rounds of
consultation with the Council of National Minorities to review their opinions and
wishes for languages to be selected in the law. Experts from ministries participated in
discussions and they expressed opinions about the feasibility in practice, under
existing legislation, and the measures taken to protect each language.
Between 13-14 May 2002 the seminar "The European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages and preservation of linguistic diversity in Romania" took
place in Bucharest, organized by the Department for Interethnic Relations with the
support of the Council of Europe. From the Secretariat of the Charter attended Regina
Jensdottir, Vesna Crnič Grote, President of the Council of Europe Committee of
Experts tasked with monitoring the implementation of the Charter, and Roland Dubik,
representative of the Ministry of Interior of the Federal Republic of Germany.
Members of the Romanian Parliament, representatives of ministries involved in the
implementation process, representatives of local government and national minorities
were present. The draft instrument of ratification was considered as a good starting
point for further dialogue between institutions - local government - minority
organizations.
On September 8, 2003, a Romanian delegation including representatives of ministries
was in Strasbourg, where it participated in a technical meeting with experts of the
Council of Europe on the ratification of the Charter. The purpose of the meeting was
to clarify some details of the ratification, given the difficulties noticed by the

13

government, in education and justice. Due to problems with languages with reduced
circulation, the Council of Europe experts’ suggestion was to adopt a differential
formula, in which these languages are included in Part II. In education, Romania's
situation was assessed as very good, being a model for neighboring countries.
On November 17, 2003 a technical meeting took place in Bucharest for further
discussions on the ratification, with the support of the Council of Europe. Well-known
independent experts in the field (Jean-Marie Woehrling, France, Robert Dunbar,
Canada; Davyth Hicks, UK) and a representative of the Council of Europe (Hasan
Bermek) participated. On this occasion the Department for Interethnic Relations
edited a booklet on the Languages Charter including the guests’ interventions,
prefaced by Philip Blair.
On March 2005 approaches aimed at ratification were incorporated. At the Council of
Europe a new technical meeting was held on the design of the instrument of
ratification by Romania. On the agenda of discussions, there were the following
points: the completion of the instrument of ratification, which to be adapted on the
significant differences of use of minority languages in Romania, territorial problems
using language, use of minority languages in local government –legal provisions, the
percentage of speakers, experiences of different countries, good/ bad practices in the
implementation of the Charter .
On November 6, 2007 Law no. 282 of October 24, 2007 was enacted to ratify the
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages; the law was published in
the Official Gazette no. 752 of November 6, 2007. The formula adopted by
Parliament coincided with the final version of the bill, conducted by the Department
for Interethnic Relations and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
In the form established by law for the ratification, the Romanian state provides
instruments for the protection of a total of 20 languages, which are languages used by
national minorities in Romania officially represented in public life. Of these, 10
minority languages more widely used in various fields enjoy a high level of protection
under the provisions of third Part of the Charter. These are: Bulgarian, Czech,
Croatian language, German, Hungarian, Russian, Serbian, Slovak, Turkish and
Ukrainian. Other languages used in smaller areas by a smaller number of speakers,
enjoy general protection under second Part. These are Albanian, Armenian, Greek,
Italian, Yiddish, Macedonian, Polish, Romani, Ruthenians and Tartar.
After ratification, the Department for Interethnic Relations held on April 10, 2008 in
Bucharest the Roundtable on the "European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages. Implementation and monitoring in Romania". On this occasion, the
Department printed a booklet comprising the European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages, the law of ratification in Romanian, Hungarian and English, and
the work "Let’s give the floor to the regional or minority languages", published by the
Council of Europe and translated into Romanian. There were present in Bucharest to
participate in this Kozhemyakov Alexey, Director Department of Regional or
Minority Languages of the Council of Europe, and Stefan Oeter, Chairman of the
Committee of Experts of the Charter, who appreciated that Romania has made an
ambitious and pragmatic ratification and offered opinions, clarifications and valuable
suggestions about the implementation and monitoring processes.

14

2. Regional or minority languages existing in Romania, as defined in para. a),
article 1 of the Charter. Areas of the country where the speakers of these
languages live.
According to Article 3 of the ratification law, in Romania the national minorities'
languages are defined as regional or minority languages.
Note that, according to Article 1, a.ii of the Charter, the list of minority languages
protected by the Romanian state does not include dialects of the Romanian language
or languages of migrants. Charter provisions apply to the following minority
languages used in Romania:

Protected
minority language

Use
development
regions*

1

Armenian

S-E
Bucharest

2

Bulgarian

W
Bucharest

No.

3

Czech

4

Croatian

per

with

Constanta
Bucharest
Timis
Bucharest

S-W
W

Mehedinti
Caras- Severin

W

Caras-Severin

Number of
of Romania

speakers/

258
333
Total number: 721
1595
301
Total number: 2496
208
353
Total number: 866
466
Total number: 650

Bucharest

Suceava
Arad
Caras-Severin
Hunedoara
Timis
Cluj
Maramures
Satu-Mare
Alba
Brasov
Mures
Sibiu
Bucharest

520
2254
4411
1067
8765
675
1426
775
677
2556
1112
4044
1697
Total number: 32,270
359
412
1006
Total number: 3,208
184

N-E
WV

5

Counties
significant
number
speakers

German
N-W

Centre

6

Greek

N-E
S-E
Bucharest

Iasi
Constanta
Bucharest

7

Italian

W

Arad

15

8

Yiddish

Bucharest

Timis
Bucharest

N-E
Bucharest

Iasi
Bucharest

S-E
W

Bucharest

Constanta
Arad
Caras-Severin
Hunedoara
Timis
Bihor
Bistrita-Nasaud
Cluj
Maramures
Satu-Mare
Salaj
Alba
Brasov
Covasna
Harghita
Mures
Sibiu
Bucharest

N-E
Bucharest

Suceava
Bucharest

N-E

Bacau
Iasi
Neamt
Buzau
Constanta
Galati
Calarasi
Giurgiu
Ialomita
Prahova
Teleorman
Dolj
Gorj
Mehedinti
Olt
Arad
Caras-Severin
Hunedoara
Timis
Bihor
Cluj
Maramures

N-W
9

Hungarian

Centre

10

Polish

S-E

S

11

Roma

S-W

W

N-W

16

213
527
Total number: 2,210
104
433
Total number: 919
638
28087
4324
21747
31364
88788
6671
79511
34624
65365
20617
10367
34713
83031
115186
109216
11638
5007
Total: 1,397,906
260
136
Total number: 707
2259
1539
1534
4192
2761
1459
2991
2875
3695
4469
3278
7796
2760
1509
3204
2827
2385
1140
4343
2490
3587
1533

Centru

Salaj
Alba
Brasov
Mures
Sibiu
Bucharest

2100
2132
1304
5158
1716
5349
Total number: 90,199

Botosani
Iasi
Suceava
Braila
Constanta
Tulcea
Bucharest

404
789
584
2520
1400
2006
1050
Total number: 10,019

Arad
Caras-Severin
Timis
Bucharest

448
2472
6422
249
Total number: 9,971

Bucharest
N-E
12

Russian

S-E

Bucharest

W
13

Serbian
Bucharest

Arad
Timis
Bihor

V
14

Slovak
N-W

S-E
15

Tartar
Bucharest

S-E
16

Turkish

S
Bucharest

17

Ukrainian
N-W
Bucharest

18

Constanta
Tulcea
Bucharest

14603
102
256
Total number: 15,055

Constanta
Tulcea
Calarasi
Bucharest

15285
2623
212
2120
Total number: 21,296

Suceava
Tulcea
Caras-Severin
Timis
Maramures
Bucharest

N-E
S-E
W

Other minority N-E
S-E
languages
(Albanian,
W

Iasi
Constanta
Timis

17

4282
565
1074
Total number: 6,278

735
307
956
1346
1537
286
Total number: 56,116
677
631
1066

Macedonian,
Ruthenian)

N-W
Bucharest

Cluj
Bucharest

550
7161
Total number: 12,503

* Development regions and abbreviations used in table:
- NE for North-East (counties Bacau, Botosani, Iasi, Neamt, Suceava, Vaslui)
- SE for South-East (Braila, Buzau, Constanta, Galati, Tulcea, Vrancea)
- S for Southern Region (Arges, Calarasi, Dambovita, Giurgiu, Ialomita, Prahova,
Teleorman)
- SW for South-West (Dolj, Gorj, Mehedinti, Olt, Valcea)
- W West Region (Arad, Caras - Severin, Hunedoara, Timis)
- NW Northwest Region (Bihor, Bistrita-Nasaud, Cluj, Maramures, Satu Mare, Salaj)
- C for the center region (Alba, Brasov, Covasna, Harghita, Mures, Sibiu)
- Bucharest (Ilfov and Bucharest municipality)
3. Speakers of each regional or minority languages. The criteria defining the
"speaker of regional or minority languages" used in Romania
The criterion defining "regional or minority language speakers" is represented in the
official census of 2002 as the speakers of mother tongues belonging to a recognized
national minority in Romania (represented in Parliament). The number of native
speakers corresponds with the information of the last official census, which reflects inter alia - the structure of population by ethnicity and language:
Albanian Language
Armenian Language
Bulgarian Language
Czech Language
Croatian Language
German Language
Greek Language
Yddish Language
Italian Language
Macedonian Language
Hungarian Language
Polish Language
Romani Language
Russian Language
Ruthenian language
Serbian Language
Slovakian Language
Tartar Language
Turkish Language
Ukrainian Language

- to „other languages” (about 500 persons)
- 694 persons
- 6,527
- 3,306
- 6,304
- 42,014
- 4,004
- 861 („Yddish and Hebrew” to the census)
- 2,420
- to „other languages” (between 100 – 200 persons)
- 1,397,906
- 2,604
- 235,346
- 28,334
- to „other languages” (between 100 – 200 persons)
- 19,948
- 15,706
- 21,171
- 27,668
- 56,116

18

4. Non-territorial languages used in Romania, as defined in para. c), article 1 of
the Charter, statistic data regarding the number of speakers
Romania did not define any language spoken on its territory as non-territorial
language.
5. Institutions and organizations legally established in Romania aimed at the
protection and development of regional or minority languages. Names and
addresses of these organizations.
Romania has not established an institution or a body to have the special task of the
protection and development of regional or minority languages. Throughout the
preparations for the ratification of the Charter, the institution that has held
consultations with potential beneficiaries, with different ministries and agencies, civil
society was the Department for Interethnic Relations, a specialized structure of the
Romanian Government in protecting the rights of people belonging to national
minorities.
6. Institutions and organizations consulted in preparing this periodical report.
The institutions that are relevant for the application and monitoring of the Law on the
Ratification of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages in Romania
have been consulted by the Department for Interethnic Relations - Government of
Romania (www.dri.gov.ro) on the preparation of the first periodical report. These
institutions are the following:
- The Ministry of Education, Research, Youth and Sports (http://www.edu.ro)1
- The Ministry of Administration and Interior (http://www.mai.gov.ro/Home/
index.htm)
- The Ministry of Culture and National Heritage (http://www.cultura.ro)2;
- The Ministry of Labor,
Family and Social Protection
(http://www.mmuncii.ro)
- Ministry of Justice and Citizens' Freedoms (http://www.just.ro);
- The Ministry of Public Finance (http://www.mfinante.ro/);
- The Ministry of Economy (http:// www.minind.ro/);
- The Ministry of Labor, Family and Social Protection (http://www.mmssf.ro);
- The Ministry of Regional Development and Housing (http://www.mdlpl.ro);
- The Ministry of Health ( http://www.ms.ro);
- The National Agency for Roma of the Romanian Government
(http://www.anr.gov.ro);
- Romanian Ombudsman (http://www.avp.ro);
- The National Agency of Civil servants (http://www.anfp.gov.ro);
- The National Audiovisual Council (http://www.cna.ro);
The
National
Council
for
Combating
Discrimination
(http://www.cncd.org.ro)
1

In 2009, when data have been asked and the most important part of the report was elaborated, the
correct name was the „Ministry of Education, Research and Innovation”; this name was mentioned
several times in the text
2

It is also cited in the text as the Ministry of Culture, Religious Denominations and National Cultural
Heritage, as it was called in 2009, when the data were asked for

19

- The National Authority for Consumer Protection (http://www.anpcnet.ro);
- The Romanian Institute for Research on National Minorities
(http://www.ispmn.gov.ro);
- The Romanian Academy - Institute for Linguistics “Iorgu Iordan – Al.
Rosetti " (http://www.lingv.ro);
- The Romanian Society for Television Broadcasting (http://www.tvr.ro);
- The Romanian Society for Radio Broadcasting (http://www.srr.ro/).
Furthermore, the 19 organizations representing the 20 national minorities in the
Romanian Parliament (the Czech and the Slovak minorities are represented by the
same organization) - all belonging to the Council of National Minorities (advisory
body of the Government) - have also been consulted in drafting this report. Since
1993, they have lobbied for the extended use of minority languages in as many fields
of public life as possible. Moreover, the sustained activity of the Democratic
Hungarian Alliance in Romania (UDMR) - the major political representative of the
Hungarian minority in Romania since 1990 - has had a determining impact on the
extension of language use in education, local public administration, justice, culture
and the media.
Various other NGOs have been active after 1990 in the field of interethnic relations.
The promotion of minority language use has been among their targeted specific subdomains. Some of these NGOs are the following:
• The Regional Center Project on Ethnic Relations (http://per.org.ro);
• The Ethno-cultural Diversity Resource Center (www.edrc.ro);
• The Intercultural Institute of Timisoara (www.intercultural.ro);
• The Open Society Foundation (www.osf.ro);
• The Pro-Europe League (http://www.proeuropa.ro/).
Basically, the meetings on the implementation and monitoring of the Charter held in
April, respectively in September 2008, outlined a working group that participated in
preparing the first periodical report by sending written contributions, statistics, tables,
examples. But since in some areas official data about the use of minority languages
did not exist, or in other areas there were not enough data, this report assumed
primarily research on different aspects by those involved.
7. Measures taken (according to art. 6 of the Charter) to make better known the
rights and duties deriving from the application of the Charter
After ratification, the Department for Interethnic Relations held on the day of April
10, 2008, in Bucharest, the Roundtable on "European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages. Implementation and monitoring in Romania ". On this
occasion, the Department printed a booklet form the European Charter for Regional
or Minority Languages, the law of ratification in Romanian, Hungarian and English,
and the work "Let’s give the floor to the regional or minority languages", published
by the Council of Europe and translated into Romanian. The copies in Romanian were
distributed to institutions and organizations which were consulted in preparing the
ratification and are involved in one form or another in implementation.
Another event took place in Bucharest on 25 and 26 September 2008 and was
organized with the support of the European Commission; the theme was linked to the

20

European Day of Languages ("European Charter of Languages - support for
multilingualism and intercultural dialogue in Romania"). The program was part of
the schedule of activities under the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue and
enjoyed the partnership of the European Parliament Information Office in Bucharest
and Ethno cultural Diversity Resource Center in Cluj. The meeting aimed to review
the progress in Romania beginning in application of the Charter of Languages. They
presented research, statistics, problems solved, points of view, future projects.
For better dissemination and understanding of the basic documents by the public, on
the website of the Department for Interethnic Relations (www.dri.gov.ro) a special
section was created, including the program and discussions.
The Institute for the Study of National Minorities and various NGOs in their activities
have included information about the European Charter of Languages, explaining its
provisions, connections with other documents of the Romanian legislation. In the
context of achieving a comprehensive directory of national minorities in Romania, the
Institute will also provide data on minority languages and their range of use. The
yearbook will be accompanied by a DVD with data and will be completed in the
second half of 2009. It is also necessary to mention the volume entitled "Policies of
integration of national minorities in Romania. Legal and institutional issues in a
Comparative Perspective", edited and printed by the Ethno cultural Diversity
Resource Center in 2008, which granted an important area in explaining the role and
the Charter.

PART II
In Romania, the provisions of the Second Part of the European Charter for
Regional or Minority Languages apply to the following languages: Albanian,
Armenian, Greek, Italian, Yiddish, Macedonian, Polish, Romani, Ruthenian and

21

Tartar.

1). The Albanian Language
History. The researchers consider the Albanians as the descendants of the ancient
Illyrians. The connections of the Albanians with the Romanian Countries are certified
at the end of the XVI century, in a documentary dated from 12/24 March 1595. This is
a report by the emissary of Emperor Rudolf II in the Romanian Countries, Giovanni
de Marini Poli, and is sent from Alba Iulia to the Imperial adviser Pezen
Bartholomew, in Vienna. In this report, Poli was saying that the Romanian ruler
Mihai Viteazul has allowed 15 000 Albanians, who came from Cervena Voda (South
of the Danube), to settle in the Romanian Country. The document quoted is
considered to be the first official document certifying the existence of the Albanian
community
in
the
Romanian
territory.
a) the recognition of the regional or minority languages as an expression of
cultural
wealth;
The Albanian language spoken in Romania is affected by the two dialects of the
Albanian language - Gheg and Tosk (i.e. northern and southern Albania), but these are
almost unified in the literary language which is spoken in Romania by the elders and
the young people. Middle-aged generation no longer knows the language well; they
are those who grew up under communism: the parents knew or know the language,
but they did not speak it home because of fear.
The declaration of ethnic identity was felt more in the communist era, influencing two
generations of Romanian citizens of Albanian ethnicity, i.e. those who had in 1990
about 60 years and their children; all these declared themselves to the census
population as Romanian citizens. So it happened that at the official statistics their
number
was
low
in
Romania.
The fear of communist state repression caused many Albanians to declare themselves
Romanians, especially since the majority of Albanians in Romania is of Orthodox
Christian religion, their names and surnames being identical to those of the
Romanians or easy to modify, because most of them came from Albania from a
predominantly Christian area. To this also added the almost complete lack of contact
with the relatives from Albania, where the communist regime was very harsh, and the
country had almost completely closed borders.
For example: an Albanian couple named, say, Hristu, was registered on arrival in
Romania before 1944 “Cristu” or “Cristea”, of Albanian nationality. Their children
are registered as Cristea or Cristescu - Romanians of Albanian origin. The
grandchildren would be registered as Romanians, although they were married only
with Albanians. In the case of marriage to a Romanian, the loss of identity was more
rapid.
Another example relates to the name derived from the profession, by features or by
name: Arnautu, Ceausu, Rotaru, Auraru, Ciorapciu, etc., or Economu - that Dumitriu,
Cristescu, etc.

22

After 1990 there was still in the aware of Romanian citizens, regardless of ethnicity,
the fear of security, and this has influenced the 1992 census. Related to this, there are
testimonies of the elderly Albanians in Romania. It was also added the Kosovo
conflict, which had a negative influence on the number of those who declared their
nationality as Albanian, regardless of religion.
After 2000, as the work of the Association League of Albanians of Romania became
known, the Albanians approached the organization and, under the influences of
cultural activities, identification and awareness of nationality and ethnic origin, many
of them declared, informally, their real ethnic identity. Currently the number of
Romanian citizens of Albanian ethnicity is estimated unofficially at over 4000, this
figure increasing from several hundred registered after the 1989 Revolution. It should
be noted that in 1944 there were identified around 20,000 Albanians in Romania3.
At present, although this is a relatively small number of people, the Albanian
language is ranked as one of the components of linguistic heritage of Romania, as
carrier of valuable cultural traditions specific to the Albanian community.
b) the respect of the geographical area of each regional or minority language in
order to ensure that existing or new administrative divisions do not constitute an
obstacle to the promotion of the regional or minority language in question;
The Association League of Albanians of Romania, which represents the minority of
the Albanian in the public life, has offices in all eight regions of development of the
country. Its members are Romanian citizens of Albanian origin and Romanian
supporters, all interested in promoting culture, civilization and traditions of the
Albanian
community.
The Albanian minority in Romania is composed of ethnics whose families settled here
centuries ago, and of Albanians who arrived after 1991 and became Romanian
citizens. The Association has tried to meet their needs through its cultural, social and
humanitarian activities. There are very different two generations, but sharing the
Albanian origin. Through the prevailing trades settled in cities on the top line south of
Romania, from west to east and then north, so that today we find in almost all the
counties, but not in compact masses, but scattered in some localities. It becomes
apparent that the integration of Albanians in Romanian society has always been
without problems, perhaps because the Romanians and Albanians, say historians,
share a common Thracian-Illyrian origin.
Romanian citizens of Albanians ethnicity live today in almost all the counties, but
mainly in the south - Banat, Oltenia, Muntenia, Dobrogea, and also in the center of
Transylvania and Moldavia. The Association League of Albanians of Romania has
offices in Bucharest, Dolj, Hunedoara, Olt, Gorj, Giurgiu, Constanta, Brasov, Cluj,
Mehedinti, and Bacau. In general, the Albanians who arrived in the Romanian
Principalities, and later in Romania settled down in the big cities: Bucharest,

3

Data sent to DIR by the Association of Albanians in Romania

23

Constanta, Braila, Galati, Ploiesti, Craiova, Slatina, Focsani4. In all these areas the
language still remains vivid and is used particularly in cultural life.
c) the need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in order to
safeguard them;
Since the Albanians do not exceed 20% of any local population there is no need the
use, orally or in writing, the Albanian language in local government. Businessmen or
other categories of Albanian citizens dealing with governmental institutions that do
not speak Romanian, receive a translator from the League Association of Albanians.
Traditions of the Albanian minority in Romania were maintained in particular by
cuisine, winter customs, and spring religious holidays - Orthodox or Muslim; through
stories, proverbs and customs of their native regions where the families come from.
To not lose these habits and traditions, Association League of Albanians of Romania
initiated - through symposiums, competitions, round tables, different holidays - in its
activities, the awakening of interest for their traditions and return to their compliance
by the younger generation, events reinvigorated and of resumption of contacts with
the traditions preserved until today in Albania.
Like other organizations of national minorities in Romania, The League of Albanians
largely operates its activities with the financial support of state.
d) the facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of regional or minority
languages, in speech and writing, in public and private life;
In public life, the use of the Albanian language is especially maintained in cultural
activities and in the mass media.
In the past four years, the Association the League of Albanians could complete the
bilingual library of hundreds of books and albums, which are always available to
anyone wishing to read them.
The published books contribute to a better understanding of the Albanian ethnicity by
the majority population in Romania and by the other ethnicities in the country. Most
books are bilingual and are published by the printing house of the Association “Privire” (Veshtrimi). Examples of books published in recent years: “Liria! Liria“,
”Pergamente (Parchments)“, ”Vesnic Prizonier (Eternal Prisoner)“.
In other printing houses in Romania, there have also appeared translations of Albanian
literature, including translations of works of Ismail Kadare, conducted by Marius
Dobrescu. Other authors, who are of Albanian origin, such as Kyçyku Ardian, are
already known as writers of Romanian and Albanian expression. The teachers of
Albanian origin Renata and Luan Topciu had edited and printed “Anthology of
Albanian
Poetry”
in
Romanian.
Handicrafts were added to the cultural heritage of the community. As the confidence
in the organization that represents them at national level increased, the Albanians
participated more in the activities of the organization and have donated handicrafts of
4

According to „History of national minorities in Romania”, auxiliary document for history teachers,
Didactic and Pedagogic Printing House R.A.,2008, page 34

24

their family legacy. To support the cultural life, starting with 2006, Albanians
purchased from Albania or made in Romania popular costumes for artistic groups of
music
and
dance.
Personalities belonging to Romania’s cultural heritage who come from the ranks of
the Albanian minority and promoted over time the Albanian language: the writers
Victor Eftimiu, Cezar Ivănescu, Vlad Zografi, Alexander Stavre Drenova (Asdreni),
Dumitru Pasko, Lasgush Poradeci, the architects Stavru Opari and Spiru Nicolau, the
actors Cyril Antony Kristache Economu, the culture man Nahum Veqilharxhi, the
tenors Cornel Stavru and Dumitru Mihailescu Toscani, the musician Gheorghe
Danga, the illustrator Despina Ghirokastra, the singer Nicholas Rafael, the slavicist
Lucia Djamo Deacons, the historian Gelcu Maksutovici, the writer and diplomat Nik
Pemma,
etc.
Culture artifacts created by the Albanian community include the bust of Victor
Eftimiu in front of his house, and also the Orthodox Church “From one day”, both in
Bucharest. The church was used by the Orthodox Albanians between 1911 and 1947.
Also, the community heritage collections include the magazine “Albanian friend “,
and the 19 titles of books published by the publishing house” Privirea “, most of them
bilingual. The Association the League of Albanians in Romania received as
donationsn dozens of very old books, some from the nineteenth century, written in the
old Albanian language.
With funding from the state budget, the Association the League of Albanians in
Romania could bring value to the whole Albanian community but also to Romanian,
with the specific music of Albanian serenades, through the editing of 6 albums. These
were recorded by the “Serenade” group. Because they were in heavy demand, the
Association has reissued them several times and circulated them in Romania, Albania,
France, USA, Italy, Germany, Luxembourg, Macedonia, Austria, etc.
The participation of the “Serenade” group at national and international festivals was
made possible by funding the Association from the State Budget, which made
possible the Albanian folk knowledge to the general public. For example, the
participation in the national festival “ProEtnica”, organized every year in August in
Sighișoara has become traditional.
The Association the League of Albanians in Romania works with similar
organizations to respect and promote minority languages and cultures, engages itself
in partnerships in Romania and abroad, develops national programs and projects
financed from its own resources or alternative resources.
The main means of information and communication of the Albanian community is the
cultural magazine “Albanian friend” to inform all Romanian readers about the most
important cultural activities of the Association the League of Albanians, about the
high-level visits and mutual relations between Romania and Albania, about the
Albanian history and its interference with the Romanian history, about literature and
culture, traditions and spirituality of the two peoples. The magazine addresses to both
the ethnic Albanian and the majority population.

25

e) the maintenance and development of links, in the fields covered by this Charter,
between groups using a regional or minority language and other groups in the State
employing a language used in identical or similar form, as well as the establishment
of cultural relations with other groups in the State using different languages;
Through participation in book fairs and traditions, such as “Ethno-Rustica” or
“Gaudeamus”, the celebration of important days in the life of the Albanian
community (March 1, March 8, the education Day in Albania, Summer Day, Easter
Day, The heroes Day, June 1 - Children’s Day, St. Mary, the beginning the school
year, the National Day of Albania, Romania’s National Day, the Christmas Day, The
Union Day, etc..), through participation in festivals, organizing symposiums,
Albanians keep close contact with all national minorities in Romania and the majority
population.
Through radio and television, the Albanian minority promotes its ethnic identity,
language and culture, achievements and future plans. Through consistent annual
participation at the National Festival “ProEtnica” of minorities from Sighişoara and
other such national events - festivals, fairs traditions, book fairs - the Albanian
minority has the opportunity to express, by all means used by media, its ethnic
identity. Thus, TVR 3, TVR Bucharest studio broadcasts a monthly show in the
Romanian language, about the most important events in the Albanian community.
The Association the League of Albanians in Romania is currently using new media
information and in particular the Internet. The magazine ‘Albanian’s friend’, Albanian
language or bilingual books, and all actions of the organization - national and
international activities – can be found online at www.alar.ro
f) the provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of
regional or minority languages at all appropriate stages;
The Association the League of Albanians in Romania started with the magazine
“Albanian’s Friend”, to offer Albanian language lessons. At the headquarters of the
Association there are periodic practical short-term courses for ethnic Albanians who
do not know the language and wish to learn it.
The phenomenon is observed as positive also by Romanian citizens who wish to study
the Albanian language. It is not taught in schools because the Albanian minority in
Romania is widespread in almost every county, and there are not enough pupils to
organize Albanian language teaching in any locality. Therefore the courses are held
regularly by professional teachers, members of the Association.
g) the provision of facilities enabling non-speakers of a regional or minority
language living in the area where it is used to learn it if they so desire;
Specialized trainers, members of ALAR, offer regular short practical courses not only
for ethnic Albanians, but for everybody who wants to learn Albanian.
h) the promotion of study and research on regional or minority languages at
universities or equivalent institutions;
Books - mostly bilingual - edited and published by ALAR and the magazine,
contributed to the spread of Albanian language and culture in Romania.

26

At the Faculty of Letters of the University of Bucharest there are teachers and
researchers specialized in Albanian, such as Catalina Vătăşescu. Among her works,
we mention The vocabulary of Latin origin in the Albanian language in comparison
with Romania, delivered at the Romanian Institute for the study of Thracian culture,
“Bibliotheca Tracologica” XIX, Bucharest, 1997; Romanian-Albanian Studies.
Semantic and etymological notes, Bucharest: Romanian Academy, 2006 (series
Etymologica, no. 22).
A well-known name is Ardian Kyçyku, a graduate of the Faculty of History and
Philology of the State University of Tirana (1990), who received a doctorate in
comparative and world literature at the University of Bucharest with a thesis:
“Directions in European modernism and their echoes in the Albanian literature
“(1998). He is both a writer and a translator and he expresses himself with equal ease
in Romanian and Albanian.
Another greatly appreciated specialist is Luan Topciu, a graduate of the Faculty of
Philology of the University of Tirana (1987), now Doctor of Philology at the
University of Bucharest. He is the author of numerous studies and translations
published in Romania, Albania and Macedonia. Together with Renata Topciu he
created - among others – the Romanian-Albanian Conversation Guide and the
Albanian-Romanian Dictionary (about 40 000 words), published at Polirom Editing
House.
i) the promotion of appropriate types of transnational exchanges, in the fields
covered by this Charter, for regional or minority languages used in identical or
similar form in two or more States
In recent years the interest in Albania and Albanians living in other countries
increased, so that the press edited by Albanians in Romania, including the monthly
cultural magazine “The Albanian’s Friend”, who reached in February 2009 its 88
edition, was published continuously from November 2001.
On the basis of agreements and the bilateral treaty with the Republic of Albania, in
cooperation with the Romanian Embassy in Tirana and the Albanian Embassy in
Bucharest, the Association the League of Albanians in Romania facilitated the
dissemination of information and cooperation between businessmen in both countries.
Also, the League of Albanians collaborates with the Academy of Arts and Music in
Korca and the Cultural Association “Blu Syria” in Tirana. They regularly publish
articles in newspapers and magazines in Albania and Macedonia and they organize
visits of Albanian journalists to Romania. Closer links with Albanians from Albania
and other countries represent a priority for future work of the Association League of
Albanians of Romania.

2. The Armenian Language

History. The first evidence of Armenian presence on Romanian soil appears in the

27

10th century (year 9675) on a stone tomb of Akkerman (today in Ukraine). Coming
from Armenia and Poland (via Crimea), “essentially urban people”6, Armenians first
established in Moldova, then in the Romanian Principalities (14th century) and
Transylvania, as tradesmen, shopkeepers and craftsmen. Although they were the first
people in the world who adopted Christianity as the official state religion (the year
301 AD) and had a special relationship with the church and its culture, in
Transylvania many Armenians were assimilated with Hungarians7, “preferring to be
converted to Catholicism, to obtain certain privileges or noble rank8. “Armenians have
still kept their ethnic values through language (having its own alphabet) and
traditions, forming an almost closed community until the early twentieth century,
when the last great wave of Armenian refugees from Turkey took place, following the
“first genocide of the twentieth century9, organized for political reasons10. Following
this exodus, in 1918, the Armenian Union in Romania was created in Bucharest,
intended to integrate (from all points of view) the surviving Armenian refugees in
Romania.
Numerous political, social and especially cultural personalities of Armenian minority
influenced the Romanian society, the environment they were established in, and found
suitable means of expression. The first Armenian museum in the world was created in
Gherla (about 1904), “the only city built entirely by Armenians in Europe in 1688. In
addition to economic contribution to the development of Transylvania, Armenians
have contributed to urbanization. Where the Armenians stood, the first buildings were
the church and the school. The Armenian people preserved faith and culture “11.
If in 1930, 15.544 Armenians were living in Romania, the census of 2002 indicated
1780 Armenians. National statistics of the Armenian Union put forward a number of
approx. 7000 people, including those whose origin is not 100% Armenian but who
declare themselves as being Armenians12.
a) he recognition of the regional or minority languages as an expression of cultural
wealth;
The Armenian community has managed to preserve the language through the unique
alphabet adapted to the phonetics of the language and through its precise vocabulary.
”Armenians in Romania speak Western Armenian; there are neither dialects nor other
languages. Armenians arrived from the former Soviet space of Armenia, speak
Eastern Armenian (similar to classical Armenian by reference) which has some small
differences from Western Armenian (similar to classical Armenian, by vocabulary and
grammar), but communication between the two groups is not hampered by these

3, 4, 5,

***, “History of national minorities in Romania”, Didactic and Pedagogic Printing House R.A.,
2008, page 39

8

ISPMN document
At April 24, 1915 The Turk Government decides the deportation and killing of all Armenians
10
***, “History of national minorities in Romania”, Didactic and Pedagogic Printing House R.A.,
2008, page 40
11
www.armeni.ro/ro/det/Armenopolis
12
Data from the document sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Union of Armenians
in Romania, page 1
9

28

differences13. In Transylvania, where Armenians are organized around religious
Armenian Catholic Church, the liturgical language is Hungarian, while the Armenian
language is used very rarely and only for a few songs; the believers did not understand
a word. In rest of the churches, subordinated to the Armenian Apostolic Church, the
services are conducted entirely in Armenian language, making particular efforts to
bring training priests from Armenia. According to the latest census of 2002, of the
total of 1780 people declared by ethnic Armenian, 694 are active speaking the
language, the number corresponding to the percentage of 35-40% estimated by the
Union of Armenians in Romania. In addition to these individuals, 27 other people of
other ethnicity than Armenian declared the Armenian language as their mother
tongue. Programs to revitalize the languagehave recently been initiated.”14
b) the respect of the geographical area of each regional or minority language in
order to ensure that existing or new administrative divisions do not constitute an
obstacle to the promotion of the regional or minority language in question;
In Romania, the ethnic Armenian community is present mainly in Moldova,
Transylvania and Wallachia. Wherever located, the Armenian communities are
recognized for their spirit of Community solidarity. Most Armenians live in
Bucharest, then the largest communities live in the county of Constanta, and the cities
of Iasi, Botosani, Suceava, Romania (the north of Moldova) Cluj, Gherla,
Dumbrăveni (Transylvania) and in the cities Pitesti, Bacau, Galati, Braila, Tulcea.
Using the Armenian language is practiced mostly in large and well-organized
communities. There are no restrictions to its use and the administrative divisions are
not impediments in this respect. In Transylvania, where there was a Hungarian
assimilation of Armenians settled in the area, the religious services are held in
Hungarian and only a minority of religious service are occasionally officiated in the
Armenian language.
c) the need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in order to
safeguard them;
The measures to protect, develop and promote the Armenian language are under the
Romanian authorities’ concern to protect minority languages, as mentioned in specific
terms in the Constitution of Romania, by applying the Languages Charter, the Law on
the organization and functioning of the Romanian Radio Society and the Romanian
Society of Television, and the Law on the Audio-visual.
Considering on the one hand the small number of members of the Armenian
community and especially the number of people who speak the language, and on the
other hand the riches and the immeasurable value to this culture, the means to protect
the Armenian language refer specifically to the protection of language and the
broadening of its areas of expression. The amounts allocated from the state budget
through the Department for Interethnic Relations, to the Armenian minority
publications cover the costs of editing various projects on ethnicity and culture (e.g.
newspapers, traditions, publication of books, support for the weekly Armenian school,
for the Armenian project to reopen the museum in Gherla, etc.). Through its efforts,
13

Data from the document sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Union of Armenians
in Romania, page 1
14
ISPMN document

29

the Union of Armenians of Romania has managed costs incurred in preparing an
Armenian priest in Armenia.
There are no localities where ethnic Armenians exceeds 20% of the population, so
language is not used in the local government, justice, public services, economic and
social life.
d) the facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of regional or minority
languages, in speech and writing, in public and private life;
In Romania, the Armenian language is used freely both orally and in writing, in
private and public life. Due to the small number of speakers and the share of
approximately 70% of older people of all community members, the Union of
Armenians in Romania and the authorities are striving to protect and develop the
Armenian language, culture and values by promoting the Armenian minority.
The Armenian culture is inextricably linked with Romania through important events
in history: here is the only city in Europe built entirely by Armenians around 1688 Armenopolis (Gherla today), where the city was founded and the first Armenian
museum in the world (in 1904). Currently efforts are made to reopen the museum and
recover heritage pieces, which together with the Armenian Church are evidence of the
value of ethnic Armenian culture in Romania.
Each branch of the Armenian Union of Romania has a small library, mostly from
donations of books and new publications of the minority publisher. The Armenian
Union of Romania has its own publishing house - “Ararat”, one of the most prolific
and active publishers in Bucharest, present in most media and book fairs in the
country and abroad. So far over 100 titles covering various topics from fiction,
history, Armenians, translation of Armenian literature, memoirs, etc have been
published.
The Armenian community publishes two publications: “Nor Ghiank” (bilingual,
bimonthly newspaper, 8 pages in Armenian language and 4 pages in Romanian, with a
circulation of 1,000 copies) and “Ararat” (in Romanian language, monthly newspaper,
8 pages plus supplements, appears periodically, with a circulation of 1,800 copies).
These two publications are financed from the state budget allocated by the
Department for Interethnic Relations. Since 2005 there is a web page of the
newspaper “Ararat” (www.araratonline.com) with a link to “Nor Ghiank (page in pdf
format).
The Armenian community is guaranteed access to minorities broadcast on public
radio and television channels. At the local radio station in Constanta, Armenians have
a 30-minute weekly program entitled “the Armenian nation and civilization”.
e) the maintenance and development of links, in the fields covered by this Charter,
between groups using a regional or minority language and other groups in the State
employing a language used in identical or similar form, as well as the establishment
of cultural relations with other groups in the State using different languages;
The Armenian minority is an active member in the Council of National Minorities in
Romania. The Community participates in public life and is in contact with other

30

minorities in Romania, taking part in joint projects carried out mainly in the cultural
field: the festival ProEtnica of Sighisoara, the events celebrating the Day of National
Minorities, the events and activities initiated by the Ministry of Culture etc.
Through periodicals, books and the community web site, the Armenians advertise
their culture and traditions, transmit information of community interest to other
minority and ethnic majority. Through freedom of the print, radio and television,
access to information about community life is provided, maintaining the links
between the Armenians and other minorities and the ethnic majority.
f) the provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of
regional or minority languages at all appropriate stages;
The Armenian language is used in public preschool education in Romania.
”Starting with the 1991/1992 school year, at the initiative of the Armenian Union of
Romania, the Bucharest Armenian School has reopened its doors, and the study of
their mother tongue was organized on two levels of instruction - beginners and
advanced. The educational reform in Romania aimed at measures of guaranteeing the
right to education based on educational pluralism. In this context, through Minister’s
Order no. 4523/1999, the Misakian Armenian School - Kesimian was reinstated as
“Community Education Center”. The New Armenian School, a revival of the
Misakian - Kesimian School that functioned between 1817 - 1963, has set up units in
the cities of Constanta and Pitesti. The Misakian Kesimian School of Bucharest has
two groups (children up to class IV and students in classes V - XII). The courses teach
the Armenian children the language, history and religion. There is a dance group who
participated in different ethnic festivals and meetings (Sighisoara, Constanta,
Timisoara).The Armenian weekly School operating in Bucharest, Constanta and Cluj
has programs approved by the Ministry of Education, the teachers are paid from the
budget. The educational and training process are organized and governed by the
objectives contained in the National Curriculum15.
In addition to the Community Education Center in Bucharest there is also a
kindergarten. To reinvigorate the linguistic identity, the Center is offering the
following subjects: language and Armenian literature, history and civilization and the
religion of the Armenian Orthodox Church.
Number of schools: 1
Number of students: 23
Number of teachers: 2
Armenian language is not taught at university level.
g) the provision of facilities enabling non-speakers of a regional or minority
language living in the area where it is used to learn it if they so desire;
In addition to the opportunity to study the Armenian language in the institutional
school, the Armenian communities are organizing language learning courses for
people who have passed the school age and are interested in the study and

15

Document sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Union of Armenians in Romania

31

assimilation of the Armenian language. Also, at the courses organized by the
Armenian minority, people of any ethnic background can participate.
h) the promotion of study and research on regional or minority languages at
universities or equivalent institutions;
”Since its establishment 10 years ago, the Ararat Publishing House of the Armenian
Union of Romania has published over 100 books, with various themes from fiction,
history, Armenian translation of literature, memoirs. The publishing house
participated on various occasions at book fairs organized in Bucharest, Cluj,
Constanta and organized book launches at the Armenian Library in Bucharest and in
bookstores across the country.“ 16 The Armenian Union has managed the development
and publication of a Romanian-Armenian, Armenian - Romanian dictionary
containing 40,000 words. The Armenians Union of Romania arranges joint research
projects with universities and institutions in Armenia, concerning Armenian culture
and language.
i) the promotion of appropriate types of transnational exchanges, in the fields
covered by this Charter, for regional or minority languages used in identical or
similar form in two or more States.
”The Armenian Community, through its two institutions, the Armenians Union of
Romania and the Armenian Church has ties with many organizations worldwide. The
Armenians participated in international congresses and meetings on various topics
(the Congress of the Diaspora, medical and youth meetings to help Armenia).
Working with Armenia is done directly by organizations or through the Embassy of
Armenia, Romania respectively, in the two countries. “17
”At the level of intergovernmental program, The cooperation program in culture,
education and science between the Government of Romania and the Republic of
Armenia, signed for the years 2006 - 2010, has to be mentioned, which states in
Chapter I - Culture and Art, Article 4 the following: Parties stimulate direct
collaboration in the cinema by:
exchange of information and audiovisual material from film archives;
exchange of specialists;
participate in festivals;
organization of film weeks of Romanian and Armenian film on a
reciprocal basis.
Article 9 of the same document states that the parties favour the establishment of
direct collaboration between the libraries of the two countries, by exchange of
specialists, informational materials and literature.18
In June 2008, the National Audiovisual Council of Romania became a member of the
Forum of Regulators of the Audiovisual and signed with the similar institution of the
Republic of Armenia, the Joint Declaration of the Member States of the Organization
16

Document sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Union of Armenians in Romania
Document sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Union of Armenians in Romania
18
Document sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of Culture and National
Heritage and National Heritage in Romania
17

32

for Black Sea Economic Cooperation, document relating to the protection of cultural
diversity of Member States.

3) The Greek Language
History. The Greek presence in Romania has a history of almost 3000 years. Greek
culture has become in time the most powerful influence exerted on the cultural, social,
economic and political life in Romania. The first proto-Greek colonies were
established in the 7th century BC on the western shore of the Black Sea (Histria and
Tomis cities). Over the centuries there have been several waves of Greek immigrants,
but the most massive immigration occurred during the Ottoman Empire19. The Greeks
brought in the Romanian area representatives from all professional fields: engineers,
soldiers, officials, artists, prelates, professors, doctors, philosophers, clergymen,
craftsmen, merchants, publishers, translators, printers, booksellers, sailors, etc.20 The
Greeks who arrived in the Romanian Principality and Moldavia were integrated into
the political and economic governing institutions of those times (“voievodat”),
reaching some important functions. Between the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries
most of the rulers of the two Romanian countries were nominated from among the
Ottoman Greeks rulers21. In the second half of the nineteenth century, the Greeks were
the most numerous owners of industrial establishments in Romania, being very
involved in the exploitation of the land22. Romania was the place where Greeks took
refuge from Bulgaria (1913), Asia Minor (1922) or from Greece, during the civil war
(1943-1949). After 1990 there was a new influx of Greek citizens who restarted and
reinvigorated traditional links between the two countries. The number of the Greek
community has experienced significant fluctuations: after growing in the nineteenth
and twentieth centuries, in 1930 there were 26,495 people, 3940 to 1992, then 6513 in
2002. Unofficial sources currently indicate a number of approx. 14.000 people.
a) the recognition of regional or minority languages as an expression of cultural
wealth
Greek, together with Latin were regarded as the two “linguas francas’ on the
European continent; Greek imposed itself on the Romanian territory, not only because
of the trend of the time, but especially through the special relationship it had with the
country of origin. Coming from all over Greece, the Greeks spread throughout
Romania, forming compact colonies in Romanian localities (such as the Epirots of
Papingo, established in Turnu Severin), or settling in large numbers and become the
majority of the respective locality. An example of the latter case is the situation of
settled Greek “in the nineteenth century on the Tait valley, in Tulcea County, where
Greek, spoken in villages similar to the northeastern Greece, was kept unaltered to
this day23. Many villages in Romania have names of Greek origin as evidence of the
presence of Greeks throughout the country.
19

ISPMN document
***, “History of national minorities in Romania”, Didactic and Pedagogic Printing House R.A.,
2008, page 20
21
ISPMN document
22
***, “History of national minorities in Romania”, Didactic and Pedagogic Printing House R.A.,
2008, page 76
23
***, “History of national minorities in Romania”, Didactic and Pedagogic Printing House R.A.,
2008, page 20
20

33

Although the number of speakers of Greek in Romania, like the situation in the world,
declined dramatically after the World War II, this does not mean its significance
reduced; its value comes from the cultural and historical power of Greece. Known as
the language of philosophy and classical literature, the Greek language has increased
its importance, being used almost exclusively in the spiritual life of Romania for
centuries. Up to the interwar period, Greek was a compulsory course in Romanian
public schools and thoroughly studied in private education, its knowledge being a sine
que non for the Romanian elite, a sign of special education and spiritual emancipation.
After its establishing in 1989, one of the major objectives of the Hellenic Union of
Romania is reviving the language among its community members by increasing
interest in Greek language. Currently, of the 6472 people who officially declared their
ethnic Greek origin in the 2002 census, 4004 speak the Greek language, i.e. a rate of
61.87%. They are supplemented by 166 other people of different ethnic origin than
the Greek, which consider the Greek language as their mother tongue.
b) the respect of the geographical area of each regional or minority language in
order to ensure that existing or new administrative divisions do not constitute an
obstacle to the promotion of the regional or minority language in question;
In Romania, there are 22 traditional Greek communities which cover almost the entire
country; only 6 counties from the total of 42 do not have any speaker of Greek. The
distribution shows a concentration of Greek communities in the Danube-Black Sea,
followed by the big cities - Bucharest, Iasi, Ploiesti, Constanta, Brasov, Turnu
Severin, Calafat, etc. The use of the Greek language is unrestricted in all
communities, without limitations or obstacles related to the administrative divisions of
the country.
c) the need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in order to
safeguard them;
With the establishment in 1989 of the Hellenic Union of Romania, protecting and
promoting the Greek language in Romania has experienced a positive development.
As a minority language, the Greek language is protected by official documents: the
Romanian Constitution, the Charter, the law on the organization and functioning of
the Romanian Radio Society and the Romanian Society of Television, audio-visual
law, etc.
The main measures taken to support the Greek language are in education (in addition
to existing courses in higher education, by Minister’s Order, from the 1999-2000
school year, it was decided to create classes with teaching Greek as a mother tongue
and Greek language school competitions, etc.). In culture the language is supported by
promoting specific cultural projects, by organizing the Festival of Hellenism in
Romania, etc. and in the media, the language is used in the publishing of the
community publication - Elpis, in radio and television.
There are no localities where the ethnic Greek population exceeds the 20% of the
population, so that the Greek language is not used in public administration, justice,
public services. There are economic and social situations in which language is used,

34

the trend is for increasing its use (Joint Romanian-Greek companies, which are very
numerous, the social programs initiated by the Greek State for the Diaspora, in
universities where students learn Greek, etc.).
d) the facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of regional or minority
languages, in speech and writing, in public and private life;
Using the Greek language in Romania is free and unrestricted, it is even stimulated
from cultural and economic reasons. After changing the political regime in 1989, a
reversal in the promotion and development of the Greek language took place, a
phenomenon closely related to free movement of people, geographical proximity and
community of religion, the rediscovery of Greek culture values and increasing interest
in them.
At the headquarters of each subsidiary of the Hellenic Union of Romania there are
small libraries; the books are provided by donations, procurement of new materials
and publications of the Union. The Greek community has its own quarterly
magazine - “Elpis”. HUR supports the editing of monographs on the existence and
history of Hellenism in Romania, such as the volume “From Papingo to Turnu
Severin” by Prof. Dr. Paula Scalcau. They published books of or about famous
cultural figures, such as: Mihail Eminescu, Kavafis, Kazantzakis – bilingual, Fampas a destiny that could not be otherwise.“24
In 2008 the Hellenic Union was invited to the Festival of the documentary film
“Autumn in Voronet”, where a short film entitled” Longing for Hellas” was
presented.
The Annual National Competition is organized for pupils speakers of Greek language.
Since 2000, it has been developed annually, “The Festival of Hellenism in
Romania”, considered to be the most comprehensive and qualitative artistic
manifestation of Hellenism. In all the Greek churches of Romania, Greek is used in
religious service.
Within the Union, in Bucharest, there is a theatre group made up of adolescents, a
choir and a dance band that contributes to the artistic programs presented during the
important events in their communities, or the various cultural and artistic events
organized nationally. Locally, there several music and dance ensembles are
organized, with very active presence in the cultural life of communities and national
and international festivals.
The presence of the Greek minority in the minority issues for broadcast on public
radio and television stations is guaranteed by law. In addition to joint appearances
with other minorities, the Greeks have a 6-minute weekly show every Wednesday, the
public television station TVR3. Radio Constanta runs weekly on Mondays (from
11.00) a 30-minute broadcast in Greek. The Hellenic Union of Romania has its own
web site (www.uniunea-elana.ro) and all branches have Internet access, using the
latest media information field.
24

Quote from the document sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Greek Union in
Romania

35

Romanian citizens of Greek ethnicity may use their mother tongue in their relations
with local government authorities, with specialist apparatus and the bodies
subordinated to local councils in the county of Tulcea. Within these authorities there
are assigned Greek speakers. Thus, the ethnic Greek citizens address orally or in
writing in Greek and the response are received both in Romanian and in their mother
tongue.
e) the maintenance and development of links, in the fields covered by this Charter,
between groups using a regional or minority language and other groups in the State
employing a language used in identical or similar form, as well as the establishment
of cultural relations with other groups in the State using different languages;
The Greek minority is one of the most active and visible ethnic communities in
Romania, engaging in numerous projects in different areas, culture and education
being favored event areas. All communities permanently participate in organized
national or local events to promote and support the Greek minority, such as the
ProEtnica Festival from Sighisoara, Sulina City Days, Regions Day, the Youth
Festival in Costinesti, etc. In recent years, the Greek community was invited to
participate in events organized by the Hebrew Communities Federation of Romania
(various cultural activities, the carnival of Purim in 2009, etc.). The Hellenic
community annually organizes the Greek Hellenism Festival in Romania, an event to
which other minorities are also invited to attend.
The Hellenic Union is represented in the Council of National Minorities by three
representatives - advisors on issues of education, culture and economy.
Using the bilingual magazine, the books and the web site of the Hellenic Union of
Romania, the community advertises its culture and traditions, presenting information
of interest to other minority and ethnic majority. Due to free and guaranteed access to
the written press, radio and television, the majority population and other minorities
have the opportunity to learn about the Greek community life.
f) the establishing of appropriate forms and means of teaching and study of
regional
or
minority
languages
at
all
appropriate
levels
The Greek language is used in preschool education in the formal education system.
The kindergarten of the Hellenic Republic Embassy in Bucharest has offered 5 of its
places of ethnic Greek children in Romania. In Bucharest, the Hellenic Union of
Romania organizes a permanent program of initiation and training in the Greek
language for preschoolers (two or three sessions per week).
At the initiative of a group of teachers of Greek ethnicity, groups of students who
opted to study Greek were organized in the public school system, with their mother
tongue as an educational discipline. The regulation of the discipline was strengthened:
starting with the 1999/2000 school year, a Minister’s Order answered the request
no.4699/14.10.1999 of the Hellenic Union, setting up the legal framework for the
establishment of classes teaching Greek. To implement this order, the General
Directorate for Education in Minority Languages works in partnership with Hellenic
Union and the Greek Embassy in Bucharest. Teaching in the Greek language is done
with a total of 6 teachers sent to Romania by the Ministry of Education of Greece. The

36

Greek language teachers teach in schools in the following Romanian cities: Bucharest,
Constanta, Braila, Ploiesti, Tulcea.
The Greek school curriculum has been prepared in accordance with the national
differentiated school curriculum, for the grades 1-4 and 5-12. Also, in the
Commission of Education of the Hellenic Union, an original textbook was prepared
and printed, entitled I learn Greek, for the Neo-Greek language classes. In Bucharest,
the Greek language is taught in the Bulgarian High School “Hristo Botev”.
The Hellenic Union of Romania organizes since 2003, a school competition – the
Greek Language National Competition - with the theme Let’s learn our parents’ and
grandparents’ language. Typically, each edition is hosted by another community in
the country.
In terms of cultural developments, Romanian schools where Greek is studied
organized yearly arts festivals, tours of the old Greece, youth camps, etc25. The
Hellenic Union and the Greek state authorities actively promote such programs.
Regarding higher education, the University of Bucharest offers academic training in
Greek and the University of Iasi has a lectureship in teaching Greek.
The Greek State offers annually scholarships for learning the Greek language (with a
duration of one, three and nine months) for students and graduates from Romania,
university scholarships (including a language preparatory year in Greece),
postgraduate and doctoral scholarships; the competitions for obtaining these
scholarships are open to both ethnic Greek citizens and citizens of other ethnic
origins.
g) the establishing of the facilities allowing those who do not speak a regional or
minority language and who live in an area where that language is used to learn, if
they so desire
Greek communities offer the premises for open courses and language learning, which
can be extended to other people than those of Greek ethnicity. There are textbooks
and specialized teachers for all ages and levels of study.
Also, in the case of Greek language studies or specialised studies of the Greek
language and civilization offered by the University of Bucharest, access is free for all
citizens, regardless to their ethnic background.
h) the promotion of the studies and the researches in regional or minority
languages field at universities or equivalent institutions level
With the resurgence of interest in Greek culture and civilization, there have been
studies and specialised works, some of which were initiated by members of the Greek
community active in the academic and research systems: Panorama of the neo-Greek
literature, Masterpieces of the neo-Greek literature, neo-Hellenic Literature in
Romania , Romanian Greek schools, Documentaries, Poems, Anthology of Romanian
25

Document sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Hellenic Union in Romania

37

literature in Romania, Prose and drama, Contemporary Greek poets, Catalog of
Greek manuscripts of the Romanian Academy Library, etc.
In the Department of Classical and Neo-Greek Languages from the Bucharest
University and the Lectorate of Neo-Greek Studies in the University of Iasi various
activities are conducted for the development of translation, retranslation, critical
editions, textbooks and classical studies, micenology, the history, theory and grammar
of the ancient Greek, the history and culture of neo-Greek language, specialized
language. Traditions related to the study of classical languages - Latin and ancient
Greek - are among the most valuable and respected in the University of Bucharest.
In Bucharest there is the Romanian Society of Hellenic Studies, which publishes its
research and studies at the “Omonia” Publishing House, the only publishing house in
Romania that promotes Modern Greek literature and civilization in Romania. The
result of 18 years of activity consists of over 80 published titles, mostly translations of
neo-Hellenic literature, covering practically all genres: prose, poetry, essay, drama,
history and literary criticism. The translations appeared in “Omonia” represent about
two thirds of all translations carried out after 1989 in Romania. In addition, there are
works signed by prestigious Romanian and foreign specialists dedicated to the
Romanian-Greek relations and the history of Hellenism on Romanian soil“26. The
“Omonia“ Publishing House is the recipient of four awards for the best translation of
a Greek literary work in a foreign language, granted in Greece, and three awards
granted in Romania, one of them by the Romanian Academy.
Since 2006, there is a branch of the Greek Cultural Foundation in Bucharest, which
aims to promote and spread Greek language and culture worldwide. The foundation
laid the basis for the development of international cultural relations of Greece and
held important cultural events related to the Greek civilization. The Language courses
within its subsidiaries, have made it possible to acquire the Greek language by a large
number of people and drove researchers followed master degrees in Greek
universities.
In 2006 the third Congress of Neo-Hellenic European Studies was held in Bucharest,
on the topic of “The World of the Greek Enlightenment period and the twentieth
century”; individual presentations focused on literature, history, anthropology, theatre,
Greek links with other cultures and civilization, etc.
i) the promotion of appropriate forms of transnational exchanges in the fields
covered by this Paper for regional or minority languages used in a form identical or
close in two or more countries
The Hellenic Union of Romania is represented in the World Council of the Greek
Diaspora and the World Union of Parliamentarians of Greek origin. It also cooperates
with Greek organizations worldwide.
Among the collaboration programs with the Greek state were the following:
- programs offered annually to approximately 230 different ethnic Greek town halls,
prefectures, foundations, ministries of Greece. The beneficiaries are children, young
26

“Financial Newspaper”, 20.02.2009

38

people especially older people from ethnic Greek (approximately 60% of seats);
- Scholarships for learning the Greek language in Greece, on fixed term, ranging from
one month to 9 months;
- Scholarships for university studies, including a language preparatory year;
- Post-graduate and doctoral scholarships.
”All the above scholarship programs can be accessed by our members, young people
eager to know Greek, or to engage in the fields and specializations offered by the
Greek state“27.
The links between Romania and Greece are maintained through numerous
cooperation activities in culture, education, economic exchanges, etc. A valuable
initiative in culture and education is the work of Professor Andreas Radosi (Greek
citizen, but teaching in Romania) of the University “Alexandru Ioan Cuza” in Iasi, a
neohellenist known worldwide through conferences and seminars presented at
international level. Among his initiatives are the set up - with the support of the
Ministry of Education in Romania – of the Lectureship in Neo-Hellenic Studies, the
establishment of the Foundation for the Promotion of Balkan and European Culture
“Rigas Fereos”, and numerous translations, retranslations, essays and studies over
many decades. Through his work in cultural magazines in Romania the translation of
the work of over 100 poets from Greece and Cyprus was made possible, and recently,
in Athens, an anthology of Romanian poetry was released.

4) The Italian Language

History. The Italian presence in Romania is consistent and starts in the year 1000,
with the arrival of missionary monks during the Christianization of the European
peoples. Later, at the invitation of princes of the Romanian historical provinces,
builders, sculptors, masons, stonecutters, carpenters, joiners, etc. arrived to reinforce
or build various civil and military fortifications. The Danube ports of the thirteenth
century become Venetian and Genoese colonies, the latter obtaining trade monopoly
over the Black Sea (in 1261), which led to the development and rapid enrichment of
the region. From the fourteenth to the sixteenth century, in Transylvania there are set
priests, architects, engineers, officers, dealers, secretaries, translators, craftsmen,
doctors, teachers, farmers, winemakers, sericulturist, drapers, painters, moneylenders
and traders. Also at the time, a massive emigration for takes place for religious
reasons. During the seventeenth century and early nineteenth century, the Italian
emigration is massive and growing (a forced colonization of political refugees from
Italy and Spain is recorded 28), especially in Banat and Transylvania. The
phenomenon is amplified and diversified since the second half of the nineteenth
century until the interwar period in all the historical provinces of Romania29. Around
25,000 Italians were established in Romania before World War II, but in 1948 there
were about 7052. In 2002 3288 Italians were officially registered, but the Association
27

Document sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Hellenic Union in Romania
***, “History of national minorities in Romania”, Didactic and Pedagogic Printing House R.A.,
2008, page 57
29
***, “History of national minorities in Romania”, Didactic and Pedagogic Printing House R.A.,
2008, page 58
28

39

of Italians in Romania “RO.AS.IT” currently estimates a lot more, taking into account
the Italians who came for business to Romania in recent years. The most important
buildings and monuments of art in Romania have been built by Italians, who brought
with them an interest in culture and fine arts30.
a) the recognition of regional or minority languages as an expression of cultural
wealth
The Italian language has a special relationship with the Romanian language: they are
drawn from the same core, with very similar vocabularies, phonetics, grammars; they
both belong to the Romance language group along with the Sardinian language, each
disputing the title of the true descendant of classical Latin. Although it is considered
that Romania has maintained almost all of Latin declension rules and Sardinian has
the closest phonology to it, Italian ranks as the “leader”.
In Romania there is a wealth of names and toponymy with reference to Italy: Upper
Venice, Lower Venice, Talien, Talien Bridge, Talien Cross etc. In Transylvania, the
Italians had used their name in Hungarian (olasz) and its derivatives31. Here, Italian
surnames were replaced with their Hungarian version, the official language of the
government at the time.
The Italian Community in Romania speaks literary Italian, “there are no dialects that
were kept”32, although immigrants who arrived here spoke in the dialect of the region
or even of the localities of origin: Friuli-Venice-Giulia, Lombardy, Emilia Romagna,
Trento and Puglia. “The first peoples who arrived from Friuli and Belluno, in the Dolj
County, used in conversation only the Belluna Friulian dialect. Men learned Italian
after they returned to military service. During the visit in 1914, in Dobrogea, A.
Mantua, State Committee of the “Dante Alighieri” Society in Bucharest, found that
boys and girls in villages inhabited by Italian immigrants did not understand Italian
and spoke the dialect of Friuli and Veneto. 12 of 65 people knew how to read. In the
Greci village, where there was a population originating from Friuli, Belluno, Rovigo,
a mixed dialect variant based on Belluno: bilumata, emerged. Today, however,
conversations take place in both Romanian and Italian. Elderly people also use, in
family conversations, words from the dialect specific to the region of origin. “33
Of those 3,288 Italians officially registered by the census of 2002, 2,420 know Italian,
i.e. a rate of 73.6%. In addition to these individuals, a total of 111 people of other
ethnicity other than Italian declared Italian as their native language. According to
unofficial statistics of the Association of Italians in Romania “RO.AS.IT, the number
of community members would be 30-40,000, more than half of them Italian speakers.
Concerning the latest wave of immigrants known as Italians in Romania, they are
native speakers, most established here for business purposes, their use of Italian
reviving the community.
30

***, “History of national minorities in Romania”, Didactic and Pedagogic Printing House R.A.,
2008, page 58
31
***, “History of national minorities in Romania”, Didactic and Pedagogic Printing House R.A.,
2008, page 65
32
Quote from the document sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Association of
Italians in Romania “RO.AS.IT.”
33
***, “History of national minorities in Romania”, Didactic and Pedagogic Printing House R.A.,
2008, page 66

40

b) the respect for the geographical area of each regional or minority languages, so
that the existing administrative divisions or us do not constitute an obstacle in
promoting such regional or minority languages
The Association of Italians in Romania RO.AS.IT is organized in 10 branches in cities
of Suceava, Bucharest, Timisoara, Otelul Rosu, Craiova, Targoviste, Galati, Zărneşti,
Bacau and Iasi. The 10 stars on the emblem of the Association represent the 10
national branches. In addition, there are dozens of small communities and small cores
of ethnic Italians over Romania, subsidiaries of the Association of Italians in Romania
working in 11 counties and another 9 being planned. The largest Italian communities
are in Bucharest, Moldavia, Banat and Walachia. Italians have settled throughout
Romania and the free use of language in communities is not hindered by any
administrative-territorial division of the country.
c) the need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages for their
safeguard
The Italian language strengthened its status in recent years and is currently used more
often and in more areas. Although there are no cities where the percentage of Italians
exceeds 20% of the total population, and Italian is not used in public administration,
justice, public services, economic and social life, however, the Prahova County Police
Inspectorate employs six policemen who know the Italian language, who can provide
the opportunity for speakers of this language to submit oral or written requests in that
language. The main measures of support for the Italian language are applied in
education, culture, cultural cooperation, cross-border exchanges, collaboration with
schools or institutions which have already established classes or study groups in their
native language (e.g. Dante Alighieri School in Bucharest, Italian Church of the Greek
village, Tulcea county, or Craiova) and cooperation activities to organize cultural
events concerning the history of this ethnicity, its personalities past and present.
"The phenomenon of Italian emigration developed soon after 1990, but has intensified
in recent years, indicating the need of reconstituting the classes taught in their mother
tongue in Romania, present at this time only in Bucharest, with the immediate
prospect of opening in other areas: Craiova, Iasi, Oradea, Timisoara, etc34." It also
envisages setting up kindergarten groups in Suceava, Bucharest and in other localities
where there will be requests.
d) the facilitating and / or encouraging the use, orally or in writing, of the regional
or minority languages in public life or private life
In Romania there are no impediments to use Italian, the language being used freely
and without restrictions, orally or in writing, in public and private life. The political
changes in 1989 caused a significant increase in the use of Italian language and
produced an unprecedented change in its status in Romania. That was achieved by
taking new measures to promote and study the Italian language, with the arrival in the
country of a new wave of Italian immigrants interested in general commercial
activities; a special situation is that of the Romanian citizens that go to work in Italy
34

Quote from the document sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Association of
Italians in Romania “RO.AS.IT.”

41

and have learnt Italian with their families. Children from these families who have
even temporarily followed their parents in the adopted country are a new class of
Italian speakers in Romania, together with the traditional community members. The
new situation generated a rediscovery of the values of Italian culture and an increased
interest in it.
Italian is studied in the public network as a modern language, and it is a subject in the
National Competitions of foreign languages.
At the Italian Church in Bucharest, the religious service is conducted in Italian. The
headquarters in Bucharest and Suceava created libraries of the Italian community,
with books obtained through donations and acquisitions. The bilingual publication of
the Italian minority - Siamo di nuovo insieme - provides information on major events
of the community life. In addition to this publication, the community has access to
periodicals published by Italian business communities established in Romania. The
books published by the Association of Italians in Romania "RO.AS.IT." promote the
values of the Italian culture in the mother country and adopted country.
The presence of the Italian community in broadcasts on public radio and television
stations is guaranteed by law. Since 2008, Radio Timisoara there is an Italian
broadcast of one hour duration. The Italian minority appears on public television in
the special broadcast dedicated to ethnic minorities and in broadcasts containing
information about many minorities. The Association of Italians in Romania
"RO.AS.IT. has a web site and many of the local communities have access to the
Internet.
e) the maintaining and developing relations in the fields provided in this Paper,
between groups using a regional or minority language and other groups of the
same state who speak a language practiced in a form identical or close, and also the
establishment of cultural relations with other groups in that State using different
languages
The Italian community is actively involved in establishing interethnic dialogue in
Romania, and due to the vast spread of the minority, the minority attendance at most
events held at local and national level, especially in the cultural (ProEtnica Festival
Day regions, cultural evening "Raphael Sanzio Urbino - titan of Italian Renaissance",
ethnic film festivals, etc.) is ensured.
The Italian minority is trying a new policy to increase its visibility aiming to higher
public and youth involvement in community projects initiated by the Association of
Italians in Romania" RO.AS . IT. "Also, since a large number of Romanian live in
Italy," RO.AS.IT. " joined the Romanian Government and the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs in organizing the project " Piazza di Romania ", presented in 3 large cities of
Italy to support Romania's image.
The Italian community promotes the Italian culture in Romania, for example the
International Symposium organization "Neo-humanism and intercultural dialogue",
with successive seasons in many years. The Salon for the evocation of the Romanian
film director of Italian ethnicity Sorana Coroamă-Stanca was also organized. Starting
from the project "La poesia e le donne", the Association of Italians in Romania

42

"RO.AS.IT." intends to present poetry and music at the headquarters in Bucharest, to
invite other minorities, or other subsidiaries of the country.
The Italian minority is an active member of the Council of National Minorities in
Romania. Through periodicals, books and the web site community, the Italians made
known their culture and traditions, by publishing information of interest to the
community, other minority groups and the majority population. One of the results of
the recently increased Italian presence in Romania is the large number of regular
publications, financially supported by the community, as well as the enhanced number
of Italian channels transmitted by cable television, which led to a closer connection
with the mother country of the Italian minority and greater access to Italian culture of
the majority population and other minorities.
Through free and guaranteed print, radio and television, the wide access to
information about the community life is ensured, as well as maintaing links between
the Italian and other minorities and the majority population.
f) the provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of
regional or minority languages at all appropriate stages
Italian is used in preschool education in the institutionalized education system in
Romania. Following discussions with representatives of local communities across the
country, the Association of Italians in Romania, "RO.AS.IT.", agreed to set up
kindergartens in Suceava, Bucharest and in all localities where there will be requests.
Also, in large communities, the setting up of groups or classes for learning the mother
tongue is envisaged.
Starting with 1990, bilingual classes (Romanian-Italian) were established at the Dante
Alighieri Theoretical High School in Bucharest, and from the 1996-1997 school year,
this program includes high school and secondary school students in 2 classes of
intensive study of Italian. At the request of the Italian minority, during the school year
2007-2008, the first class taught in Italian as mother tongue was opened at the Dante
Alighieri Theoretical High School. Now there are approaches to the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and Ministry of Public Education of Italy for recognition in this
country of the baccalaureate obtained by graduates of bilingual classes. Italian is also
studied in high schools from Pucioasa and Targoviste.
The Italian university studies are organized at the Universities of Bucharest, Iasi,
Constanta, Craiova, Timisoara, Cluj, at the Conservatories in Bucharest, Brasov, Iasi,
at the Academy of Economic Studies in Bucharest, etc.
g) the provision of facilities enabling non-speakers of a regional or minority
language living in the area where it is used to learn it if they so desire
The headquarters of the Italian communities are organizing beginner and intermediate
language courses, studies that can be attended by other people than those of Italian
ethnicity. For courses aimed at the study of the Italian language and civilization,
offered at university level also in Italian language, access is free for people of any
ethnic group in Romania.

43

h) the promotion of study and research on regional or minority languages at
universities or equivalent institutions
The Department of Italian Language and Literature of the Faculty of Foreign
Languages and Literatures at the University of Bucharest provides courses in
translation and studies in history and literary criticism, several books, materials and
general dictionaries for those who want to learn Italian or need useful information on
certain activities, services, etc., in Italian. Numerous works on Italian language and
literature and also teaching materials or works of practical utility – Italian.
Commercial correspondence; The administrative language of Italy; The Italian verb
through exercises with key Italian-Romanian Conversation Guide; Italian. Simple and
effective, etc. – were published and printed.
i) the promotion of appropriate types of transnational exchanges, in the fields
covered by this Charter, for regional or minority languages used in identical or
similar form in two or more States
In 2009, the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage launched a Program to
promote Romanian and Italian cultural identities and values, called "Latinitas 2009".
In the field of education, starting with 1997, the Dante Alighieri High School, offering
Romanian-Italian bilingual teaching, constantly participates in projects of European
integration within the Socrates European program with European partners from Italy,
Spain, Portugal, Sweden, Czech Republic, France, Ireland etc. Universities with
Italian departments collaborate with similar institutions. Cultural institutions have
direct links, rendering them ever closer to Italy.
The Association of Italians in Romania, other organizations and institutions, work
directly with partners from Italy or with the support of the Italian Embassy and Italian
Cultural Institute in Bucharest, Vito Grasso. In Cluj there is an Italian Cultural Center.

5).The Yiddish Language
History. The presence of Jews on Romanian territory dates from the 2nd century AD.
From the period between the fall of the Roman Empire and the 11th century, we hardly
have any sources related to Jewish presence. From a source from 1165, we learn about
Byzantium Jews who have good connections with South-Danube Vlachs. In the
middle of the sixteenth century, the first Hebrew community in Bucharest is attested.
In Transylvania, the Jews were still present in the 11th-12th centuries. In Transylvania,
the Jews were mainly assimilated to the Hungarian population. In Moldova and
Wallachia, the people speaking various Jew dialects became Romanian speakers. In
1930, 728,115 persons declared themselves Jewish, of which about 500,000 spoke
Yiddish. After the Holocaust, most of the Jews left Romania (data provided by the
Institute for the Study of National Minorities Problems).

44

a) the recognition of the regional or minority languages as an expression of
cultural wealth
Yiddish is spoken in Romania only by part of the members of the Jewish community
– 951 people of the total of 5,785 people that declared themselves of Jewish ethnicity
at the 2002 census. Minority representation in public life is ensured by the Hebrew
Communities Federation of Romania, which brings together 38 communities in all
areas of the country. The largest community is in Bucharest, with over 3500 people.
Yiddish language, very much used by Jews in interwar Romania, is currently less
practiced in current communication, and especially by the elderly, informal statistics
recording about 1100 speakers35. Dramatically affected by the Holocaust and the
totalitarian communist period, as in other central and eastern European countries,
Yiddish remained more a language of culture, preserving a priceless cultural
heritage created over hundreds of years of history. The period of maximum
development of Yiddish in Romania was the late nineteenth and early twentieth
century, when the millions of speakers in Europe included the hundreds of thousands
of speakers in our country36.
As noted by the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly in 1996, when it
approved Recommendation no. 1291 on Yiddish culture, like in the rest of Europe,
also in Romania this language is spoken in a more and more limited, aging
community, being even threatened with extinction. Together with the extinction of the
language, one of the richest cultures in Europe would also disappear, itself a mosaic
due to the influences of the different contexts in which this community lived. This
extinction risk of Yiddish, quite pronounced in Romania, was the reason why the
Federation of Jewish Communities in Romania called for Yiddish, and not the
Hebrew language to be protected according to the provisions of the European Charter
for Regional or Minority Languages.
b) the respect of the geographical area of each regional or minority language in
order to ensure that existing or new administrative divisions do not constitute an
obstacle to the promotion of the regional or minority language in question
The Federation of Jewish Communities in Romania includes 38 communities
scattered all across the country: Alba Iulia, Arad, Bacau, Baia Mare, Barlad, Bistrita,
Botosani, Braila, Brasov, Cluj-Napoca, Constanta, Craiova, Dej, Deva, Dorohoi,
Fălticeni, Focsani, Galati, Husi, Iasi, Lugoj, Oradea, Piatra Neamt, Pitesti, Ploiesti,
Radau, Resita, Romania, Satu Mare, Sibiu, Sighetu Marmatiei, Suceava, Tecuci,
Timisoara, Targu Mures, Tulcea, Vatra Dornei.
According to the 2002 census, Yiddish language is still without any limitations or
barriers in almost all communities. The number of speakers is relatively higher in
areas with numerous Jewish communities – Bucharest, the counties of Bacau, Arad,
Bihor, Alba.

35

Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Federation of Jewish Communities in
Romania
36
Data from Wikipedia: at the 1930 census, in the Romanian Kingdom 518,754 people were registered
as having Yiddish as the mother tongue, representing 2.9% of the total Romanian population.

45

c) the need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in order to
safeguard them
Yiddish is currently used mainly in higher education, culture and cultural exchanges,
as keeper of a diverse and valuable cultural heritage. In the local administration,
conditions for its use are not met, due to the lack of places where the Jewish
population amounts to 20% of the total population. We do not have data showing the
use of Yiddish in justice, public services, economic and social life, and cross-border
exchanges.
The most important measures taken by the Romanian authorities in support of the
Yiddish language are related to culture: through the budget of local authorities, the
Federation of Jewish Communities, the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage, the
operating costs of the Jewish State Theatre, the institutional expenses necessary for
research centers, libraries, museums that have exhibitions in Yiddish are ensured as
appropriate, and cultural projects that provide framework events in this language are
supported.
d) the facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of regional or minority
languages, in speech and writing, in public and private life
In Romania there are no barriers that limit the use of Yiddish, orally or in writing, in
private or public life. On the contrary, the effort of the authorities and of the few
speakers is focused on maintaining the use of this language, rediscovering its history,
and valorizing it culturally. Related to its use in public life, Yiddish remains alive in
cultural activities and, to a lesser extent, in the mass media.

Theatre. The most important preserver and promoter of Yiddish in Romania is the
Jewish State Theatre in Bucharest. With a history of over 130 years, the Jewish State
Theatre resisted dramatic periods in its history, being today the only theatre of a
national minority in Bucharest and one of the few professional Yiddish theatres that
were preserved in Europe. It is the continuer of the first professional Yiddish theatre
in the world, founded in Iași in 1876 by the writer and artist Abraham Goldfaden.
Later moved to Bucharest, the theatre was the cultural center of the Jewish
community, which in the interwar period included several hundred thousand people.
During the fascist dictatorship, the activity of theatre was discontinued, and actors
could not play in their mother tongue. Since 1948, it functions as a theatre subsidized
by the state, with an own room, located in the old Jewish district of Bucharest. As in
all other theatres, during the communist era the performances of the Jewish Theatre
have been banned or censored. However, the theatre, irrespectively of the language,
was a form of resistance by culture of the Romanian people, including the Jewish
community, which was increasingly restricted.
The Director of the Jewish State Theatre, Harry Eliad, recalled in 2006, when they
celebrated 130 years since the foundation of the institution, that the private army of
the Jewish theatre in Bucharest was composed of famous actors, who would then go
around the world. The actors played in neighborhoods, in various public gardens or
cinema halls. “Music, theatre and culture were balm for pain, hard at times ... Each

46

Hebrew family singing, dancing and reciting lyrics in Hebrew has a tradition in this
respect”, says Mr. Eliad in The National Journal, September 2006.
Today the Jewish State Theatre (www.teatrul-evreiesc.ro) offers performances of all
kinds in Yiddish, providing headsets with Romanian translation. Most viewers do not
speak Yiddish, but appreciate the value of the roles and players. The theatre group
attracted in time Romanian actors who learned Yiddish. The preamble of the website,
signed by Harry Eliad, is an advocacy and a call for viewers – “Yiddish must not
die!”.
The Hebrew State Theatre took part in many contests and festivals in Romania and
abroad, and it maintains close ties with the few similar institutions existing in the
world, constantly preparing for the first performances of classical Yiddish literature.
The Yiddish theatre is sometimes presented not only on stage, but also at the radio
and television. For example, the newspaper Adevarul reported in May 2003 that the
National Theatre and TVR International Television presented a show of the play by
Jacob Gordin, The Kreutzer Sonata, in the studio of the Romanian Television and the
Jewish State Theatre.
Museums. In Bucharest, the Museum of the History of Jews from Romania “Chief
Rabbi Dr. Moses Rosen” maintains a rich heritage of Yiddish. An important
background of exhibits is kept regarding the Yiddish culture and literature in Romania
– Wolf Zbarjer Ehrenkranz (poet), Eliezer Steinberg (fabulist), Jacob Groper (poet
and essayist), Itzak Manger (poet and novelist), etc. A group picture from 1908
evokes the first Congress of Yiddish, held in Chernivtsi. A tower of the press suggests
the effervescence of the Jewish press in the interwar period – 500 titles of Jewish
newspapers published in Romania in Romanian, Yiddish, Hebrew, German, Ladino,
or bilingual. Data about the great Jewish journalists working in the Romanian press,
the great reporters of the country’s major newspapers, are found in the museum. A
central place is dedicated to the Jewish Theatre. A scene in miniature, a costume
showcase, display panels and numerous papers, reviews, photos, programs offer
memories about the Yiddish Theatre, which first appeared in Iasi, known as the
“Green Tree” in 1876, and founded by Abraham Goldfaden, and then moved to
Bucharest.
On July 30, 2002, the Elie Wiesel Museum was inaugurated in Sighetu Marmatiei, in
the house where the great scholar and writer was born and raised; he was born in 1928
and he is a concentration camp survivor, currently residing in the U.S.A. He is the
only writer originating from Romania who received the Nobel Prize. In the museum,
there are pieces of furniture, but also prints of old Hebrew, with prayers in Yiddish.
After the war, Wiesel arrived in France, where he began working as a translator and
journalist. In the mid 1950s, Elie Wiesel met François Mauriac, which prompted him
to write his testimony about the Holocaust, for the millions of people involved.
Originally written in Yiddish, his autobiographical book “Night” consecrated Elie
Wiesel as a writer and brought him world fame.
In other ancient Jewish centers in Romania, like in Cluj or Şimleu Silvaniei, in the
synagogues that are no longer used for worship for lack of parishioners, organizations

47

promoting intercultural dialogue and Hebrew traditions are currently active. The
Tranzit House in Cluj is particularly active in this respect.
Music. Yiddish is still intact in klezmer music, promoted in Romania by choirs of
synagogues or Jewish assemblies. This kind of music is the universal language,
closely related to religious life, representing the common people or their history in
many ways. Although originally it was a music used for dancing, it can now be heard
in concert halls and in recordings. It seems that it influenced many other genres of
music in Central Europe. “In Romania, in the past, each borough was playing this
music. In Iasi, for example, in 1835 there was even a guild of fiddlers and Hebrew ...
All there being a temple of fiddlers” (taken from the data and feedback of the web
page of the musician Berti Barbera).
The “Hakeshet Klezmer Band” is a component of the Artistic Ensemble of the Jewish
Community of Oradea, being the first klezmer band in Romania which was invited to
the most prestigious music festival of its kind in the world, organized in the area of
Tsfat, Israel. During their participation in this festival, artists have recorded their first
album, “Give Me a Lift to Tsfat” (newspaper Crisana – Oradea, November 2008).
Cinema. On February 1, 2009, the official premiere of two documentaries signed by
director Radu Gabrea, “Goldfaden’s Legacy” and “Rumenye! Rumenye”, which focus
on Yiddish culture, took place. Radu Gabrea, one of the best known and appreciated
Romanian directors and writers, has produced several films about the Jews who left
Romania for the United States and their music. In “Rumenye! Rumenye” he makes an
original foray into the traditional Yiddish music world, signaling the similarities
between this music and “doina”, the most authentic piece of the Romanian folklore. In
another video, “Looking for Schwartz”, about Jewish descendants of families who left
Romania, they rediscover their roots through klezmer music and Yiddish.
Libraries. The Federation of Jewish Communities in Romania has a valuable library,
named Dr. Alexander Safran, after the former chief rabbi of Romania’s Mosaic Cult
in 1940, former Chief Rabbi of the Jewish Community in Geneva after 1948, a
scholar, theologian, philosopher, and historian. On the shelves of the library, which is
undergoing computerization, there are held about 30,000 volumes of universal and
Romanian literature, history, art and culture, and works in French, German, English,
Italian, Russian, Yiddish and Hebrew. The books in Yiddish include thousands of
titles. Most of the funding comes from the Jewish community libraries, such as those
of various Jewish organizations and associations, including numerous donations by
people who have emigrated. This fund is connected to the recently founded “Hasefer”
Publishing House, which is attached to the Federation of Jewish Communities. The
library intends to develop bibliographic research and organize cultural events (the
newsletter Divers, 2008).
In addition to the “Dr. Safran” library in Bucharest, there are 20 libraries in different
Jewish communities in the country37.
Books and publications. In the Federation, in addition to its headquarters in
Bucharest, there is the publishing house Hasefer, which publishes about 25-30 titles a
year – works on Jewish history, their contribution to Romanian and universal culture,
37

From the data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Federation of Jewish
Communities in Romania.

48

Jewish philosophy, dictionaries and encyclopedias, studies, memoirs, art albums.
Although it does not publish volumes in Yiddish, the Publishing House promotes its
values in Romanian, publishing translations of classical Yiddish literature. The
Publishing House is one of the elite ones in Romania and is always present at book
fairs in the country and abroad.
The main medium of information and communication of the Jewish community is the
magazine “Jewish Reality”, whose circulation reached 4500 copies per week in
recent years. “Jewish Reality” is in Romanian but also contains materials in Yiddish,
Hebrew and English, and is circulated in the Jewish communities in the country and
other countries. For some years, there are also magazines of the local Jewish
communities from Bucharest, Arad and Focsani.
The Federation of Jewish Communities in Romania has its own website www.jewish.ro - which includes an overview of the organization, community life,
important events (book launches, conferences, communications, religious
celebrations, materials on the Holocaust and Jewish culture). Some communities in
the country also have their own home pages. Romanian language is used, but one may
find data on the use of Yiddish in the past.
e) the maintenance and development of links covered by this Charter, between
groups using a regional or minority language and other groups in the State
employing a language used in identical or similar form, as well as the establishment
of cultural relations with other groups in the State using different languages
The magazine “Jewish Reality”, through the books printed by the Publishing House
,,Hasefer”, through the Center for the Study of Jewish History in Romania, through
museums and libraries, and the few Yiddish speakers in contact with all 20 ethnic
groups in Romania and the majority population. In addition to Jewish communities,
there are 25 clubs, 11 choirs and 5 instrumental bands that participate in various
activities.
The Jewish community life is always reflected in the media, especially at the public
radio and television stations, at certain cultural and religious events which can inform
the general public. There is only one broadcast dedicated particularly to the Jewish
minority – the broadcast “Shalom” – from TVR Cluj, which is being relayed on the
new channel TVR3 throughout the country. No shows are submitted in Yiddish, but
there are references to this language and its cultural heritage.
In the Council of National Minorities in Romania – a Government advisory body
composed of 3 representatives of 19 organizations of national minorities represented
in Parliament – the Federation of Jewish Communities is one of the most active on the
cultural level. Together with combinations of other minorities, the traditional Hebrew
ensembles participate in the festival “ProEtnica” at Sighisoara, the Minority Theatre
Festival, the National Minorities Day, and at fairs and exhibitions that are held
annually. Plays and concerts of klezmer music are presented in Yiddish.
A special project was “Euroiudaica 2007”, included in the project Sibiu - European
Capital of Culture, a complex event, attended by guests from abroad. Yiddish is used
in some cultural events organized by the Federation of Jewish Communities with

49

funds from the state budget and from donations, at least for readings of texts - cultural
evenings. In addition, music and poetry, events celebrating the European Day of
Jewish Culture, concerts of the 3 klezmer music groups (Bucharest, Cluj and Oradea),
performances of choral ensembles, book releases, etc., are also promoted.
f) the provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of
regional or minority languages at all appropriate stages
Yiddish is not used in education at undergraduate level. There are private schools and
courses in communities, but only studying Hebrew.
In recent years there is a revival of interest in universities and at the Academy for
Yiddish language, in the context of the emergence of centers of Jewish or Holocaust
studies.
There are several such centers:
• At the university “Al. I. Cuza” Iasi, there exists, as a department of the
Faculty of History, the Center for Jewish History. One of the master’s programs of the
Center proposes learning Yiddish and Hebrew to facilitate access to literature and
some historical documents.
• The Center for Hebrew Studies “Goldstein Goren”, established in 1998 at the
Faculty of Letters, University of Bucharest, offers various programs of study and
research related to history, religion and Jewish culture. It collaborates with many
universities in the world. It has a library and database. It publishes a specialized
magazine, “Studia Hebraica”.
• the Institute of Jewish History “Dr. Moshe Carmilly” was founded in 1991 at
the Faculty of History and Philosophy “Babes-Bolyai University in Cluj-Napoca. The
institute owns a library which includes around 10,000 books in Romanian, English,
French, German, Hebrew and Yiddish. It collaborates with numerous universities
organizing student exchanges, joint programs, exchange information, publications,
conferences, workshops.
• the Department of Jewish Studies of the Faculty of Foreign Languages and
Literatures, University of Bucharest, was founded in October 2002. It functions within
the
Department
of
Oriental
Languages
and
Literatures.
• the First Center for Jewish Studies in the system of private universities
opened in 2004 at the Western University “Vasile Goldis” in Arad.
g) the provision of facilities enabling non-speakers of a regional or minority
language living in the area where it is used to learn it if they so desire
The centers of Jewish studies mentioned in the previous paragraph provide anyone
wishing to continue their studies courses of Yiddish – MA, PhD, scholarships, without
regard to ethnicity.
h) the promotion of study and research on regional or minority languages at
universities or equivalent institutions
The number of researchers and academics with an interest in Yiddish has grown in
recent years, in the context of trends in the public education system to promote
contemporary history and the history of the Holocaust. In addition to Yiddish

50

language courses designed especially for historians, philologists, translators, at all
centers of Jewish studies established with different universities, studies and research
are carried out on Jewish culture and civilization. Some of these relate to the
grammar, writing, and history of Yiddish literature expressed in Yiddish, the language
in the archival documents held by the various archives, museums, and libraries in
Romania.
The Jewish centers edit and print academic papers and magazines, best known as
“Studia Hebraica”. Collaborations with universities in Israel, USA and other countries
are very active. The most important studies are presented at conferences, seminars,
congresses for specialists.
i) the promotion of appropriate types of transnational exchanges, in the fields
covered by this Charter, for regional or minority languages used in identical or
similar form in two or more States
The Federation of Jewish Communities in Romania maintains links with Jewish
communities and organizations in Europe, Israel and the U.S., participating in various
cultural exchanges. In addition to the tours abroad of the Hebrew State Theatre, choirs
and ensembles from country communities, on several occasions Romania became the
center of European music and Yiddish theatre. For example, in October 2003, the
Yiddish theatre and klezmer music festival took place in Iaşi, attended by
representatives from all over Central Europe. The program was organized by the
Ministry of Culture and National Heritage and the French Cultural Center of Iaşi, with
the support of many partners, and was part of a broader project involving the
European rediscovery of the ancient routes of Yiddish culture. Funding was provided
by the EU Culture 2000 program. This festival was held again in Iaşi in 2008, with the
participation of the Yiddish theatres from Israel, Russia and France.

6. The Macedonian language
History. The origin and ethnicity of Macedonians in Romania is disputed to this day.
The first documents about the existence of the Macedonian population in Romania
date from around 1300. One of the first settlements in Romania, which according to
historians was founded by Macedonians, is the Macedonian City of Timis County,
documented in the records of papal dijm years in 1332-1337, as the Machadonia38.
The massive immigration into Romanian territory took place during the nineteenthtwentieth centuries (the last wave of emigration occurred in 1948, when about 8,500
Macedonians and about 4,000 young adults from the Aegean Macedonia arrived in
Romania)39.
a) the recognition of the regional or minority languages as an expression of
cultural wealth
Macedonians in Romania define themselves as people speaking a Slavic language,

38

http://www.asociatia-macedonenilor.ro/istoric.php
***, “History of national minorities in Romania”, Didactic and Pedagogic Printing House R.A.,
2008, page 29
39

51

and are an Eastern Orthodox population coming from the territory of Macedonia in
Romania in waves of migration from the eleventh century onward40.
With the coming of the Slavs in the Balkans, the Macedonian language had a strong
influence, and currently has a strong feature of Slavic, however maintaining certain
specific words of the Illiro Macedonian-Thracian language. The Macedonian
language belongs, along with Bulgarian, Serbian, Slovenian, Croatian, Bosnian and
Montenegrin, to the Southern branch of Slavic languages. Ethnic Macedonians in
Romania speak several dialects of the Macedonian language, according to the
different waves of migration, recent and old, and geographical origin41.
Located both in rural communities in the south and in most large cities in Romania
today, representatives of the Macedonian community left their mark, influencing the
Romanian language in areas inhabited by them. In southern Romania, Macedonian
influences are more evident. Here one can encounter Macedonian words that have
entered everyday Romanian vocabulary under the generic name of regionalisms:
lubenita (watermelon), stoma (a type of barrel), opinti - flounder (peasant sandals),
cherpici (adobe), leeks, ilic waistcoat, obor (fair), livada (orchard), etc. Another
possible footprint would be the perfect simple tense in Oltenia – the only region in
Romania where it is used for the conjugation of verbs – with Macedonians being the
only inhabitants of the Balkans that use it frequently.
Different localities in southern Romania have names derived from Macedonian
language: Caraula (Dolj) - caraula = observation point on the border; Criva (Dolj),
Upper and Lower Criva (Olt) - Criva = crooked; Crivina (Mehedinti) - crivina =
curve; Galician Sea and Galiciuca (Dolj) - from the city of Galicia (today in the
Republic of Macedonia); Gighera (Dolj) - gighir = liver; Bojinu (Gorj) - many
families of ethnic Macedonians are called Bojin; Tehomir (Gorj) - the name of
Tihomir; Vrata (Mehedinti) - vrata = gate, door; Cruşovu (Olt) - cruşeva = pear;
Slatina (Olt) - slatina = mine42.
b) the respect of the geographical area of each regional or minority language in
order to ensure that existing or new administrative divisions do not constitute an
obstacle to the promotion of the regional or minority language in question
Macedonians from Macedonia are represented by the Association of Macedonians in
Romania (AMR) – the organization was founded in 2000, corresponding to the
existence of ethnic Macedonian communities spread throughout Romania. AMR,
through its 45 branches (in Bucharest, Craiova, Băileşti, nettle, Timisoara, Constanta,
Cluj, Giurgiu, Buzau, Neamt, Iasi, etc.) is established in 20 counties, and shows an
active participation in cultural, social and economic life, by organizing cultural and
educational events in which the mother tongue43 is used.
According to the census results of 2002, the Macedonian language is spoken by 588
people44. The number of ethnic Macedonians living in Romania is estimated
40

http://www.asociatia-macedonenilor.ro/istoric.php
Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Association of Macedonians in Romania
42
Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Association of Macedonians in Romania
43
Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Association of Macedonians in Romania
44
http://www.recensamant.ro/datepr/tbl5.html
41

52

unofficially by the Association of Macedonians in Romania to 15,000. For obtaining
this figure, the information pertaining to Macedonian emigration to today’s Romania
from the national archives of Romania and Macedonia and social dynamics in this
geopolitical area were taken into account45.
c) the need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in order to
safeguard them

The Romanian state has granted financial aid from the state for press expenses, books,
school books, publications, expenditure for the organization of cultural and scientific
symposiums to raise awareness about the language, customs, traditions, beliefs,
folklore elements of the Macedonian community.
d) the facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of regional or minority
languages, in speech and writing, in public and private life
In Romania there are barriers that limit the use of Macedonian language, in oral or
writing, in private or public life. According to the Romanian Constitution, in the
territorial-administrative units where citizens belonging to national minorities have a
significant weight (citizens belonging to national minorities have a share of over 20%
of the total population), the national minority language can be used in written and oral
relations with local government authorities and the decentralized public services, as
states also in the organic law46. In the case of the Macedonian language, there are no
legal conditions for it to be used in public administration.
The press and the publication of books and CDs is a very important task for asserting
ethnic identity, for the preservation and cultivation of traditions, habits, and for
spreading the knowledge of Macedonian culture. By publishing books, a vast cultural
and linguistic richness is transmitted to both ethnic Macedonian and the rest of the
readers.
The publications edited by the Association of Macedonians in Romania are: the
magazine “Macedonian” - bilingual, the magazine “Macedonian Urzicuta”, the
magazine “Macedonian Băileşti” - bilingual, the magazine “Macedonian Craiova” bilingual, the magazine “Macedonian Timis” - bilingual.
Among the printed volumes, there are: a Macedonian cookbook - bilingual, a
Macedonian customs and traditions book - bilingual, the volume of poems “Poems of
Duşa” - collection of poems, book debut of several young poets from Urzicuta, in the
Macedonian language.
Audio materials are aimed at preserving and transmitting to the Macedonian public
and not only, the original phonographic materials of the rich Macedonian folklore:
“First Song” (Macedonian traditional songs interpreted in Romanian), “Prvite Pesni”
(in Macedonian), “Songs for Children” (in Macedonian and Romanian), “Our Songs”
45

Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Association of Macedonians in
Romania, History of national minorities in Romania”, Didactic and Pedagogic Printing House R.A.,
2008, page 67
46
Constitution of Romania, article 120, paragraph 2.

53

(in Romanian), “Naşite Pesni” (in Macedonian), “Pesni Makedonski” (Macedonian
language), “Pesni” (in Macedonian and Romanian).
Within A.M.R., there is a Group of ethnography and folklore Biser Balkanski, the
Museum of Macedonian culture and folklore, the theatre group Little Macedonian, the
Group of Macedonian poets and prose writers “Alexandru Macedonski”, the Group of
fine arts Umetniti, the dance bands “Macedonian”, “Iliden”, “Sonte”, “Soncevi Ceda”,
and the Group of singers “Peamo”.
e) the maintenance and development of links covered by this Charter, between
groups using a regional or minority language and other groups in the State
employing a language used in identical or similar form, as well as the establishment
of cultural relations with other groups in the State using different languages
The Macedonian community life is reflected in the media, especially public radio and
television stations, on the occasion of religious and cultural events, and of other
events which can inform the general public. The Romanian Television, with its
Department for other minorities, produces seven shows weekly on the TVR1, TVR2,
TVR3 and TVR Cultural channels: “Luggage for Europe / cohabitation”, “Together in
Europe”, “First Step”, “Identity”, “Ethnicity Danube”, in Romanian, in which data
about Macedonians are presented. On TVR3, Studio TVR Bucharest, a monthly show
is carried out in the Romanian language, covering the most important events from
several communities, including the Macedonian one47.
The Macedonian community does not have its own radio and television. Its members,
as spokespersons of their ethnic group, participate in a television show that broadcasts
twice a week. The Macedonian community cooperates in particular with the radio and
TV stations in Craiova, Timisoara, Iasi, and Brasov48.
Together with combinations of other minorities, the Macedonian minority ensembles
participate in the festival “ProEtnica” at Sighisoara, at the National Minorities Day,
and at fairs and exhibitions that are held annually.
The Association of Macedonians in
http://www.asociatia-macedonenilor.ro.

Romania

has

its

own

website

-

f) the provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of
regional or minority languages at all appropriate stages
There is no education or courses in Macedonian language as a native language, with
elements of national culture, in middle school or high school. However, since the
2007-2008 school year, with the help of the Ministry of Education, Research, Youth
and Sports, in The General School “Barbu Ionescu” in Urzicuta (Dolj county), the
Macedonian language is taught as a native language by qualified personnel in the

47
48

Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Romanian Television
Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Association of Macedonians in Romania

54

Macedonian language49. The Association of Macedonians in Romania also organizes
native language courses on Sundays50.
The Macedonian language is studied in a lectureship of the Faculty of Foreign
Languages, Department of Slavic Languages and Literatures at the University of
Bucharest51.
g) the provision of facilities enabling non-speakers of a regional or minority
language living in the area where it is used to learn it if they so desire
Those interested can participate in courses organized on Sundays by the Association
of Macedonians in Romania.
h) the promotion of study and research on regional or minority languages at
universities or equivalent institutions
Studies and research are promoted by the Department of Slavic Languages and
Literatures at the University of Bucharest, with seven sections of the modern Slavic
languages - Bulgarian, Czech, Croatian, Serbian, Slovak, Polish, Ukrainian -, a
Macedonian language lecturer and a Slovenian one. The Lectorship of the
Macedonian language is supported by a visiting professor from Macedonia. The 21
members of the department submitted a business plan supported scientifically and
educationally, and most are recognized by the published works and participation in
symposiums or congresses of international profile in Slavonic studies.

i) the promotion of appropriate types of transnational exchanges, in the fields
covered by this Charter, for regional or minority languages used in identical or
similar form in two or more States
The Program of cooperation between the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage
of Romania and the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage of the Republic of
Macedonia, signed for the period 2005-2007 and subsequently extended, states:
“The Parties shall support the exchange of experts in the field of minority issues of
cultural programs for special projects for exploitation of cultural heritage of the
Romanian minority in Macedonia and the Macedonian minority in Romania. The
Parties shall support the development of cooperation between book publishers and
editorial boards of journals of culture, for publication of translations of works
reciprocal important classical authors and contemporary authors of the other Party.
The Parties shall support direct cooperation between libraries, exchange of experts as
participation in symposia, workshops and exchange of documents, including
electronic form, based on direct understanding.“52
49

The magazine “Macedonian from Craiova”, issue no. 3, 2007, Association of Macedonians in
Romania
50
Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Association of Macedonians in Romania
51
http://www3.limbi-straine.ro/2008/05/catedra-de-limbi-si-literaturi-slave.html
52
Data extracted from the Monitoring Report by the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage and the
Denominations on the implementation of the European Charter of Regional or Minority Languages,
sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage and
the Denominations.

55

Under the bilateral cooperation between the two countries, the Ministry of Culture and
National Heritage of Romania and the Embassy of the Republic of Macedonia
organized in 2008 in Bucharest and Craiova, cultural and artistic events under the
name of “Goţevi denove” (Days of Goţe). On this occasion, scientific
communications on “historical and cultural ties between the Macedonian people and
the Romanian people” were presented by Macedonian and Romanian professors, and
a piano concert and the projection of the documentaries “The youth of Mother Teresa
lived in Skopje” and “Sighs of Goţe Delchev’s niece”53 took place.

7. The Polish Language
History. The first distinct Polish community in the Romanian space was established
in the late eighteenth century, when, with the dissolution of the independent Polish
state, a compact group of Poles have settled mainly in Bukovina. The Polish
settlement in Bukovina led in time to the emergence of many towns populated mostly
by Polish people, such as Cacica, Soloneţu Nou, Poiana Micului, Pleşa, Bulai
(Moara), Ruda (Vicşani), Paltinoasa - in Suceava County, Tereblecea, Davideni, Zrab,
Huta Veche, Pătrăuţii de Jos, Crăsnişoara Veche (Chernivtsi region, now in Ukraine).
The number of Poles in Romania has dropped dramatically after the Second World
War. This was due, in particular, to the returns to Poland organized by the Polish
state54. In Romania, in the 2002 census, 3671 people declared themselves ethnic
Poles.
a) the recognition of the regional or minority languages as an expression of
cultural wealth
According to the census of 2002, Polish is used at least by 2755 people of the total
3671 who have declared themselves to be of Polish origin. Representation of the
Polish community in public life is provided by the Union of Poles in Romania,
bringing together fourteen branches. Of these, eleven are located in Suceava County
and three in several major cities in Romania.
The Union of Poles in Romania, supported by the Romanian state, is concerned that
Polish is spoken by a decreasing number of people among the community. Among the
residents of the villages Soloneţu Nou, Poiana Micului and Plesa, a dialect of Polish is
spoken, that of Wallachia in Czadca, that in Poland has disappeared. Speech
differences are observed in the language used by those from Vicşani and Moara.
Refugees from Northern Bukovina and those living in cities use literary Polish.
Preschool children and students learn the literary language, but in family and
community relationships speak in dialect55.

53

Data extracted from the Monitoring Report by the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage and the
Denominations on the implementation of the European Charter of Regional or Minority Languages,
sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage and
the Denominations.
54
“History of national minorities in Romania”, Didactic and Pedagogic Printing House R.A., 2008,
pages 50-51
55
Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Union of Poles in Romania

56

b) the respect of the geographical area of each regional or minority language in
order to ensure that existing or new administrative divisions do not constitute an
obstacle to the promotion of the regional or minority language in question
The Union of Poles in Romania currently comprises fourteen branches, of which
eleven are located in Suceava County (Cacica, Gura Humorului, Moara, Paltinoasa,
Pleşa, Poiana Micului, Radauti, Soloneţu Nou, Suceava, Vicşani) and three cities in
Romania (Bucharest, Iasi, Constanta)56.
Polish is spoken, without limitations or barriers, in almost all Polish communities in
Romania - 2755 people have said that Polish is their mother tongue, according to the
2002 census. A greater number of speakers are in communities in Suceava County.
In the Union of Poles in Romania, organizations work on different profiles - Youth
Organization, the Organization of Polish Women, Elderly Club. In their activities,
Polish is spoken.
c) the need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in order to
safeguard them
Polish language can be studied from kindergarten to university level. The Union of
Poles in Romania seeks to extend the number of classes or groups of study in Polish,
due to the fact that there is an increased interest among community members. Up to
this point, additional measures to promote the Polish language in schools were not
needed.
In eight localities in the country, all in Suceava County, there are bilingual
inscriptions in Romanian and Polish on the nameplates. The only municipality in the
country where the population exceeds the 20% rate is Cacica - 23% Polish population;
in the mayor’s office, there is one employee who knows the Polish language57.
d) the facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of regional or minority
languages, in speech and writing, in public and private life
The Romanian state provides the legal and institutional framework for the unrestricted
use of Polish language, in speech and writing, in private and public life.
Media. After 1989, the Polish minority in Romania enjoys full and unrestricted
freedom of expression, and access to mass media, nationally and regionally. There are
no radio and TV broadcasts in Polish, but in the context of programs for national
minorities, aspects of the cultural life of Poles in Romania are presented at the
Romania News Radio, Radio Iasi or PRO TV and local stations - Bukovina TV Plus
and Radio Suceava.
Churches. Currently, in Bukovina, the Divine Liturgy is officiated in Polish in eight
churches (Soloneţu Nou, Pleşa, Suceava, Cacica, Vicşani, Siret, Moara, Bucharest). A
telling example is that of the Basilica Minor of Cacica, where pilgrims come from
Bukovina, Moldova, Maramures, Transylvania, but also from Poland, Ukraine,
56
57

Idem 3
Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Union of Poles in Romania

57

Hungary, Germany on 14-15 August, and on this occasion officiate masses in
Romanian, Polish, German, Hungarian and Ukrainian.
Tradition. The Polish community is represented by two sets of song and dance bands:
“Sołonczanka” in Soloneţu Nou and “Mała Pojana” in Poiana Micului. These
assemblies promote the traditions and customs of Poles in Romania as part of national
and international events, at a regional level - The “Cohabitation” Festival organized
by the Union of Ukrainians in Romania in the Bukovina counties; and nationally - at
Sighisoara, the “Proetnica” Festival, or the Festival Bukovina Meetings in Campulung
Moldovenesc.
Publications and Web. The Union of Poles in Romania publishes, with funding from
the state budget, the monthly bilingual publication “Polonus”, which has reached issue
number 158, and a quarterly publication for children in Polish. It also its own website
– www.dompolski.ro. In addition, in Bucharest and Cacica, the respective associations
have their own websites. In the past four years, the union has published ten books,
works on the history of the Poles in Romania and their contribution to Romanian
culture, but also literary works.
With access to the new media, the Polish community members can surf the Internet at
union headquarters and in some schools with teaching in Polish.
Libraries. In localities where there are Polish households, the members of the
community have access to libraries with books in their mother tongue (Bucharest,
Suceava, Siret, Radauti). In other localities (Poiana Micului, Soloneţu Nou), Polishspeaking readers can borrow books from school libraries58.
e) the maintenance and development of links covered by this Charter, between
groups using a regional or minority language and other groups in the State
employing a language used in identical or similar form, as well as the establishment
of cultural relations with other groups in the State using different languages
The Union of Poles in Romania participates to cultural life, but not only, with all the
other 18 organizations of national minorities in Romania. Since 2007, together with
the Union of Ukrainians in Romania, this participation is organized within the
framework of the literary event entitled “Armonii lirice in spatiul Bucovinean”,
including recitations of the greatest creations of Romania’s, Poland’s and Ukraine’s
national poets - Mihai Eminescu, Adam Mickiewicz, Taras Shevchenko. In 2008, the
Union of Poles in Romania, together with the Democratic Union of Slovaks and
Czechs in Romania organized an exchange program entitled “Following the Slovak
and Polish culture”.59
f) the provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of
regional or minority languages at all appropriate stages
The study of Polish as a mother tongue for children of Polish ethnicity is organized by
the School Inspectorate of Suceava, in the localities where the Polish community is
represented: Soloneţu Nou, Pleşa Suceava Cacica, Moara, in close collaboration with
58
59

Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Union of Poles in Romania
Idem 5

58

the Union of Poles in Romania. Education in Polish, originally organized under the
Education Law of 1948, was discontinued in the 1960s and resumed after 1989.
Currently, in 12 schools in Suceava County, 409 students participate in Polish
language study (classes I-XII). In 5 of 149 kindergartens, children learn the Polish
language, with 9 teachers and 3 kindergarten teachers.
In the College “Alexandru cel Bun” from Gura Humorului, in classes IX and X, 17
and 20 ethnic Polish students, respectively, study in classes with partial teaching in
Polish.
Related to the study of the Polish language, The Ministry of Education, Research and
Youth has the following objectives:
• a study on the number of students in classes V-VII who wish to attend high
school, partly in their mother tongue;
• in collaboration with parents, awareness of the role of the Polish language as
a means of access to employment and universal cultural heritage;
• diversification of education;
• production of promotional materials for schools where ethnic Polish
secondary school students study, with the purpose of admission into high
school classes with partial teaching in Polish.
In Suceava County, on the initiative of the Polish Embassy in Bucharest, the project
“Children of Bukovina” was initiated, with the purpose of improving the education of
young people in schools that teach ethnic Poles. The project “Children of Bukovina”
is open to all students of Polish communities, regardless of ethnicity, religion, social
status, ensuring access to quality education, providing the best conditions, knowledge
and mutual acceptance, cultivating values for a better integration in society60.
g) the provision of facilities enabling non-speakers of a regional or minority
language living in the area where it is used to learn it if they so desire
In large cities (Bucharest, Bacau etc.), Alumni of the University of Bucharest
specializing in Polish have established companies teaching Polish language courses61.
h) the promotion of study and research on regional or minority languages at
universities or equivalent institutions
Polish literature studies are under the supervision of Professor Dr. Constantin
Geambasu, Head of the Department of Slavic Languages and Literature at Bucharest
University. Also, Maria Ostrovschi published a study on the Wallachian dialect of
Polish villages in Bukovina. The concerns of Polish students studying various
researches fall in Polish.62
i) the promotion of appropriate types of transnational exchanges, in the fields
covered by this Charter, for regional or minority languages used in identical or
similar form in two or more States
60

“Study for linguistic communities in Romania in school years 2006-2007 and 2007-2008” – Project
on Ethnic Relations, Bucharest, 2008 – pages 67-68
61
Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Union of Poles in Romania
62
Idem 8

59

The Union of Poles in Romania is a member of the Union of Polish communities in
Europe and the World Council of Poles in the Diaspora. The representatives of the
Union of Poles in Romania participate in congresses, regional meetings, educational
scientific and cultural programs where the working language is Polish. The Union of
Poles in Romania made in recent years exchanges of experience with newspapers and
carried out cultural programs with similar organizations in Chernivtsi - Ukraine, Balti
- Moldova, northern France, Hungary etc63.

8. The Romani Language
History. The arrival of Roma in the present territory of Romania is not known
precisely, but experts assume that it would be around the year 100064. The first
documents attesting this minority date from the 14th century (in 1385, the Roma are
mentioned in an act of donation to the monastery Vodiţa in the Romanian Country,
the donation including “40 dwellings of aRoma”). In the fifteenth century, the first
mentions of Roma in the documents from Moldavia and Transylvania appear.
Historians and sociologists consider that many Roma have reached the Romanian
territory as Tartar slaves (slaves of the Golden Horde). Their emancipation from
slavery took place only in the first decades of the nineteenth century. In 1930, there
were 262,501 Roma in Romania.
a) the recognition of the regional or minority languages as an expression of
cultural
wealth
It is difficult to reach a consensus in what concerns the origin of the Romani
language; it is believed to be related to Punjabi and Hindi, originating from India,
from where it spread together with the initial migration of Roma populations. Many
studies seem to support this theory. Studies of a Hungarian pastor who was studying
in Holland in the eighteenth century, but also further researches from 1780 in
England, support this theory.65
Linguists argue that although the Romani language came to Europe in a uniform
manner, it was divided into a series of many dialects, many of which were influenced
by the languages of the majority of states in which the Roma live. It is estimated that
there are between 13 and 30 dialects, and that 80% of the Roma in Europe speak one
of them. However, these dialects can be divided into two major groups: “Vlach” and
“non-Vlach”. The former predominates in Romania and was influenced by Romanian
language66.
Since 1989, there has been a real explosion in Romania of the movement promoting
the Roma minority and Romani language. If in the beginning there were a few
members of the Roma community speaking Romani language, now it is standardized,
63

Idem 8
From “History of national minorities in Romania”, Didactic and Pedagogic Printing House R.A.,
2008
65
Data from the study paper „Roma in Romania”, elaborated by The Center for Documentation and
Information about Minorities from the South-East of Europe (CEDIMR-SE)
66
Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Pro Europe Roma Faction
64

60

it is studied in schools and universities, it is used in culture and the media, similar to
other languages of national minorities.
A telling example of the progress that this language registered in the last 20 years is
that the Ministry of Education, Research, Youth and Sports– MERI – organizes,
starting with the year 2000, the National Competition of Romani Language, with an
annual participation of 74 students, from grades VII - XII. The Ministry also held
annually since 2008 a national school competition of the history and traditions of
Roma, with the participation of students from classes VI – XII. Since 2006, MERI
holds an annual Parade of Roma dance clothes, with the intercession of the Roma
language, for a total of 150 students from different Roma folklore groups. Between
1999 and 2008, MERI organized a Romani language camp with the participation of a
number of 100-250 Roma pupils, distinguished at regional and national level in the
Romani Language Competition67.
b) the respect of the geographical area of each regional or minority language in
order to ensure that existing or new administrative divisions do not constitute an
obstacle to the promotion of the regional or minority language in question
Romani language is studied in 41 of the 42 counties of Romania, with a total of 420 to
460 of Roma teachers teaching Romani in schools68.
c) the need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in order to
safeguard them
The Ministry of Culture and National Heritage includes in its structures the National
Center for the Culture of the Roma - NCCR - established as a public institution by
Government Decision no. 834/2003, with the central objective of preserving and
promoting the traditional Roma culture, but also the creation and dissemination of
modern culture and ethnicity. The main objectives of NCCR are presented in Law no.
430/2001, concerning the strategy to improve the situation of Roma, as amended by
the Decision no. 522 of April 19, 2006. According to the reform initiated by the
Romanian Government to improve and streamline managerial skills in public
institutions of culture by increasing the autonomy and separation of the administrative
management specializing in artistic and cultural management, from April 2008 NCCR
has a new leadership, based on management project contests. NCCR concluded a
protocol on establishing a section for Roma in the project “Sibiu - European Capital
of Culture” (2007), then participated in Sibiu folklore festivals each year with over
100 artists: painters, artisans, folk music bands famous all over the country, and
dancers. Following these editions of the Festival in Sibiu, NCCR was invited to
participate in two international festivals, namely in 2006 at Ulm and in 2007 in
Fellbach, Germany. In addition to traditional arts of the Roma, NCCR is interested in
the development of theatre, the visual arts and literature, which, in turn, reflect the
mentality, habits and psychology of the Roma community69.
67

Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of Education, Research and
Innovation
68
Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of Education, Research and
Innovation
69
Data extracted from the Monitoring Report by the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage and the
Denominations on the implementation of the European Charter of Regional or Minority Languages,

61

Consistent with the integration process and promoting cultural diversity as a central
element of a coherent cultural policy, the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage
funds in 2009 a program for the protection, affirmation, development and free
expression of cultural identity of national minorities in Romania, called Roma Together for Europe 200970.
Since 2000, the National Competition of Romani language is organized annually and
attended by students from grades VII – XII; since 2008, a similar competition
concerning the history and traditions of the Roma is also organized. During the period
1998-2005, summer camps for Romani language were conducted, and in the years
2003-2005, an intercultural Camp took place, attended by a number of between 200
and 250 Roma students studying Romani language in schools. The 2007 Parade
exhibited Roma traditional wear and dances71.
d) the facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of regional or minority
languages, in speech and writing, in public and private life
Although the number of Roma citizens is not 20% of the population in territorial
administrative units, Romani language is officially used in local government.
Thus, in the territorial structures of the Romanian Police, the situation was the
following72:
- At the County Police Inspectorate of Arad (IPJ Arad), it was decided to establish a
police officer position to be occupied by a person of Roma origin, in the Police of
Santana, given the existence of compact Roma communities at that location.
Additionally, at the I.P.J. Arad, 3 Roma candidates were recruited from the schools
for police officers “Vasile Lascar” - Campina and “Septimius Muresan” - ClujNapoca;
- in the Botosani county, where about 4,000 citizens of Roma origin live, the IPJ
Botosani employed in 2006 a policeman of Roma origin, who is able to respond to the
requests of citizens of this ethnic group;
- In the I.P.J. Calarasi, in 2006-2007 a police officer of Roma origin and a police
officer who knew the Romani language were employed;
- in the Giurgiu county, although there are only 3.8% Roma people, in the IPJ there is
qualified personnel with knowledge of Romani language, which is able to respond to
the written or oral requests formulated by citizens of Roma origin;
- In the I.P.J. Ialomita, facilitating the exercise of citizenship rights of Romani
speakers and in order to perform civic duties in conditions which take into account
their mode of expression, care has been taken of the need to assign Roma people to
various offices. Also, the allocation of seats in educational institutions of the Ministry
of Interior, IPJ Ialomita, provides for special seats being offered in annual
competitions to the Roma;
sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage and
the Denominations.
70
Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of Culture and National
Heritage and the Denominations.
71
Gheorghe Sarau, Romani Language. Linguistic planning in Romania between 1990 and 2008, article
from “An evaluation of policies of producing bilingual”.
72
Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of Administration and Interior.

62

- In the Iasi county there are several communities with a large Roma population.
Thus, in order to ensure an appropriate level of communication between police
employees and residents of the territorial administrative units and to better address
specific issues of these communities, during 2008 5 Roma guards were employed by
IPJ Iasi, who were assigned to police formations in those places;
- In the Olt county, of the total 489,275 people, 9449 people have declared another
nationality / ethnic group than Romanian (according to data from Olt County
Statistics). Among these, the percentage of the Roma population amounts to 1.86% of
the total. Although it does not reach the 20% threshold set by law, the IPJ Olt has
employed two guards belonging to the Roma ethnic group who knew the Romani
language;
- In the Prahova county, according to the existing data from County Statistics, in a
population of about 820,000 inhabitants, 16,780 people declared themselves as Roma.
Thus, in the I.P.J. Prahova, Roma people knowing the Romani language were
employed to ensure the possibility for users of these languages to submit oral or
written requests;
- In the county of Sibiu, in the year 2008, no oral or written requests were submitted
in Romani, but when developing a portfolio of people with knowledge of regional or
minority languages at the IPJ Sibiu, a police officer was identified who had a
satisfactory knowledge of Romani language;
- In the Timis county I.P.J., 2 Roma agents were employed, their allocation taking into
account the needs of the population;
- In the Vaslui county, in the city of Murgeni, out of the total population (7674), 1838
people are Romanian citizens of Roma origin, Romani speaking. Therefore, at the IPJ
Vaslui, an officer and a policeman of Roma origin were employed, who are able to
respond to requests from Roma people and use them in the court of law.
In the local and regional authorities, the situation of Romani language use is as
follows:
Regarding the provision of the mother tongue being used in relations with citizens
belonging to national minorities, at the institutions of the Cluj and Dolj Regional
Councils, two Romani-speaking people are assigned that are able to respond to any
requests made by citizens belonging to the Roma minority73.
In what concerns the use of minority languages in the activity of some regional or
local government authorities74:
To ensure that persons of Roma origin can benefit from the right to
inspect the contents of the agenda of the meetings of Sibiu and
Suceava County Councils, these institutions have made
arrangements to communicate the agenda in Romani language;
The Sibiu and Suceava County Councils have also taken the
necessary measures to ensure the public disclosure of decisions in
Romani.
As regards the use of minority languages in other cases provided by law, in 13
counties - Bacau, Bistrita, Calarasi, Cluj, Constanta, Dolj, Galati, Ialomita, Mehedinti,
Mures, Olt, Sibiu, Timis - staff is employed with knowledge of Romani language that
73
74

Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of Administration and Interior
Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of Administration and Interior

63

can respond to petitions addressed to local government authorities in that language75.
In relation to the right of minorities to address oral / written requests to local
government authorities in Dolj and Olt, provisions were adopted to offer answers to
requests addressed to local government authorities by citizens belonging to the Roma
minority in their mother tongue76.
e) the maintenance and development of links covered by this Charter, between
groups using a regional or minority language and other groups in the State
employing a language used in identical or similar form, as well as the establishment
of cultural relations with other groups in the State using different languages
The publications of the Roma minority are the main tools for maintaining and
promoting contacts with the other minorities and the Romanian majority. This
includes the magazine “The ace of clubs”, edited intermittently by the Roma
organization Pro Europe (twice in 2005 and twice in 2008). The increase in
circulation of the publication “The ace of clubs”, from 20,000 copies in 2005 to
220,000 copies in 2008, with the new form of the newspaper, is noteworthy. The
magazine “Roma stars” was published in 2007 by the same institute that published the
supplement “the Roma Party report” in the “Romanian reality” (one page, 12
appearances in 2005, 12 appearances in 2006).
The Ministry of Education, Research, Youth and Sports, through its inspectors for the
Romani language, facilitates awareness of the existence of electronic texts in Roma
language, from people from different countries, offering opportunities for linguistic
communication between speakers of this language in Romania and in other
countries77.
The programs implemented by the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage during
2004-2008 in the framework of the Cultural Diversity Service, entitled
“Proetnicultura” and “Roma - Together for Europe“, were aimed at promoting
cultural diversity, multilingualism and values deriving from ethnic and cultural
diversity at the national and local level by financing activities based on projects to
eliminate prejudices, to recognize common values, to guide public financial resources,
to finance specific activities of conservation and development of the cultural and
linguistic identity of national minorities in Romania. The financing of national,
regional and local authorities, taking into account the national cultural interest or
priorities for local communities, was aimed at promoting and protecting cultural
identity and diversity, implementing the legislative framework in the field,
harmonized with EU regulations and the promotion of fundamental cultural features,
by running these two major cultural programs: “Proetnicultura”, which covers all
national minorities in Romania, and “Roma together for Europe”, which is a program
aimed at providing specialized materials falling under the Annual Action Plan for
Implementing the Government Strategy for improving the situation of the Roma78.
75

Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of Administration and Interior
Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of Administration and Interior
77
Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of Education, Research and
Innovation
78
Data extracted from the Monitoring Report by the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage and the
Denominations on the implementation of the European Charter of Regional or Minority Languages,
76

64

The Romanian Radio Broadcasting Corporation offers programs in Romani language
at the regional radio stations broadcasting in Romania: Radio Resita transmits 30
minutes of weekly broadcast in Romani language; in Targu-Mures, the radio
broadcasts in Romani were initiated in 2000. Radio Timisoara’s share of programs in
minority languages is 21.43% of all programs, and 30 minutes are dedicated to
Romani, on Sundays from 18.30 to 19.00. Radio Targu-Mures’ share of broadcasts in
minority languages being 44.61% and 39.70% on AM and FM frequencies,
respectively, it includes a program in Romani language, of 60 minutes in the first 3
weeks of each month, on Saturdays at 07.00.
Taking into account the applicable provisions of the Charter, the Romanian Radio
Broadcasting Corporation, in the Department for Minorities in Bucharest, has
developed a project aimed at widening the broadcasting time of the department by 2
hours a day, Mondays and Wednesdays (22.30 - 23.15, 23.15 - 24.00, respectively), a
time reserved for broadcasting news stories and interviews in Romanian79.
The Romanian Television, in the context of its Department for Minorities, produces
programs dedicated to the Roma80:
- The Show “Together in Europe. First Step” on TVR2, lasting 52 minutes each
month at 15:00, is a broadcast devoted exclusively to the Roma, presenting the
traditions, customs and social problems of the Roma. The editions are designed
thematically and focus on presenting the issue from all points of view;
- The Romanian television debut of a new show of the Department for Minorities,
“Traio Romano”, a peek into the world of the Roma from Banat, took place in
February 2004. With the establishment of TVR3 in October 2008, the show was
moved to that channel, having an effective duration of 34 minutes and was broadcast
three times a month on Mondays, conducted alternately at TVR Timisoara, TVR Cluj
and TVR Bucharest;
- Daily from Monday to Thursday, in Timisoara and Cluj, there are programs running
in Hungarian, German, Serbian and Romanian, with a duration of 30 minutes;
- TVR’s teams were present at the festivals “ProEtnica” and “Cool” - Romani Art
Festival;
- On March 16, 2009, the first show in Romani with subtitles in Romanian, was aired
on TVR3, just as the channel became available nationally. In its first edition, under
the heading “Ethnic minority languages magazine – Romani”, an interview with
professor Gheorghe Sarau81 of the Ministry of Education, Research, Youth and
Sportswas shown, in which details of the national program for Roma “All in the

sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage and
the Denominations
79
Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Romanian Radio Society, Radio
Romania Regional, Department for Editorial production, Regional Studios and Minorities’ Redaction.
80
Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Romanian Radio Society – Romanian
Television
81
Georghe Sarau is the one who set the bases for Roma studying, printing the first study book of this
language in the primary schools, the first course thought in university and the first dictionary. In the
last 17 years, he formed over 460 teachers of Roma language and promoted specialists of this language,
as graduates of Foreign Languages Faculty – Roma language major, from Bucharest University
(http://www.cotidianul.ro/gheorghe_sarau_un_alexandru_graur_al_romilor_30064.html)

65

nursery, all in first grade” were presented, as well as a recorded program with all the
dances and traditional songs of the Roma “Amaro-Del”82.
f) the provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of
regional or minority languages at all appropriate stages
In Romania, a Roma family can choose for its child between schools with teaching in
Romanian or Hungarian, according to local tradition and the respective family (in this
type of education, parents can have their children study 3-4 extra hours per week of
native Romani language and literature and / or the history and traditions of Roma) and
education with full teaching in Romani language (4:00 pm, with mandatory weekly
Romanian).
1.
Romani
language
teaching
in
schools
and
kindergartens83
Teaching at 3:00 pm weekly / Romanian language class, the common base of school
subjects in grades IX - XII has (since 1990), in normal schools (former teaching
colleges): in Romania, teaching first hours of Romanian language began in the
1990/1991 school year, three classes of 50 Roma pupils, who were preparing to
become teachers Roma in normal schools (high schools Teaching) in Bucharest,
Bacau and Targu Mures. The project ended in 1995, but, has been occasionally
replicated, especially in the school year 1995-1996 and the school year 2001-2002,
being taught in other schools in Bucharest, Slatina, Zalau, Cluj Napoca, Iasi, Bacau
etc., where they studied and 3 o’clock weekly Romanian language provided in the
curriculum.
3-4 hours weekly teaching / class of Romanian language, the common base of school
subjects in grades I - The Twelfth (from 1992 till now) and one hours / week of Roma
history and traditions in classes VI and VII: 1992-1993 school year, the study extends
the Romans and in the mother tongue classes I-IV, with a total of 368 Roma children
studying this subject, as currently in 2008, the number of Roma students studying
language, literature, history and traditions of Roma to reach 26,805 (over four
hundred teachers in 41 counties of 42).
Full teaching Roma language (supplemented by compulsory study of Romanian 4
o’clock weekly) started in the 2001/2002 school year at School no. 12 Magura Lugoj, Timis county, then in the 2006/2007 school year was extended from School. 1
of Drastic, Hunedoara county, and in the 2007/2008 school year and from School. 1
Lupeni, Hunedoara County, School no. 9 “Anton Pann” in Braila, Olt county
Stoeneşti School and School Ineu of Bihor County. 380 Roma pupils are enrolled in
Romanian monolingual education.
At the initiative of the Roma organization “Bitter Rromentza”, bilingual teaching
(Romanian-Romani) was introduced experimentally in 2005, in partnership with CSI
Calarasi, at Săruleşti Kindergarten, to a group of Roma preschool children. In 2006,
the project was extended by the same organization, in cooperation with ISJ Iasi and
Ciurea (in Iasi County). Preschool education in Romani language expanded from the
82

www.divers.ro
Gheorghe Sarau, Roma Language. Linguistic planning in Romania between 1990 and 2008, article
appeared in “An evaluation of the policies of producing the bilinguals”, The Institute for Studying the
Problems of National Minorities (ISPMN), page 195-197
83

66

academic year 2006-2007 to other schools, and now there are several groups of Roma
preschool children in Bacau (3 groups in 2007, the Şc “Dominate Maria” in Bacau, in
Şc no. 1 Dărmăneşti and Şc Gutinaş, Comuna Stefan cel Mare), the Şc no. 12 Magura
(2 groups) and Şc Ineu (Bihar, a group).
2. Roma language at university
- University of Bucharest - Faculty of Foreign Languages: Optional Course of
Romani: from the academic year 1992/1993, for the first time in Romanian higher
education, Romani language study was initiated at the Faculty of Foreign Languages
and Literatures, University of Bucharest with the support of Prof. Gheorghe Sarau, as
an optional course. This process continued until 2001 - even after the establishment,
in 1997, of an Indian Department (Hindi - Romanian) - and was open to students of
foreign language departments, the Faculty of Philology in Romanian, as well as to
students of the University and other educational institutes in Bucharest and abroad,
and those active in Roma issues in non-governmental organizations (including
students from the faculties of sociology, theology, law, history, journalism, music,
psychology, pedagogy, theater, etc.)84.
The Department of Indian Studies of the Faculty of Foreign Languages and
Literatures at the University of Bucharest: in the 1996/1997 academic year, it
reopened section B. Hindi, and the academic year 1997/1998, following examination
for admission in autumn 1997, it opened the Hindi-Romanian section. For the two
sections (B Hindi, Hindi-Romanian B, respectively) certain numbers of schools were
given (year, how many places 7.10), the alternation, i.e. from 2 to 2 years for each
section. During the academic year 1997/1998, section B. Indian (Hindi-Romanian)
was attended by 13 students of the Faculty of Foreign Languages and Literatures in
Bucharest.
In 1997/1998, it was approved establishing a section in its own right “B language and
literature, and since the academic year 1998/1999 the Ministry of Education has
awarded 10 separate places for this purpose. After the entrance examination were
admitted 8 specializations young Romanian-Romanian Roma (6 students),
respectively specializations French / English - Romanian (2 students). Next, be
granted one year Roma candidates 10-15 seats.
From the academic year 2005/2006, section B. Language and Literature Department
was transformed into A section, language and literature, with 20 students each year85.
- University of Bucharest - Department of Distance Learning (CREDIS): Section
“Institute - Romanian language. In the period 2000 - 2008, preparing Roma teachers
for Romani-language Romani language studies field was conducted at the University
of Bucharest (Department CREDIS open and distance learning) in a program initiated
by the Ministry of Education. In 2000, in partnership with the University of Bucharest
and the initial financial support of the organization Center Education 2000 +, and with
the support of other partners (UNICEF Romania, PHARE Program of the Ministry of
Education, Open Society Institute - Budapest, Resource Center Roma Communities Cluj Napoca, Providence Foundations, etc.), to pay tuition fees. Roma students from
84
85

Gheorghe Sarau, op. cit. page 198
Gheorghe Sarau, op. cit. page 198 - 199

67

CREDIS activated in parallel, as teachers of Roma language and / or the history and
traditions of Roma in schools located in their communities of residence.
Section “Pedagogy education and preschool”. During the academic year 2005/2006,
in the context of the Rural Education Program (MLP), 50 Roma students were
admitted at the national level as scholars, who graduated in 2008, benefiting from a
curriculum with 3 optional subjects in the field of language, literature and their
teaching methodology86.
- University Babes - Bolyai in Cluj Napoca - Faculty of Psychology and Educational
Sciences: during the academic year 2005/2006, the PHARE program undertaken by
the Ministry of Education, addressed to disadvantaged groups of students awarded 38
scholarships for Roma students, IDD department “preschool education and
pedagogy”, of the Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences of Babes-Bolyai
University. Roma students have a nuanced curriculum for subjects relating to
language, literature, history and culture, as well as their teaching methodology. From
the academic year 2006/2007, a further 20 Roma trainees became part of this section,
with grants being offered under the same program87.
Ministry of Education, Research, Youth and Sportsand partners have set up between
1990-2008 six major types of programs in the context of education for Roma. They
are88:
1. Programs initiated and funded solely by the Ministry of Education, Research,
Youth and Sports:
Allocation of separate places for Roma children in schools for
admission (1990 - 1955, 1995-2000, 2001-2008);
Provision of seats for admission of young Roma in different faculties
and colleges (1992 - 2008);
Teaching and history of Romani in schools and colleges (1990, 1992 to
2008);
Romani teaching at university (1992-2008);
Establish stations Roma school inspectors in the CSI (1999);
Funding stations Romani language and history teachers (1990, 1992 to
2008);
Organization of summer schools of the Romani language and history
(1999 - 2008), with its funding in 2000 and 2007, 2008);
National Competition Romani language school (2000-2008) and
language camps and creation Roma (1998 - 2006);
School history and traditions of Roma National Competition (since
2008);
School Programs (1991-2008) and textbooks for language and
literature, history and traditions of Roma (1994-2008);

86

Gheorghe Sarau, op. cit. page 200
Gheorghe Sarau, op. cit. page 200
88
Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of Education, Research and
Innovation, conf. PhD. Georghe Sarau, adviser for Roma language and Roma people in the Ministry of
Education, Research and Innovation
87

68

Initial and continuing education courses (in 2007, over 1800 human
resources were formed, and in 2008 received another 1900 people);
The current annual one from 80 to 120 summer kindergarten pre first
class (between 2002 and 2007) and in the summer of 2008 were 280 kindergartens
organized other summer.
2. Programs initiated and financed by partners of the Ministry of Education
(over 80 organizations from 1988 to present):
Roma CRISS (1994-2008)
Intercultural Institute (1994 - 2007)
Roma game “Pro Europe” (1997-2007)
Regional Center Project on Ethnic Relations, based in Targu-Mures
and Bucharest (1998-2008)
Center Education 2000 +, Bucharest (1998-2007)
Resource Center for Roma Communities, Cluj Napoca (1998 - 2008)
Save the Children (1998-2008)
UNICEF (2001 - 2008)
Organization “Amare Rromentza”, Bucharest (2006-2008)
Foundation “Ruhama” - Oradea (2007-2008)

3. Programs initiated by the Ministry of Education and financed by UNICEF
Romania:
Editing educational material and textbooks for auxiliary language,
history and traditions of Roma (2001-2008, 17 titles);
Scholarships to cover tuition fees of young Roma teaching Roma
language in schools and attending the IDD section “Romanian for special purposes”,
University of Bucharest (2001-2005, annually between 117 to 220 grants);
Funding Roma language and history summer schools (2001 - 2008);
Kindergarten summer pre-class for first graders (2001);
Training of teachers working with students and non-Roma children
Roma in educational romanipen (2004-2006);
Testing ZEP (priority education zones);
Workshops for school inspectors and methodologists for Roma (2003,
2005, 2006, 2007).
4. Programs initiated and run by the Ministry of Education with European
funds, the educational PHARE program for disadvantaged children and students:
PHARE development Program to reduce educational disadvantage
(Roma, in particular), from 2002 to 2008;
Provision of scholarships for 55 young Roma for open and distance
learning (teacher - Romanian), 2003-2007, the University of Bucharest and other 58 at
Babes-Bolyai University (2006, 2007, 2008);
Non-Roma and Roma teacher training in inclusive education;
Establishing networks of Roma school mediators (over 600 mediator
school) and training;
The “second chance” development Program (9th grade), from 2005 to
2008;

69

Implement summer garden for children who have not attended before
entry into kindergarten class (2004-2008), in the summer of 2008, have benefited
from such kindergartens over 2400 Roma children;
Develop educational materials (including bilingual or Romanian);
Rehabilitation of school premises and facilities.
5. Programs run by the Ministry of Education in the context of governmental
programs:
All educational activities for the Roma are conducted according to the Government
Strategy for Roma (GD 522/26 of April 2006, initially: GD 430 / April 25, 2001) and
the goals of the Decade of Roma Inclusion, a program financed by George Soros and
Government of Romania.
European strategic projects undertaken by the Romanian Government (in 2008).
Example: the “All in kindergarten! All in class“(2008 -2009), the pre- first grade
summer kindergarten and integrated services to assist during the first grade (designed
for the summer of 2009, with a sample of 8400 young Roma beneficiaries).
6. Programs initiated by the Ministry of Education from legislative perspective:
A series of laws supporting the steps the Ministry and partners on the educational
offer for Roma:
- Notification no. 41 459/10 in November 2008 for approval Fiche no. 41 459/19 in
September 2008 on (self) assessment activity school inspector for Roma education
issues;
- Order approving the curricula for the optional course “Intercultural Education” (the
school curriculum for secondary education) and the revised school curriculum
optional course “Human Rights” (the school curriculum for high school) no. 3774 /
22.04.2008;
- MECT decision no. 27 481/28 February 2008 with work on the admission of Roma
candidates in secondary education and careers of the State in school year 2008/2009;
- MECT decision no. 26 596/14 February 2008 on the profile and types of activities of
school tutors for Roma high school students;
- MECT decision no. 595/14 February 2008 on 26 examples of methodoclogical
activities for schooling / teaching Roma language and history / teacher of Romanian
language;
- MET Notification no. 25 436 / January 28, 2008 with details on the classification of
school mediators;
- MECT decision no. 42 047 / 4 October 2007 on the arrangements for training /
motivation of teachers (teachers / learners) in organizing and running summer prefirst grade kindergarten (annually within 3-4 weeks from August to September), and
non-Roma for Roma children have not attended kindergarten and to be included in
CL.I
- MECT Order no. July 1529/18. 2007 on the development of diversity in the national
curriculum (published in M. Of. R. No. 670/1.X.2007);
- MECT Order no. July 1539/19. 2007 on the rules of engagement and activity of
school mediator (published in M. Of. R. No. 670/1.X.2007);
- MECT Order no. July 1540/19. 2007 banning school segregation of Roma children
and approving the Methodology for the prevention and elimination of school

70

segregation of Roma children (published in M. Of. R. No. 692/11.X.2007);
- Notification no. 29546/06. 04. 2007 for updating the composition of CMIS
(Ministerial Committee for the Implementation Strategy of improvement of the
Roma);
- MECT decision no. 28 859/26 March 2007 on the approval of the job description of
business school inspector for Roma education issues.
- MECT decision no. 28859/23 March 2007 on completion of procedures for school
inspectors for Roma education issues;
- MECT decision no. 26 256/12 February 2007 approving and carrying out the
methodological worksheet to for the schooling of Roma;
- MEC decision no. 48 897/13 November 2006 Calendar of Roma (school purpose);
- N MEC otificationno. 42 622/25 October 2006 on the conducting of specific
activities of Roma education.
g) the provision of facilities enabling non-speakers of a regional or minority
language living in the area where it is used to learn it if they so desire
The Romani language classes and / or the history and traditions of Roma classes are
open to Roma children, but also to children not belonging to the Roma minority,
whose parents wish them to study89.
After 1990 more materials written in Romani were published: Romani-Romanian
Dictionary (Kriterion Publishing House, Bucharest, 1992); Dictionary Romani
(spoitoresc) - Romanian (Kriterion Publishing House, Bucharest, 1998); Dictionary
Romanian - Roman and Dictionary Romani - Romanian Kriterion Publishing House,
Bucharest, 1998), Handbook of communication in Romani (EDP, Bucharest, 1999);
Dictionary Romani - Romanian (Dacia, Cluj, 2000, Sigma Publishing House,
Bucharest, 2006) Romanian – Romani Conversation Guide (Kriterion Publishing
House, Bucharest, 2000) most beloved Romani songs (Middle Latin Publishing
House, Brasov 2000); the Roma tinmans’ dialect in Romania (Bucharest University
Publishing House, 2001) ; Romanian-Romani Dictionary. Coordination,
standardization, writing lexicographic (Vanemonde Publishing House, Bucharest,
2003); leksikologìa Romany (Roma Lexicology) (University of Bucharest Publishing
House, 2004), positive practices guide for education of the Roma (Roma Center for
Social Intervention and Studies - Romani CRISS, Bucharest, 2004) - author / coauthor
Gheorghe Sarau, “Nemeka - The Gypsy Baron” - Gabor Zsrinyi Irina (Publisher SC.
Ansidei International Romimpex Tg. Mureş) is a trilingual collection of prose and
poetry written by a writer of Romani to preserve folk Roma versions in Romanian,
and Romani-Hungarian-Romanian, “gems of Roma folklore” by Costica Ionel
Bătălan, Publisher Kriterion, Roma Library Collection - collection of texts gathering
much of the current folklore of the Roma in Romania, which give a fragmentary, but
highly acute image on the life and world of Roma, Romanian bilingual book, Roma90.
There is also an “Audio Course for Roma language and culture” (Roma Center for
Public Policies Publishing House, Aven Amentza), Silklioven rromanes including a

89

Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of Education, Research and
Innovation
90
www.romacenter.ro/publicatii/

71

manual and 2 audio cassettes, 15 lessons and 15 Roma songs. (Project Coordinator:
Delia Grigore)91
h) the promotion of study and research on regional or minority languages at
universities or equivalent institutions;
The study of Romani is promoted in universities, as well as Romani studies,
translation studies and researches on Roma in the Romani language, etc92.
Academics are the foremost researchers in the field; their work is known and used not
only in Romania but also in other European countries. Studies below represent
different scientific contributions:
- “Participation in education of Roma children” - Study by the Institute of Education
Sciences, Education, UNICEF and the Research Institute for the Quality of Life;
- “Thinking Romanian language or cultural models preserved in linguistic
expression”, author Delia Grigore, Paper presented at the annual scientific session of
the Faculty of Foreign Languages and Literatures from the University of Bucharest,
2008;
- Romani. Language planning in Romania “, author Gheorghe Sarau, Paper presented
at the annual scientific session of the Faculty of Foreign Languages and Literatures of
the University of Bucharest, 2008;
- The future of Romanian language: a policy of linguistic pluralism, Yaron Matras,
Institute for the Study of national minorities, Cluj-Napoca, 2009;
- “Introduction to the study of Romani traditional culture, Romani Anthropology
Course (2001, CREDIS, University of Bucharest), author Delia Grigore;
- “Roma: types and archetypes of identity. Roma and Romanian folk culture. Thai
patrin iAG “- author Delia Grigore, Aven Amentza, Bucharest, 2002;
- “History and traditions of the Roma minority” - author Delia Grigore, Petre PETC
and
Mariana
Sandu,
Editura
Sigma,
Bucharest,
2005;
- “The history and traditions of Roma” - author Peter PETC, Delia Grigore and
Mariana
Sandu.
Ro
Media,
Bucharest,
2003;
- “Stylistics Romani language in texts (anthology of translations and editing). I
stilìstika e Roma ćhibăqi teksturenθe (Amboldimatenqi aj redakcienqi anthology) “,
author
Gheorghe
Sarau,
CREDIS-University
of
Bucharest,
2002;
- The Roma nations and their way of life - author Basil Burtea in Romanian Sociology
magazine;
- Historical and social Marginalization - cooperation for the Roma - author Basil
Burtea in social research journals;
- Gypsies between ignorance and anxiety, co-author Basil Burtea, Ed. “Alternative”,
Bucharest, 1993 (Volume awarded by the Romanian Academy in the field of
sociology in 1993)
i) the promotion of appropriate types of transnational exchanges, in the fields
covered by this Charter, for regional or minority languages used in identical or
similar form in two or more States.
The Romani Language and Literature Department of the Faculty of Foreign
Languages and Literatures at University of Bucharest received since 2007, many
91

www.romacenter.ro/publicatii/
Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of Education, Research and
Innovation

92

72

Roma students: 5 students, under the Erasmus scheme from the Romani language
department of the University of Veliko Tarnovo in Bulgaria, but also students from
other countries.

9. The Ruthenian language

History. The origin of the Ruthenian language is still unclear. It is obvious that the
Ruthenian is part of the Slavic branch, drawn from the great Indo-European trunk.
There is a theory which claims that the Ruthenians are descendants of slavicized
Celtic populations. In the 15th and 16th centuries, Ruthenian was spread on an
impressive area. In Moldova, Romania, Ruthenian is first mentioned in the reign of
Petru Rares (1527-1538).
a) the recognition of the regional or minority languages as an expression of
cultural wealth
In Romania, according to the census of 2002, there are 292 Ruthenians. Because of
the factors that have come over long historical periods, starting with World War II,
but also of the social – political changes from that period, Ruthenians were forced to
deny their own identity. According to unofficial estimates of the Union of Ruthenians
of Romania, the community is larger.
The Carpathian-Ruthenian language is an East Slavic language, influenced by the
vocabulary of Polish Slovak and Hungarian languages. The alphabet used for writing
is Cyrillic. The first publications appeared in the ancestral Ruthenian language or in
the Slavonic language, used in liturgies in church sermons93.
b) the respect of the geographical area of each regional or minority language in
order to ensure that existing or new administrative divisions do not constitute an
obstacle to the promotion of the regional or minority language in question;
The Cultural Union of Ruthenians of Romania currently has offices in the counties of
Hunedoara, Alba, Suceava, Maramures, and Arad. Ruthenians represent a slightly
higher number in some localities: Bistra - Maramures County, Dărmăneşti - Suceava
County, Peregu Mare - Arad County.
There are no obstacles in using and promoting this language in relation to the
administrative divisions of the country, the use on the very limited areas primarily
being due to the extremely low number of speakers.
c) the need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in order to
safeguard them;
The Ruthenian language use is not restricted, however, because today this language is
becoming less used, the Cultural Union of Ruthenian of Romania is striving to

93

http://www.rutenii.ro/ro/index.php?id=10024

73

rediscover the Ruthenian ethnicity, in an attempt to attract the interest of community
members to valuate and use their mother tongue.
In public administration there are no conditions for the use of the Ruthenian language,
due to the inexistence of cities where the Ruthenian population exceeds 20% of the
local population. We do not have data showing Ruthenian language use in courts,
public services, economic and social life, and cross-border exchanges.
d) the facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of regional or minority
languages, in speech and writing, in public and private life
Romanian state provides the legal and institutional framework for unrestricted use of
the Ruthenian language, orally or in writing, in private or public life.
Media. The Ruthenian community life is reflected in the Romanian language media,
especially in the public television, in broadcasts dedicated to national minorities,
providing to the Cultural Union of Ruthenian the opportunity to present itself both in
country and internationally.
Publications and Web. In addition to the Ruthenian newspaper and the Ruthenian
faith magazine, the Union has edited books of presentation of the history of the
Ruthenians of Romania, but also the history Ruthenian living in other places,
highlighting the culture and traditions Ruthenian. A particular care has been given in
implementing modern methods of information transmission. Over the past years there
were printed CDs and DVDs containing the most important events organized by the
Ruthenian community. The Cultural Union of Ruthenian of Romania has the website
www.rutenii.ro, a forum that has the opportunity to present aspects of community life.
For now, the page is presented in Romanian, Ruthenian and English languages
versions being still in preparation.
Libraries. The Cultural Union of Ruthenians of Romania has its own library, but the
vast majority of Ruthenian editorial issues can be found in public libraries, both in the
country and abroad.
e) the maintenance and development of links covered by this Charter, between
groups using a regional or minority language and other groups in the State
employing a language used in identical or similar form, as well as the establishment
of cultural relations with other groups in the State using different languages
The Cultural Union of Ruthenian of Romania maintains collaborative relationships
with all other 18 organizations of national minorities, members of the Council of
National Minorities. In the recent years the Union has participated at a series of
programs organized by other organizations and programs organized by the
Department for Interethnic Relations.
f) the provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of
regional or minority languages at all appropriate stages
The Ruthenian language is not studied in schools, but the Cultural Union of Ruthenian
of Romania has set up study groups in the Ruthenian language besides the Greek

74

Catholic Parish of Peregu Mare, Arad County, and beside the School of Dărmăneşti,
Suceava County94.
g) the promotion of the studies and the researches in regional or minority
languages field at universities or equivalent institutions level
The freedom of individuals to study any minority language is not suppressed. We do
not have data showing that people of other ethnic groups that want to study Ruthenian
language can do it at organized level.
h) the promotion of study and research on regional or minority languages at
universities or equivalent institutions
The Ruthenian language problems, being different to the one of the other minority
languages, in the sense that Ruthenians do not have a kin state or an academic body of
language codification, it is very difficult to conduct studies and researches at national
level. Thus, international congresses of linguistic Ruthenian tried to replace this
deficiency through the effective involvement of specialists from nine countries in
which Ruthenians live, to carry out researches in this field95.
i) the promotion of appropriate types of transnational exchanges, in the fields
covered by this Charter, for regional or minority languages used in identical or
similar form in two or more States
Transnational exchanges in the field of Ruthenian language are achieved through the
Ruthenian congresses of linguistics held regularly, the last one in 2008 in Krakow,
Poland, as well as through sections devoted to these issues in the global conferences
of the Ruthenian conducted every two years96.

10). The Tartar language
History. Tartars arrived in several waves in the Romanian territory of today. In the
13th century the first Tartar communities appeared in Dobrogea. After the Crimean
War a new wave of Tartar immigrants came in Dobrogea. During 1873 and 1874, in
Tulcea and Varna were living 100 000 Muslims and 60 000 Christians. The most
important Muslim centers were Babadag, Tulcea, Constanta and Hârsova. In 1930 in
Romania there were 220 00 Tartars. In the ethnic origin of the Tartars in the literature
until today (history, ethnography, geography, and linguistics), opinions are divided:
some of them sustain the Mongolian origin and others the Turkish origin of the
Tartars. Whatever the findings, the Tartars have existed throughout history as a
separate entity and have proved this identity through memorable achievements97.
a) the recognition of the regional or minority languages as an expression of
cultural wealth
94

Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Cultural Union of Ruthenians in
Romania
95
Idem 3
96
Idem 3
97
http://www.Tartar.ro/articole/cine_sunt_Tartarii.php

75

From the ethnic point of view, Tartars in Romania are from Crimea, speaking a patois
of the Crimean Tartar language. In Romania, within the Tartar communities there are
no differences of language, but only of regionalisms. Because of the prevalence of
communities from veldt area, in Dobrogea it was generalized the so-called veldt
dialects of Crimean Tartar language. Although in different waves of displacement in
Dobrogea, there were also situated people speaking the other two generic structural
dialects: yalıboyı (seaside) and Orta colak (central dialect). Ancestral traditions of
Tartars in Romania fall into two categories: secular (customs related to life events,
natural phenomena, the national sport - Küreş) and religious (moments of life,
Holiday of Berth - Ramazan Bayram, the Feast of Sacrifice - Kurban Bayram)98.
b) the respect of the geographical area of each regional or minority language in
order to ensure that existing or new administrative divisions do not constitute an
obstacle to the promotion of the regional or minority language in question
At the census of 2002, 23 935 people declared themselves as Tartars in Romania. Of
these, over 21 000 people have said that their mother tongue is Tartar. The estimated
number of Tartars in Romania is 24,649 persons, representing 0.11% of the
population. They live in the counties of Constanta, Tulcea, in Bucharest. In Dobrogea
live 90% of Tartars and of these ¾ are living in Constanta County. The Democratic
Union of Turkish-Muslim Tartars in Romania has offices in 31 cities; the main
communities (the largest) are in Constanta, Medgidia, Mangalia, Valu lui Traian,
Cobadin, Tulcea, Basarabia99.

c) the need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in order to
safeguard them
At the beginning of 2009, the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate adopted the draft
law on establishment of the Tartar Cultural Institute of Romania “Sebat Husein”,
the institute which aims to promote the cultural values of Tartars in Romania and is
funded from the budget U.D.T.T.M.R. and sponsorship according to the law. The
project was initiated by the MP of the Tartar community in Romania.
d) the facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of regional or minority
languages, in speech and writing, in public and private life
Since 1990, a number of publications have appeared in which, systematically, there
were published articles and studies in Tartar language: a monthly newspaper “Karadeniz” (in Tartar, Turkish and Romanian), a youth magazine “Caş” - “The
Young”, a magazine for women - “Kadinlar Dunyasi” - “World Women”. In
partnership with the members of the Turkish community, at the radio station of
Constanta Radio T is broadcasted news in Tartar language. Also, the Tartars of
Constanta have one hour of broadcasting on Radio Constanta. Between U.D.T.T.M.R.

98

Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Democratic Union of Turkish-Muslim
Tartars in Romania
99
Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Democratic Union of Turkish-Muslim
Tartars in Romania

76

and TVR3 there is a partnership, once a month being broadcasted a 12 minute show in
Tartar language.
At the initiative of the Democratic Union of Turkish-Muslim Tartars in Romania was
launched the website http://www.Tartars.eu/, which contains a portal to support
teachers, including an online dictionary, support for teaching materials, movies and
games. Tartars Ethnics have their own web page www.Tatar.ro were there are posted
news, important events for community members - book launches, conferences,
communicates, religious holidays.
e) the maintenance and development of links covered by this Charter, between
groups using a regional or minority language and other groups in the State
employing a language used in identical or similar form, as well as the establishment
of cultural relations with other groups in the State using different languages
From the Cultural heritage of the Tartar community are to be noticed the remarkable
places of worship, some of them dating from the Ottoman period: Geamia “Esmahan
Sultan” in Mangalia, Geamia “Gazi Ali Pasha” in Babadag, Geamia “Abdul-Megid”
in Medgidia, Geamia “Hünkâr” in Constanta . Also, at the Popular Art Museum of
Constanta there is an impressive collection of ethnography100.
f) the provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of
regional or minority languages at all appropriate stages 101
With the support of U.D.T.T.M.R. it was organized the first methodic laboratory for
teaching the course Native Tartar Language at School no. 12 “B.P. Haşdeu “in
Constanta. Since the 2008-2009 school year there were set up pilot groups kindergarten and primary school, aimed at testing curricula for first grade, of the
textbook and ancillary materials for teaching; in Medgidia there is pilot group for
kindergarten and in Constanta a group of class I at School No. 12 and School no. 31.
There were also organized for groups of students belonging to Dobrogea Tartar
minority for optional course based on issues of tradition, culture and Dobrogea Tartar
civilization at schools from the cities Lumina, Techirghiol, Mihail Kolgălniceanu
(Constanta County).
During the decades 6-7, although the studying in the Tartar language did not exist
from the official point of view, the fact that at the Bucharest University functioned a
department of Tartar language, created the premises of scientific substance, which led
to the crystallization issues related to the Tartar grammar and spelling elements. In
this way a series of literary and linguistic works have appeared that used the results of
university research in this area. To be noted Kerim Altay (Kâniye), Ahmet Ali Nagi
Geafer (“Boztorgay “), and Enver Nedret Mammoth, etc.
In 1992 it was established the department of Turkish language at the University
“Ovidius” of Constanta, to which contributed a number of academics such as Enver
Mamut, Emel Emin, Berguzar Buliga, etc.. Based on this group, in 2000, it was
founded the College of institutors “Kemal Atatürk”, having as profile the preparation
100

Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Democratic Union of Turkish-Muslim
Tartars in Romania
101
Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Democratic Union of Turkish-Muslim
Tartars in Romania

77

of institutors of Turkish and Islamic religion. In this framework it was formed a group
formed of academics who were mostly Tartars and of students with concerns
regarding the Tartar language and literature and have developed a series of activities
such as research projects, essays and scholarly works related to specific Tartar
language and literature.
For training young teachers, U.D.T.T.M.R. initiated a partnership with the University
Ovidius - Constanta and the Technical and Pedagogical University in Simferopol
(Crimea / Ukraine), aimed at organizing training courses in Tartar language
instruction for kindergarten teachers, institutors and teachers. The program started in
11-15 September 2008 at University Ovidius - Constanta, by organizing the Summer
School on “The syllabus and teaching methods of Tartar language at primary school”.
The courses were presented by Associate Prof. Enver Mamut, Lecturer Dr. Nedret
Mamut (The University Ovidius - Constanta), Prof. Dr. Ismail Kerimov, Assist.
Sabina Stanceaeva (The Technical and Pedagogical University in Simferopol) and
Prof. S. Osman Nihat (U.D.T.T.M.R.). The Summer school program will follow
structure, forms and content of optional subjects and specific aspects of teaching
Tartar.
Also during 2008, University Ovidius - Constanta in cooperation with the
Technical and Pedagogical University in Simferopol (Crimea / Ukraine) organized in
Constanta a specialization course for teaching Tartar. This course will be further
developed as an optional module included in the curricula of the Faculty of Letters at
the University Ovidius - Constanta, having the structure of a regional training module
under the Black Sea Universities Network and integrated into the Bologna system102.
g) the provision of facilities enabling non-speakers of a regional or minority
language living in the area where it is used to learn it if they so desire
U.D.T.T.M.R. organize at the subsidiaries from localities Constanta, Medgidia,
Bucharest, Eforie, Techirghiol, Mangalia, Mihail Kogălniceanu, Cobadin and Tulcea,
Tartar language courses for children and adults who are not integrated into the school
system. On the basis of agreement between the subsidiary and, where appropriate,
some schools it may be established a local partnerships in which these activities can
be run as non-school activities with Community - Community School.
h) the promotion of study and research on regional or minority languages at
universities or equivalent institutions
In December 2008, under the patronage of Romanian President and the support of the
Department for Interethnic Relations it was organized the International Seminar on
the theme of Keeping regional and minority diversity the Black Sea. At this seminar
was analyzed as a case study the situation of Tartar language. At the works also
attended a delegation of Crimean Autonomous Republic, Ukraine. Thus,
representatives of the two communities in Romania and in Crimea have decided to
form two working groups in Romania and in Crimea to consider the scientific aspect
of language differences and to propose measures for harmonization.
i) the promotion of appropriate types of transnational exchanges, in the fields
covered by this Charter, for regional or minority languages used in identical or
similar form in two or more States
102

Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Democratic Union of Turkish-Muslim
Tartars in Romania

78

Democratic Union of Turkish-Muslim Tartars in Romania has initiated and organized
symposia, anniversaries, commemorations, folk festivals, table sports competitions,
round tables, exhibitions, ethnographic and cooking, etc.. All this has helped to revive
the secular and religious traditions. Also, external relations of collaboration were
established with similar organizations in Ukraine (Crimea, where the Tartars are
coming from in Romania), Turkey, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Russian Federation (Tartarstan),
Macedonia, Kosovo, Kazakhstan103.

PART III

The provisions of Part III of the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages are applied in Romania, for the following languages: the Bulgarian,
Czech, Croat, German, Hungarian, Russian, Serb, Slovak, Turkish and Ukrainian.
Although the legislative framework created in the past 20 years allows the use of all
national minority languages on a large scale and in vital domains for the communitysuch as education, culture, mass media- conspicuous differences and many
specificities from one language to the other can be found. The degree of vitality, the
approach to the standard literary language, the diversity and the level of cultural
products and services differ from one case to the other, being influenced not only by
the number of speakers and by their concentration in various areas, but also by the
force of the traditions, by the present interests of the communities, the cooperation set
up with their kin-state, the economic potential of each region, etc.
As concerns the application of the provisions of the European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages per domains, a few general comments may be worded, as
follows:
Education. Considered by the majority of the speakers of minority languages of
Romania as the essential implementation chapter for the preservation of a language
and culture, the education meant to the minority children and young peoples is
regulated by a special chapter of the legislation regarding education. Moreover, a
Directorate General in the Ministry of Education, Research, Youth and Sportsis
concerned with the entire network where the language or languages are studied. In the
counties there are school inspectors who monitor and control the study of this
language or in these languages. In Romania, there are schools and high schools with
teaching in minority languages that accumulated high prestige and traditions of a few
centuries, without ever interrupting their activity, despite unfavourable periods. There
are also schools and high schools that resurrected old traditions after 1989, in places
where the schools were dissolved. In the last few years an extremely interesting
experience was accumulated, as concerns the education in Romani language that is
developed rapidly, with beneficent effects on the Roma community.
It is a complex system, built in three different forms of educations: A. Entire teaching
in mother tongue of the disciplines, B. Partial or mixed teaching in mother tongue and
in Romanian language, C. Mother tongue study as study discipline (3 – 4 classes per
103

Data sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Democratic Union of Turkish-Muslim
Tartars in Romania

79

week) in schools with teaching in Romanian language.
The national minorities,
which benefit of education units with teaching in mother tongue, are Hungarian,
German, Ukrainian, Serb, Slovak, Czech, Croat, Bulgarian, Roma and Italian..
Macedonian minority is recently added to these.
One of the priorities of the Ministry of Education, Research, Youth and Sportsin the
context of the last years' reforms was the „Promotion and capitalization of the cultural
diversity in education”104. In this direction important steps were achieved: Order of
the Education Minister no. 1528/ July 2007 on promoting the diversity in education,
Order of the Education Minister no. 1540/ July 2007 on forbidding school segregation
of the Rroma children, approval of the first curriculum of intercultural education in
Romania (optional course for gymnasium) and of the first national minority history
(optional course for high school), the last two in 2008. Cultivating intercultural
dialogue through education was one of the favourite topics of Romania’s participation
at 2008 - European Year of Intercultural Dialogue.
Justice. In this field minority languages are less used, but those concerned know the
possibility opened by the new regulations. In practice, there are situations of using
Hungarian language in the areas with high weigh of speakers, over 75 – 80% of the
local population, as it happens in Covasna and Harghita counties.
Administration and public services. In this field spectacular developments were
registered after the adoption of the Law no. 215 of 2001, on local public
administration with further amendments and completions.
In 6 counties - Bihor, Covasna, Harghita, Mureş, Satu Mare, Sălaj – over 20% weigh
of the citizens belonging to national minorities is recorded. In 417 localities municipalities, cities, communes in a number of 21 counties, the weigh of the citizens
belonging to national minorities exceeds 20%. In these localities, the citizens
belonging to national minorities speak Hungarian language, Romani language, Slovak
language, Ukrainian language, Serb language, Russian language and Greek language.
Within 9 county councils and 341 local councils using mother tongue in the relations
with the citizens belonging to national minorities is assured. Moreover, mother tongue
may be used in the relation with the citizens within 663 structures subordinated to
county and local councils, but also within 153 decentralised public services of
ministries and other bodies of the central public administration organized at the level
of administrative-territorial units.105
Mother tongue is also used in the activity of some authorities of local public
administration, on the occasion of:
- Bringing to public knowledge the agenda of 8 county councils and of 219 local
councils, respectively;
- 6 county councils and of 231 local councils meetings unfolding;
104

Government of Romania, Report on the fulfillment of the 2005 – 2008 Governance Programme
provisions, 2008 (www.guv.ro)

105

Data sent to the Grade for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of the Administration and Interior

80

-

Bringing to public knowledge or on the occasion of communicating the decisions
with normative character by the representatives of 4 county councils and 148
local councils, and decisions with individual character, respectively, by 7 county
councils and 197 local councils.

In 14 counties there are 285 local councils, county councils and bodies subordinated
to local councils that receive petitions in national minorities languages, and among
these a number of 254 formulate also replies to petitions in the respective national
minorities languages.
As concerns the obligation set up in the task of the local public administration
regarding inscribing the name of the localities and public institutions under their
authority, based on Article 76 paragraph (4) in Law no. 215/2001, we mention there
are 469 localities (municipalities, cities, communes) in 21 counties, 569 public
institutions, respectively, which names are also inscribed in national minorities
language which have a weigh of over 20% of the number of inhabitants. On the other
hand, in 13 counties there are 567 local public administrative authorities and public
institutions subordinated that assure displaying public interest announcements in the
national minorities languages also.106
Within local public administration authorities and in some structures subordinated to
these, respectively, in 26 counties, 4 848 persons knowing the mother tongue of the
citizens belonging to national minorities are employed.
Mass media. The mass media explosion of all types in Romania after 1989 influenced
also the national minorities, these setting up or developing the expression means in
their own language. The audiovisual and the Internet acquire more and more
importance, their impact being extremely positive upon all languages spoken by the
minorities of Romania, including of those spoken on more limited areas.
In Romania, the freedom of expression and the freedom to receive and communicate
information are guaranteed by the Constitution and are protected by the Law
no.41/1994, on organizing and functioning of the Romanian Broadcasting Society and
of the Romanian Television Society as well as by the Law no.504/2002 on
audiovisual.
In the last years many efforts were spent for improving the access of all minorities to the
public mass media, increasing the coverage and the broadcasting time allocated them by
the radio and television, as well as for a more active presence in the written press. Beside
this extension process, a diversification of the subjects approached in the radio and TV
shows can be remarked, thing that offer the public and the communities the possibility of
informing on a large range of preoccupations of the minorities.
“TVR carries on its activity under the control of the Parliament, in accordance with
the Law no. 41/1994, with the scope to create TV programmes in Romanian language,
in the national minorities languages or in other languages, with informative, cultural,
educational and entertainment purpose. Article 4, paragraph (1) provides that
Romanian Television Society, as public service, when accomplishing the general
106

Data sent DRI by the by the Ministry of the Administration and Interior

81

objectives that is information, education, entertainment, is obliged to promote, with
competence and exigency, the values of the Romanian language, of the authentic
cultural ,scientific, national and universal and of national minorities creation, as well
as the democratic, civic, moral and sportive values. Article 7 paragraph (3) mentions
that at least 30% of the European creation transmitted shall be Romanian creation,
including national minorities specific creations. In accordance with the Law
no.41/1994, the national minorities parliament groups have a representative in the
Board of Administrators of the Romanian Television Society “107
In accordance with the provisions of the Law no. 504/2002 on audiovisual article 82
(1), all cable distributors have the obligation to include in their offer the programmes
of the Romanian Television Society channels, that leads to the extension of the
possibilities of receiving programmes dedicated to national minorities. According to
the provisions in Article 82 paragraph (4), for the localities where the national
minorities represents a higher than 20% weigh of the total population, the legislator
had in view to enhance their access to programmes, introducing also the obligation to
send the programmes free to be re-transmitted, in the language of the respective
minority.”108
After the accession to EU on the 1 January 2007, the Audiovisual Media Services
Directive, Directive 2007/65/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council that
provides at point. 4 “(1) Member States shall ensure freedom of reception and shall
not restrict retransmissions on their territory of audiovisual media services from other
Member States for reasons which fall within the fields coordinated by this Directive”,
is applicable on the territory of Romania.
These provisions shall apply in case of Romania, Bulgaria and Hungary. “In case of
the other states neighbouring Romania, but which are not European Union Members
States, these may transmit programmes dedicated to national minorities of Romania,
based on an agreement of retransmission issued by the National Audiovisual Council
for the audiovisual programmes existing under the incidence of an international
agreement of free retransmission. In this situation might be the programmes
transmitted by the Ukraine, Serbia and the Republic of Moldova for the national
minorities of Romania.”109
Activities and cultural facilities. They represent a favourite domain of manifesting,
allowing in variety of forms and full liberty of expression the development and
promotion of cultures of the 20 minority groups of Romania. The means of sustaining
culture were diversified and adjusted at a large extent to the requirements –
preservation of the authentic traditions on the one hand, stimulation of creativity and
connections between cultures on the other. The financial assistance granted by the
Romanian authorities to the organisations of the citizens belonging to national
minorities had and have a considerable contribution to the promotion of the
interethnic dialogue and to preserving the cultural patrimony of the communities. The
large majority of the organisations consider this aid as the most important support for
preserving their own identity, language, culture and traditions.
107

Data took over from the docuemt sent by TVR to DRI.
Quoted from from the data sent DRI by the National Council of Audiovisual
109
Quoted from from the datasent DRI by the National Council of Audiovisual
108

82

Economic and social life. Using the minority languages in these spheres is a
relatively recent phenomenon, but the trend of diversifying the languages is visible.
All together with the development of the mixed forms and of the multinational
companies, the private companies of all types, the knowledge of a smaller circulation
language may become an advantage, which increase the interest for the study of
minority languages, irrespective of the age or level.
Transfrontier exchanges. Though with a very recent history, it is an extremely
dynamic field. The legislative framework carrying on the transfrontier cooperation
actions by the authorities and local communities in our country is represented by the
Emergency Ordinance of the Government (OUG) no.120/1998 on the ratification by
Romania of the European Outline Convention on Transfrontier Co-operation between
Territorial Communities or Authorities, adopted in Madrid, on 21 May 1980.
Romania is a signatory party of the European Charter of Local Self-Government,
adopted in Strasbourg, on 15 October 1985 and ratified by Law no.199/1997.
According to the provisions of the Convention of Madrid, the transfrontier cooperation targets strengthening and development of the neighbouring relations
between communities or territorial authorities depending on two or several
contracting parties, as well as on concluding agreements and conventions for this
purpose.
In the last few years, the Ministry of Regional Development and Housing had
administered programmes of transfrontier cooperation, financed from pre-accession
funds finalized the process of scheduling in case of programmes financed from
European funds (European Fund for Regional Development, European
Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument and Instrument for Pre-Accession
Assistance). The relevance of these programmes for the provisions of the European
Charter for Regional or Minority Languages is given by the fact these encourage the
partnerships and the contacts between the beneficiaries in the states attending the
programme. These programmes finance projects initiated and carried on by the
applicants in the attending states in several domains such as infrastructure,
environment protection, economic development and also human resources
development, education or cultural patrimony protection.

a) The Bulgarian Language
According to the official statistics resulted as consequence of the 2002 census, 8 092
Bulgarians in Romania, among who 6 747 (83.38% of the total number of Bulgarians
ethnic group) declared the Bulgarian language their mother tongue. Beside these,
other 208 individuals belonging to other ethnic group that Bulgarian consider
Bulgarian language as their mother tongue. All these Bulgarians belonging to the
Bulgarian ethnic group of Romania know the literary Bulgarian language or one of its
dialects. The main area where there are localities with compact Bulgarian nationality
population is the West of the country: Timiş and Arad counties (here live 6 868
Bulgarians of over 7 500 Bulgarians of Banat).
Within this area, a case apart is the community of Dudeştii Vechi commune, Timiş
County, set up in 1738 by the Bulgarians of Pavlikeni. Unlike the other Bulgarian

83

communities and Bulgarians of Bulgaria110, these have Roman-Catholic religion,
speak a particular dialect, written with Latin alphabet, keep a unique popular garb in
the region and a specific culture, totally different of the other groups. The Pavlikian
dialect has kept ancient elements of the Bulgarian language that had disappeared from
the contemporary literary Bulgarian language.
In the South of the country and especially all along the Danube river, Bulgarian
communities are spread less compact, but preserving their languages and traditions,
different from the Bulgarians of the Banat. Those from the South area have a
Christian Orthodox religion, as the majority population.
The Bulgarian minority of Romania is represented in the Parliament of Romania by a
deputy, chosen among the ranks of the Bulgarian Union of the the Banat – the
strongest organisation of the Bulgarians from number of members viewpoint, having
8 branches in Timiş county, 3 branches in Arad county and a representation in
Bucharest.
From Article 8 – Education – Romania selected for the Bulgarian language the
following points:
- Paragraph 1. With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the
territory in which such languages are used, according to the situation of each of
these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s)
of the State:
Subparagraph a)(ii) “to make available a substantial part of pre-school
education in the relevant regional or minority languages;”
Subparagraph b)(ii) “to make available a substantial part of primary
education in the relevant regional or minority languages”,
Subparagraph c)(iii) to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching
of the relevant regional or minority languages as an integral part of the
curriculum;
Subparagraph d)(iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii
above at least to those pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish
in a number considered sufficient;
Subparagraph e)(ii) to provide facilities for the study of these languages as
university and higher education subjects;
Subparagraph g) to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history
and the culture, which is reflected by the regional or minority language;
Subparagraph h) to provide the basic and further training of the teachers
required to implement those of paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;
Subparagraph i) to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for
monitoring the measures taken and progress achieved in establishing or
developing the teaching of regional or minority languages and for drawing up
periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.
Bulgarian community of Dudeştii Vechi is among the most active ethnic groups,
concerned in preserving and promoting its identity, fact visible especially by the
efforts spent in the field of education: here activate as general education high school
that assures education starting with the pre-school level until the high school level
110

http://www.e-primarii.ro/~dudestiivechi/info_generale.php

84

including. Moreover, meeting the request of the Bulgarian community of Vinga, Arad
County, the courses of Bulgarian language (optional study discipline, with teaching in
grades 2-8, depending on the request of the pupils).
According to the legal provisions, in the official state education of Romania, the
Bulgarian language is studied at all levels of education: pre-school, primary,
gymnasium, high school and university. All school units where Bulgarian language is
studied are spread in Arad (Vinga) and Timişoara (Dudeştii Vechi, Breştea and Denta)
counties, and in Bucharest activate the “Hristo Botev” Bulgarian General Education
High School (only for the study of the language at high school level).
Pre-school education is organized in Breştea and Dudeştii Vechi localities. In the
kinder garden of Breştea, ”the instructive-educational is carried on Bulgarian
language, at the courses 20 children with pre-school age being registered 111”.
Considering the special situation of the Bulgarian community in Dudeştii Vechi, 4
years ago was set up within the high school of the locality, the kindergarten with
prolonged programme with partial teaching in Bulgarian language (2 groups, with a
total of 40 children).
For the other level of education, ”the form of teaching adopted is the study of the
Bulgarian mother tongue as education discipline in the schools with Romanian
language teaching. Bulgarian mother tongue (3-4 classes/week) is part of the
Framework Syllabus and is part of the school timetable, the purpose being the written
semester paper work. The school curriculum at Bulgarian language for grades 1-12
and for the study discipline Bulgarian Minority History and Traditions grades 6-7
were elaborated by a group of specialist and approved by order of the Minister.112”
At the primary cycle level, the Bulgarian language is taught in schools of Vinga,
Dudeştii Vechi and Breştea, at the gymnasium level in Vinga and Dudeştii Vechi. In
schools where Bulgarian language and literature is taught the Bulgarian Minority of
Romania History and Traditions was entered as subject and study discipline (manual
published by The Bulgarian Union of the Banat – Romania), subject taught in
Bulgarian language, as well as the” Religion” discipline. Moreover, The Bulgarian
Union of the Banat – Romania, with the support of the Ministry of Education and
Sciences of the Republic of Bulgaria, of the Embassy of the Republic of Bulgaria in
Bucharest, as well as of the State Agency for the Bulgarians of Abroad, “ have
procured and continue to do so other teaching staff for the schools and high schools
where Bulgarian language is studied.113” Every year, the Ministry of Education,
Research, Youth and Sportsorganizes national Olympics of mother tongue, among
which the Bulgarian language.
High school education is organized in Bucharest and Dudeştii Vechi, and the
graduates of the 12th grade take linguistic competence examination at Bulgarian
language. Within „Cyril and Methodius Saints“ General education high school of
Dudeşti a modern Bulgarian language classroom was inaugurated. During academic
111

Document sent to the Grade for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of Education, Research and
Innovation.
112
Idem.
113
Document sent to the Grade for Interethnic Relations by the Bulgarian Union of the Banat –
Romania.

85

year 1999/2000 „Hristo Botev” General Education Bulgarian High School of
Bucharest re-opened its gates, where activates 4 high school grades. The high school
educates students belonging to Bulgarian ethnic group, graduates of 8th grade of the
Bucharest Municipality coterminous localities. The high school is very well equipped
from the logistic viewpoint both by the Ministry of Education, Research, Youth and
Sportsand from the funds of the local budget and sponsorships. Starting with
2005/2006 academic year, based on the Programme of cooperation in the field of
education, science and culture for the years 2005/2007 between the Government of
Romania and the Government of the Republic Bulgaria, within this high school there
is a high school master of Bulgarian language from Bulgaria. The High school is
united with a high school of Ruse locality (Bulgaria) bearing the same name and
carries on common cultural activities and exchanges of students and teachers. Part of
the graduates of the two high schools as well as other young belonging to Bulgarian
ethnic group continue their higher studies at the universities in Bulgaria, many of
them returning in the native localities, where they teach in gymnasiums and high
schools the study discipline “Bulgarian language and literature”.
N
o.

County

1

ARAD

2

BUCHAREST

3

TIMIȘ

Education
Unit

School with
grades 1-8
Vinga
Hristo Botev
Bulgarian
General
Education
High School

Total
childr
en
and
stude
nts
27

Kind
ergard
en
child
ren
-

Gr
ad
e
1
-

Gr
ad
e
2
-

Gr
ad
e
3
2

68

-

-

-

40

30

20

60

348
Cyril
and
Methodius
General
Education
High School
Dudeştii
Vechi
School with
45
grades 1-4
Breştea
GRAND
488
TOTAL

Primary Cycle
Gr
ad
e
4
6

Gymnasium
Cycle
Gra Gr Gr Gr
de
ad ad a
5
e
e
de
6
7
8
8
5
2
4

High School
Cycle
G Gr Gr Gr
ra ad ad ad
de e
e
e
9
10 11 12
-

-

-

-

-

-

-

13

7

14

34

29

27

27

32

31

33

15

24

22

16

22

10

4

4

7

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

40

33

33

40

40

36

35

19

37

29

30

56

At present, the total teaching staff who teach Bulgarian language is 14, of whom 1
teacher of Bulgaria (at the Hristo Botev Bulgarian General Education High School of
Bucharest, came based on the Programme of inter-ministerial co-operation in the filed

86

of education). Improvement training of the teaching staff is carried out within the
activities carried out by the School Inspectorate of Timiş County and of the School
Inspectorate of Bucharest Municipality. Bulgarian language curriculum for occupying
vacancies and obtaining didactic degrees are displayed on the web page of the
Ministry and may be accessed (on the address www.edu.ro –Education for national
minorities). For the purpose to monitor Bulgarian language learning process a teacher
of teaching methods for Bulgarian language has been appointed, within Timiş County
School Inspectorate.

At university level, within the Chair for Slav Languages and Literature of the Faculty
of Foreign Languages and Literatures of Bucharest University activates a Bulgarian
literature and language grade, having an over 50 years tradition. For a good
assimilation of the language by the students, a foreign lecturer carry on his activity
here, native speaker of Bulgarian language. Deepening the knowledge in the field of
Bulgarian language and literature may also be continued at post university level by the
programmes offered by the philology partnership. The graduates of the Slav
languages and literature carry on their activity in education, press, radio, television,
translation or cultural management.
”Professors and students carry on a continuous activity in scientific and didactic plan,
being recognised by their works published and by their participation at symposiums or
congresses with international Slavistic profile.114” The scientific studies and the
publications of the Bulgarian language department demonstrate the interest and the
attention granted to this language: conversation guidelines, dictionaries, translations,
retranslations, Bulgarian Culture and Civilization, Historical Grammar of the
Bulgarian Language, Bulgarians speaks in Romania, Bulgarian Language and
Literature, Romanian Lexical Borrowings in Literary Bulgarian Language, Bulgur
language at University of Bucharest, Romanian-Bulgarian Linguistic, Literary and
Cultural Relations, Romanian-Bulgarian Linguistic Contacts: Etymological Notes, the
present statute of certain Turkish origin words in Bulgarian and in Romanian, etc.
- Paragraph 2. “With regard to education and in respect of territories other
than those in which the regional or minority languages are traditionally used,
the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language
justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the regional or
minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.”
The individuals belonging to Bulgarian ethnic group live also in the cities of south
Romania, but due to their low number, the study of the language is more difficult,
„setting up study groups of mother tongue being not possible”115. The Bulgarian
Union of the the Banat – Romania organizes different activities attended by children
belonging to the Bulgarian ethnic „who have thus the opportunity to communicate
among them in mother tongue also”.116 Furthermore, „for the future it will be tried to
organize circles of mother tongue study at the branches seat of the Bulgarian Union of
the Banat – Romania.”117
114

http://www.unibuc.ro/ro/catd_lsclls_ro
Document sent to the Grade for Interethnic relations by the Bulgarian Union of Banat – Romania.
116
Idem.
117
Idem.
115

87

According to the specifications of the Bulgarian Union of the Banat – Romania, ”in
the families where both parents have Bulgarian nationality, the children learn
naturally the Bulgarian language. The same situation is met usually in the mixed
families where the mother has Bulgarian nationality. But in the mixed families where
the father belongs to the Bulgarian ethnic group, the children do not learn Bulgarian
language. This shortcoming is somewhat replaced by Bulgarian language learning in
kinder gardens and in schools. But this is also possible only in those localities where
compact communities of individuals belonging to Bulgarian ethnic group are living
and where setting up grades or study groups of Bulgarian language is possible.118”
From Article 9 – Judicial authorities
- Paragraph 1. The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in
which the number of residents using the regional or minority languages justifies
the measures specified below, according to the situation of each of these
languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the present
paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of
justice:
Subparagraph a) (ii) to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional
or minority language;
Subparagraph a) (iii) to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or
oral, shall not be considered inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a
regional or minority language;
Subparagraph b) (ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person
before a court, that he or she may use his or her regional or minority language
without thereby incurring additional expense;
Subparagraph b) (iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the
regional or minority languages if necessary by the use of interpreters and
translations;
Subparagraph c) (ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person
before a court, that he or she may use his or her regional or minority language
without thereby incurring additional expense;
Subparagraph c) (iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the
regional or minority languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and
translations;
Subparagraph d) to take steps to ensure that the application of subparagraphs i and iii of paragraphs b and c above and any necessary use of
interpreters and translations does not involve extra expense for the persons
concerned.
- Paragraph 2. The Parties undertake:
Subparagraph a) not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within
the State solely because they are drafted in a regional or minority language;
- Paragraph 3. The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or
minority languages the most important national statutory texts and those
relating particularly to users of these languages, unless they are otherwise
provided
–were selected
118

Idem.

88

We have no data referring to the use of Bulgarian language in this field.
From Article 10 - Administrative authorities and public services:
- Paragraph 1. Within the administrative districts of the State in which the
number of residents who are users of regional or minority languages justifies the
measures specified below and according to the situation of each language, the
Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
Subparagraph a) (ii) to ensure that such of their officers as are in contact with
the public use the regional or minority languages in their relations with persons
applying to them in these languages; or
Subparagraph a) (iii) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may
submit oral or written applications and receive a reply in these languages;
Subparagraph a) (iv) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may
submit oral or written applications in these languages;
Subparagraph a) (v) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages
may validly submit a document in these languages;
- Paragraph 2. In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose
territory the number of residents who are users of regional or minority
languages is such as to justify the measures specified below, the Parties
undertake to allow and/or encourage:
Subparagraph b) the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to
submit oral or written applications in these languages;
Subparagraph c) the publication by regional authorities of their official
documents also in the relevant regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph d) the publication by local authorities of their official
documents also in the relevant regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph e) the use by regional authorities of regional or minority
languages in debates in their assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of
the official language(s) of the State;
Subparagraph f) the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages
in debates in their assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official
language(s) of the State;
Subparagraph g) the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the
name in the official language(s), of traditional and correct forms of place-names
in regional or minority languages.
- Paragraph 3. With regard to public services provided by the administrative
authorities or other persons acting on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within
the territory in which regional or minority languages are used, in accordance
with the situation of each language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
Subparagraph a) to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in
the provision of the service; or
Subparagraph b) to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a
request and receive a reply in these languages; or
Subparagraph c) to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a
request in these languages.

89

- Paragraph 4. With a view to putting into effect those provisions of
paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the Parties undertake to take one or
more of the following measures:
Subparagraph b) recruitment and, where necessary, training of the officials
and other public service employees required;
Subparagraph c) compliance as far as possible with requests from public
service employees having a knowledge of a regional or minority language to be
appointed in the territory in which that language is used.
- Paragraph 5. The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family
names in the regional or minority languages, at the request of those concerned.
Within the local public administration authorizations in Timiş county individuals
knowing Bulgarian language, able to formulate in this language replies to the petitions
filed by the citizens belonging to Bulgarian ethnic group, in mother tongue, were
employed. Within the territorial structure and of public order and security organized
in the areas were communities of the citizens belonging to Bulgarian ethnic group are
concentrated, the framework for putting into application of the provisions in Article
10 of the Charter is assured is assured. Thus, at the level of the Caraş-Severin County
Police Inspectorate, Sibiu County Police Inspectorate, Timiş County Police
Inspectorate policemen knowing Bulgarian language, able to facilitate the dialogue
with the citizens of Bulgarian nationality, carry on their activity.
From Article 11 - Media:
- Paragraph 1. The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority
languages within the territories in which those languages are spoken, according
to the situation of each language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly
or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this field, and
respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
a) to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:
Subparagraph a) (iii) to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer
programmes in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph b) (ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio
programmes in the regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
Subparagraph c) (ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of
television programmes in the regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
Subparagraph d) to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution
of audio and audiovisual works in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph e)(i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or
maintenance of at least one newspaper in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph g) to support the training of journalists and other staff for media
using regional or minority languages.
The Bulgarian minority has unlimited access in the press, in the last years efforts being
spent for the enhancement of the balanced access of the minorities in public mass media
and of increasing the transmission time allocated to them in radio and television, as well
as of the presence in the written press. In this direction, within the Minority Office in
Bucharest of the Romanian Radio Broadcasting Society, a project was elaborated
targeting the extension of the national transmission time of the office with 2 additional
hours/day, the Bulgarian language being allocated a 45 minutes additional time per week,

90

comprising news, events account, interviews etc. At the regional radio station of
Timişoara there is a programme in the Bulgarian language with duration of ½ hour
that is transmitted once a week. Starting with January 2009, the duration of this
programme is prolonged to 1 hour per week.
The setting up in October 2008 of the TVR3 channel of the Romanian national
television (dedicated extensively to national minorities) allowed the extension of the
time allocated to the programmes in minority languages and led to the entering - in
premiere – in the grid of a 10 minute Bulgarian language programme. ”Apart from
these programmes for the Bulgarian minority, TVR1 national station transmits a
programme dedicated to all national minorities of Romania on a weekly basis. Within
these programmes aspects in the life of the Bulgarian communities in Romania are
found. Moreover, Arad TV station transmits twice per month a programme in
Bulgarian language with 30 minutes duration. 119” The programmes dedicated to
national minorities are then retransmitted on the 5 channels of the public television,
assuring an increased access to these.
“The public television reserved a transmission time for TVR 3 channel where the
transmission of an art film from the kin states of the national minorities (with subtitles
in the Romanian language) is done on weekly basis. The Romanian public television
has also begun the necessary procedures with a view to signing or renewing the cooperation agreements (exchange of programmes, art films, documentaries, reportages
etc.) between the public television in Romania and those of Albania, Bulgaria, the
Czech Republic, Croatia, Germany, Greece, Israel, Macedonia, Russia, Serbia,
Slovakia, Turkey, Ukraine and Hungary.120”
As concerns the written media, the Bulgarian Union of the Banat – Romania
publishes
- based on the funds allocated from the state budget by means of the Department for
Interethnic Relations - “Náša Glás” (Our voice) (http://www.nasaglas.link.ro/), a
bilingual newspaper, published twice a month, „Literaturna miselj“ (Literary
thought), a bilingual bimonthly magazine and ”Palqensqi katoli]`nsqi kalind`r” yearbook in Bulgarian language. Moreover, the Local Council of Dudeştii Vechi
publishes, from its own resources, on a monthly basis, ”Foaia de Dudeşti”, a local,
bilingual Romanian-Bulgarian publication
(link from http://dudestivechi.blogspot.com/). The life of the small communities, spread in the South and East
of the country, is mirrored within the publications of the minority by the articles sent
by the members of these communities, thus assuring their active and continuous
participation at all events from the life of the minority.
The financial support received from the State budget by means of the Department for
Interethnic Relations is the main source of creating the publications and of assuring
the logistic support, the minorities organizations acquiring computers and the
apparatus for editing and publishing their periodicals.
Referring to the new media technologies, as of 2002, The Bulgarian Union of the
Banat –
119

Document sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Bulgarian Union of Banat –
Romania.
120
Document sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Romanian Television Society.

91

Romania has its own website on the internet www.nasaglas.link.ro, case valid also for
the bigger branches of the Union (Dudeştii Vechi - http://dudesti-vechi.blogspot.com,
Sannicolau Mare - http://filialaubbr-sannicolaumare.blogspot.com, Vinga http://vinga-ubbr.blogspot.com, Brestea - http://dentabrestea-ubbr.blogspot.com).
The Romanian television intends to organize in 2009 training courses for the
collaborators who create the new programmes in the national minority languages at
TVR 3. As of 2007, the Department for Interethnic relations organizes on a yearly
basis a journalism course for the editors of national minorities’ periodicals, with a
view to increasing the attention paid to the minorities in radio, television and written
press. Moreover, during September 2007 – October 2008, the Centre for Independent
Journalism unfolded the programme entitled “Increasing the capacity of the
Romanian media to facilitate social integration” in view of “stimulating the quality of
the reports about the under-privileged groups in the local media, for the purpose of
reflecting more correctly and extensively their problems at national level.”121 Besides
the workshops supported by BBC specialists and by the Romanian trainers, the
programme included also two e-Learning modules, a premiere for the activity of the
Centre.
- Paragraph 2. The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception
of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language
used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language, and not to
oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring
countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure that no
restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of
information in the written press in a language used in identical or similar form to
a regional or minority language. The exercise of the above-mentioned freedoms,
since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such
formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are
necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial
integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of
others, for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for
maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
After the accession to the European Union on the 1st January 2007, the Audiovisual
Media Services Directive 2007/65/EC of the European Parliament and the Council
states at point 4, art.2* that “(1) Member States shall ensure freedom of reception and
shall not restrict retransmissions on their territory of audiovisual media services from
other Member States for reasons which fall within the fields coordinated by this
Directive” is applicable on the territory of Romania. These provisions are also applied
in the case of radio and television programmes produced and transmitted in Bulgaria.
The practical exemplification is insertion of TV programmes transmitted in Dudeştii
Vechi, which are transmitted by the local distributor from two TV channels in
Bulgaria.
- Paragraph 3. The Parties undertake to ensure that the interests of the users
of regional or minority languages are represented or taken into account within
121[1]

http://diversitate.cji.ro/categorie.php?id=2

92

such bodies as may be established in accordance with the law with responsibility
for guaranteeing the freedom and pluralism of the media.
The National Audiovisual Council of Romania, the autonomous public authority in
charge with the defence of public interest in the field of audiovisual programmes
(radio, television) services, specifies that “in accordance with the provisions of Law
no. 504/2002, Article 82 (1), the obligation of including in their offer the programmes
of the Romanian television Society fall on the distributors”, which leads to the
extension of the reception of public TV programmes dedicated to national minorities.
According to the provisions in Article 82 paragraph 4, “for the areas where the
national minorities represent at least 20% of the total of the population, the legislator
had in view to enhance their access to programmes, including also the obligation of
transmitting programmes free for retransmission, in the language of the respective
minority.”122
As of June 2008, the National Audiovisual Council of Romania became member of
the Forum of the Broadcasting Regulatory Authorities of countries of the Black Sea
region and signatory, along with the similar institution of the Republic of Bulgaria, of
the common declaration of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organisation
Member States Organization, document referring to the protection of the cultural
diversity of the signatory Member States.
From Article 12 - Cultural activities and facilities–were selected:
- Paragraph 1. With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially
libraries, video libraries, cultural centres, museums, archives, academies,
theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production, vernacular
forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries, including inter
alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are
competent, have power or play a role in this field:
Subparagraph a) to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to
regional or minority languages and foster the different means of access to works
produced in these languages;
Subparagraph b) to foster the different means of access in other languages to
works produced in regional or minority languages by aiding and developing
translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;
Subparagraph c) to foster access in regional or minority languages to works
produced in other languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing,
post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;
Subparagraph d) to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or
supporting cultural activities of various kinds make appropriate allowance for
incorporating the knowledge and use of regional or minority languages and
cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for which they provide
backing;
Subparagraph e) to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible
for organising or supporting cultural activities have at their disposal staff who
have a full command of the regional or minority language concerned, as well as
of the language(s) of the rest of the population;
122

Quoted form the data sent by the National Audiovisual Council to DRI.

93

Subparagraph f) to encourage direct participation by representatives of the
users of a given regional or minority language in providing facilities and
planning cultural activities;
Subparagraph g) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or
bodies responsible for collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing
works produced in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph h) if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance
translation and terminological research services, particularly with a view to
maintaining and developing appropriate administrative, commercial, economic,
social, technical or legal terminology in each regional or minority language.
The Romanian authorities are concerned with preserving, developing and promoting
minority languages, assuring a complex support of cultural facilities and activities.
The main measures are taken in the field of preserving their specific language, culture
and education. Acquiring, editing, publishing, translating and spreading the written
and the audio-video materials are priorities of the Romanian Television Society, of the
Romanian Radio Society, of the Department for Interethnic Relations, of the Ministry
of Culture and National Heritage and Religious Affairs of Romania and of the
Ministry of Education, Research, Youth and Sports. The institutional framework and
the financing sources of the cultural programmes and projects dedicated to national
minorities are the following:
• Ministry of Culture and National Heritage and National Heritage;
• County Directorates for culture;
• Public cultural institutions;
• Administration of the National Cultural Fund.
It must be specified that at the offices of each branch of the Bulgarian Union of the
Banat – Romania there are small libraries, the book fund being assured almost
exclusively by donations, procurement of new materials and other publications of the
Union.
The Bulgarian minority attends different book and media fairs. The financial support
received from the State budget by means of the Department for Interethnic Relations
is the main source of publishing the periodicals and books and of assuring the logistic
support. For this purpose, minority organizations purchase computers and the
technical devices needed for editing and publishing their periodicals.
The Department for Interethnic Relations assures the active participation of the
minorities to these events, giving them the opportunity of establishing new contacts
and partnerships and of increasing the market of spreading the editorial products. The
most important events of this type are the “Book and Media Fair” and the
”Gaudeamus Fair”.
Books published by the Bulgarian Union of the Banat – Romania, 2005-2008

No.

Author

Year
of
publishing/
Publishing
Page
no./
House
No.
Of
printed

Title

94

1.

Пирин Бояджиев

2.

Anton Lebanov

3.

Ivanciov Margareta

4.

M`rkov Miki

5.

M`rkov Miki

copies
Българското училище в Букурещ. 2005/
1896-1955. [Bulgarian School of 87 pages/
Bucharest. 1896-1955]
400 copies
Izbr`ni poeziji. [Chosen Poems].
2006/
210 pages /
500 copies
Istorijata
i
tradicijite
na
balgarskotu
malcinstvu
ud 2006/
Rumania. U]ebniq. [History and 116 pages /
traditions of the Bulgarian Minority 1000 copies
of Romania. Manual]
Ugled`lu za du[ata (vol. I). 2008/
„Mirror for the soul. Short 120 pages /
1165 ex.
fiction“.
Ugled`lu za du[ata (vol. II). 2008/
„Mirror for the soul". Short 111 pages/
1165 ex.
fiction “.

„Mirton“,
Timişoara
„Mirton“,
Timişoara

„Mirton“,
Timişoara

„Mirton“
Timişoara
„Mirton“
Timişoara

** Note: The above- mentioned periodicals and the books are published in the
Bulgarian language.
Within the big branches of the Bulgarian Union of the Banat – Romania artistic,
folklore and cultural ensembles–dance, song teams, choruses, etc. These were invited
to attend numerous TV programmes in Bucharest and Sofia and attend various
contests and events organized at a national and international level. For example, the
Men Chorus of Dudeştii Vechi has concerts in Serbia and Bulgaria, and the chorus of
Vinga has concerts in Croatia and Bulgaria. The religious mixed Chorus of the
Bulgarians of Timişoara attended various contests.
Among the projects and activities of the Bulgarian minority: Art of the popular masks
of the Banat - «Farsangul»; celebration of 270 years since the settling down of the
individuals belonging to the Bulgarian ethnic group in Dudeştii Vechi commune;
meeting of the editors of the Bulgarian Union of Banat – Romania (U.B.B.-R) with the
Bulgarian language writers and professors; Bulgarian Culture and Slavonic Writing
Day – Saints Cyril and Methodius; Celebration of « Saints Cyril and Methodius»
High School of Dudestii Vechi; The first steps, the first words and the first acting on
scene– bilingual show of the children of Bulgarian or mixed origin; the Festival of
the Ethnic Groups; the Festival of the popular Bulgarian garb, song and dance of
Banat, the 16th edition; celebration of the Dedication Day of the Church in Dudeştii
Vechi -« Dvete Nedeli »; « Pro Etnica» Festival; Interethnic Theatre Festival;
« Mala Gospa »- Basilica celebration of the Dedication Day of Maria Radna
Basilica of Lipova; National Minorities Festival in Arad county; Bulgarian ethnic
group celebration in Sânnicolau –Mare; the Bulgarians World Great Assembly;
« Kolada »- laic and religious customs related to the celebration of Christmas;
going from house to house the sing Christmas Carols; « Kucenete »-customs related
to closing the vegetation cycle and of the beginning of the rest for the hard workers of
the land; “Jaku Ronkov”Folklore Festival; day of the Bulgarian leaders, etc.

95

In what concerns the legislation regulating the cinema field, Government Emergency
Decree no.7/2008, which modifies Government Decree no.39/2005, addresses “the
promotion of the regional minority language”123. Thus “the possibility of creating
movies in any language spoken in the communities of Romania and thus the access to
the Cinema Fund is free for any creator, who is able to create the standard copy in any
language and to benefit from the refundable grant from the Fund.”124 The unlimited
access represents „the most useful item of Law no.282/2007 in the cinema field.”125
The Cultural Diversity Department within the Ministry of Culture and National
Heritage and National Heritage „supported the creative affirmation of the minorities
of Romania cultural identity and in this direction initiated, supported
methodologically and financed partially or in cooperation with other central, local
government institutions or non-governmental organizations of the country or of
abroad, studies, researches and syntheses concerning the history, the spiritual life and
the culture of the national minorities as well as their cultural interferences with the
majority population, by means of field researches, publications, organizing
symposiums, oral examinations, round tables etc. together with the publication of the
presented materials (studies, catalogues, brochures, flyers, etc) both in Romania and
abroad.”126
The strategy for decentralization in the cultural field (October 2006) „favoured
putting at the disposal of organisms in charge with cultural activities staff knowing
regional or minority language and a diversification of the forms of expression of the
entertainment institutions and museum institutions in order to respond to the cultural
needs articulated by the local communities.”127
The programmes carried on by the Cultural Diversity Department during 2004 – 2008
aimed at “promoting cultural diversity, multilingualism and the values deriving from
the ethnic and cultural diversity at national and local level”, by financing some
activities based on projects with the purpose of eliminating prejudge, recognizing
mutual values and for public finance resources directed towards financing specific
activities aimed at preserving and developing the cultural and linguistic identity of the
national minorities in Romania.”128
- Paragraph 2 In respect of territories other than those in which the regional
or minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the
number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow,
encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in
accordance with the preceding paragraph.
The Bulgarian minority is predominantly located in the West part of the country and
around the capital city, Bucharest, areas where the authorities took all the needed

123

Document sent to the Grade for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of Culture and National
Heritage and Religious Affairs.
124
Idem.
125
Idem.
126
Idem.
127
Idem.
128
Idem.

96

measures to support the various cultural, artistic and education activities of the
Bulgarian language speakers.
- Paragraph 3 The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in
pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for regional or minority languages and the
cultures they reflect.
We are not in possession of relevant data.
From Article 13 – Economic and social life
- Paragraph 1. With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties
undertake, within the whole country:
Subparagraph a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting
or limiting without justifiable reasons the use of regional or minority languages
in documents relating to economic or social life, particularly contracts of
employment, and in technical documents such as instructions for the use of
products or installations;
Subparagraph b) to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of companies
and private documents of any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional
or minority languages, at least between users of the same language;”
–were selected
We are not in possession of relevant data.
From Article 14 - Transfrontier exchanges
The Parties undertake:
- Paragraph a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which
bind them with the States in which the same language is used in identical or
similar form, or if necessary to seek to conclude such agreements, in such a way
as to foster contacts between the users of the same language in the States
concerned in the fields of culture, education, information, vocational training
and permanent education;
–was selected.
As of 2003, Romania and Bulgaria are beneficiaries of the” Regional Programme for
the Cultural and Natural Heritage of South-Eastern Europe” (PRSEE) initiated by the
Council of Europe, programme whose general objective is to offer an aggregate
framework favourable to exchanges of expertise and experience between
neighbouring states confronted with similar problems regarding the protection,
preservation and rehabilitation of the cultural and natural heritage. The programme
also considers “the creation of a trust and security climate between the various
communities, including the relations between the minority and the majority
population with the purpose of promoting an active reconciliation between the
individuals and the communities, in general”.129
For 2009, the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage and National Heritage
proposed itself to carry on a transborder programme between Romania (Constanţa,
Călăraşi, Giurgiu counties) and Bulgaria (Silistra), targeting common traditions and
129

http://www.cultura.ro/Documents.aspx?ID=365

97

customs of Romanians and Bulgarians of these areas, patrimonial-immaterial
elements being targeted.
“The Bulgarian minority of Romania, through its organization, the Bulgarian Union
of the Banat – Romania respectively, has connections and contacts with the
organizations of the other national minorities of Romania, such as with organizations
of the Bulgarian minorities of: Serbia, Hungary, the Ukraine and the Republic of
Moldova. Moreover, the Bulgarian minority has contacts with the Embassy of the
Republic of Bulgaria in Bucharest, with various cultural, mass communication and
educational institutions of the Republic of Bulgaria. These contacts are capitalized
through the fact that on an annual basis, the Bulgarian nationality’s youth
representatives in Romania are received to study in higher education institutions of
Bulgaria. Further more, the Bulgarian children from Romania spend their holidays in
camps in the Republic of Bulgaria.”130
Starting with the 2005/2006 academic year, based on the Programme of cooperation
in the field of education, science and culture for the years 2005-2007 between the
Government of Romania and the Government of the Republic of Bulgaria, within this
high school there is a Bulgarian language high school master from Bulgaria. The High
school cooperates with a high school of Ruse locality (Bulgaria) bearing the same
name and carries on common cultural activities and exchanges of students and
teachers.
Moreover, the Bulgarian Union of the Banat – Romania, with the support of the
Ministry of Education and Sciences of the Republic of Bulgaria, of the Embassy of
the Republic of Bulgaria in Bucharest, as well as of the State Agency for the
Bulgarians of Abroad, “procured and continues to do so manuals and other school
supplies for the schools and high schools where the Bulgarian language is studied.”131
Paragraph b) for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/
or promote co-operation across borders, in particular between regional or local
authorities in whose territory the same language is used in identical or similar
form.”
At present, the Phare programmes for transborder cooperation between Romania and
Bulgaria are unfolding, having as main objectives the consolidation of already
existing common values, the development of the transborder cooperation in view of
emphasizing the common social-cultural inheritance, related to the history and local
environment, as well as the strengthening of the operational domain in the transborder
cooperation field. The Ministry of Regional Development, Public Works and
Housing, institution that contributes to the elaboration of the national strategy of
Transborder cooperation, elaborates and disseminates documents of communication in
minority languages in order to ensure a higher transparency of its activity. Brochures
concerning the financing programmes from European funds that are administered by
the ministry were published in the Bulgarian language and disseminated: Romania –
Bulgaria Cross-Border Cooperation Programme 2007 – 2013; Romania – Bulgaria
130

Document sent to the Grade for Relaţii Interethnic Relations by the Bulgarian Union of the Banat –
Romania.
131
Document sent to the Grade for Interethnic Relations by the Bulgarian Union of the Banat –
Romania.

98

Cross-Border Cooperation Programme 2007 – 2013 / Progresses registered during
2008.
The Romania – Bulgaria Cross-Border Cooperation Programme, 2007 – 2013,
proposes itself to consolidate the contacts between the communities of the border
areas, aiming at facilitating the common development of the frontier. 22% of the
budget was allocated to the priority axis targeting the economic and social
development, including the support of the business environment by promoting images
and regional identities, cooperation in the filed of development of human resources
and the “people to people” cooperation. This component includes organizing common
events for the promotion of culture, sports, cooperation between education institutions
by means of experience exchanges programmes, exchanges between the schools and
universities of both parts, the common promotion of the tourist attractions of the area
etc.
Romania and Bulgaria are partners in the Black Sea Basin Joint Operational
Programme 2007-2013. Among the priorities of this programme are the cultural and
educational initiatives to create a common cultural climate in the region.
Joint activities of the two countries are carried on within132:
-

the Transnational Co-operation Programme “South-East Europe”, a
programme for which projects promoting the use of cultural heritage with a
view to development are also eligible.

-

URBACT II Programme, where 3 of the 7 multinational programmes approved
have Romanian-Bulgarian participation. (From the Romanian part the
Intercommunity Development Association Alba Iulia, Satu Mare City Hall and
Alba Iulia City Hall are participating).

-

“Danube’s” Euro region association created in 2002, at the initiative of the
Giurgiu county Council and Ruse City Hall, and which includes Ruse county,
from the Bulgarian part, and Giurgiu county from the Romanian part; the main
goal of the association is to encourage the cross-border cooperation in all the
fields of activity, by creating common programmes and projects, financed
from external sources.

-

Danube 21 Euroregion: association for cross-border cooperation, set up on the
18th January 2002 in Vidin, by the mayors of Calafat, Vidin and Zaichar cities,
having as objectives the development of cross border cooperation, as well as
creation and administration of transfrontier projects.

-

Euro-region Middle Danube - Iron Gate: an initiative of the Romanian,
Bulgarian, Serbian and Montenegrin authorities, created in 2005,
concentrated on elaborating structural projects in the infrastructure field.

-

Danube South Euroregion: created in 2001, with centre in Victor (Bulgaria),
led to the implementation of “Toward friendship through Sport; make a friend
on the other bank of the Danube; Radio Katranov; Balkan Youth forum; Share
your dream, share your reality; Regional Agenda 21” projects. Within the

132

According to the document sent to the Grade for Relaţii Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs

99

same Euro region the project Young people of Zimnicea and Svishtov transmit
traditions and popular dances learned from their parents was lodged for
financing.
-

-

Lower Danube Euroregion: set up in 2001, one of the projects under
implementation being Cross-border Tourism at Lower Danube and a
Romanian Bulgarian pro-active group for transfrontier cooperation, is under
preparation.
Giurgiu – Ruse Euro region: created in 2001, it has a common Secretariat, an
ecological and health commission that gather on quarter basis and analyse
problems related top environment protection, public health etc. The Objectives
are the Transborder cooperation development, enhancing effectiveness of the
local authorities in Plevna region and in Olt county, cooperation in the field of
infrastructure, creating and administering cross-border projects etc.

Examples of documentation published by the Romanian institutions in Bulgarian
language that facilitates and promotes cross-border cooperation133:
Institution

Editing
Documentation

Dolj
Council

county

Constanţa School
Inspectorate
Constanţa School
Inspectorate
Teleorman
Chamber
of
Commerce,
Industry
and
Agriculture
Foundation
“Romanian
Ecological Action”
Dolj
county
Council
Călăraşi Chamber
of
Commerce,
Industry
and
Agriculture
Non Governmental
Organization Mare
Nostrum Constanţa

Bulgarian
DVD including the description of Dolj-Vidin, language
Montana, Vratsa transfrontier region

Poster; folder

Bulgarian
language
Bulgarian
language
Bulgarian
language

Folder

Bulgarian
language

Teacher’s manual
Student’s exercise book

Banner

Bulgarian
language
Bulgarian
language

Folder

Bulgarian
language

Brochure

133

Document sent to the Grade for Interethnic relations by the Ministry of Regional Development and
Housing .

100

Călăraşi Chamber
of
Commerce, Folder; TV announcement; TV spot; poster
Industry
and
Agriculture
Non Governmental
Organization Mare Folder
Nostrum Constanţa
Constanta Museum
Communiqué; press announcement
of Art

Bulgarian
language

Bulgarian
language
Bulgarian
language

Moreover, within RO 2004/016-784.01.04.01.04 “EU Romanian-Bulgarian Club and
EU at Giurgiu”, project initiated by the European Integration DirectorateProgrammes within the Local Council of Giurgiu Municipality, bilingual calendars in
Romanian and Bulgarian were published and disseminated. Beside these, The
Chamber of Commerce and Industry Oltenia published bilingual copies of the
Economic Mission Catalogue in Vidin – Bulgaria, and of the Economic Mission
Catalogue in Craiova – Romania, as well as the brochure “Structural Funds of the
European Union” in three-linguistic copies in Romanian, English and Bulgarian
(project RO 2004/016-784.01.04.01-03 “preparing business environment in Dolj–
Romania and Vidin-Bulgaria for an extended unique market; transborder challenges
and opportunities”).

b) The Czech Language
According to the official data of the 2002 census, 3 941 individuals declared to belong
to the Czech ethnic group, in Romania, among who 3 306 individuals having Czech
language their mother tongue. The Czech minority is concentrated in Caraş Severin
and Mehedinţi counties. In Caraş Severin county the representative localities are
Gârnic, Sfânta Elena, Ravensca, Bigăr, and in Mehedinţi county - Eibenthal locality.
In public life the Czechs are represented by the Democratic Union of the Slovaks and
Czechs of Romania, which promotes both the interests of the individuals belonging to
the Czech ethnic group and of those belonging to the Slovak ethnic group. The Union
has a deputy in the Parliament of Romania, who represents both communities.
From Article 8 – Education – the following paragraphs and subparagraphs were
selected for the Czech language:
- Paragraph 1. With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the
territory in which such languages are used, according to the situation of each of
these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s)
of the State:
Subparagraph a)(ii) “to make available a substantial part of pre-school
education in the relevant regional or minority languages;”
Subparagraph b)(ii) “to make available a substantial part of primary
education in the relevant regional or minority languages”,
Subparagraph c)(iii) to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching
of the relevant regional or minority languages as an integral part of the
curriculum;

101

Subparagraph d)(iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii
above at least to those pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish
in a number considered sufficient;
Subparagraph g) to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history
and the culture, which is reflected by the regional or minority language;
Subparagraph i) to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for
monitoring the measures taken and progress achieved in establishing or
developing the teaching of regional or minority languages and for drawing up
periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.
The Czech language is studied in schools with tuition in Czech language in primary
school and in the gymnasium, and the study of the Czech language as a discipline,
with 3 classes/week, in schools with Romanian language tuition.
Schools where the Czech language is studied and the number of students per grade
as in 2008/2009 academic years:
No
.

1.
2.

3.

4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

School/
Locality

Total
no. of
pupils
and
children
School with 1-8 40
grades Eibenthal /MH
School with 1-4 16
grades Baia Nouă
/MH
School with 1-8 48
grades Sfânta Elena /
CS
School with 1-8 6
grades Ravensca /CS
School with 1-8 12
grades Bigăr /CS
School with 1-8 42
grades Gârnic /CS
School with 1-8 6
grades Şumiţa /CS
School with 1-8 7
grades
Moldova
Nouă /CS
GRAND TOTAL
186

Kind
ergar
ten

Gr Gr Gr Gr Gr Gr Gr Gr
ade ade ade ade ade ade ade ade
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

7

3

4

-

3

2

6

7

8

10

2

1

1

2

-

-

-

-

16

6

6

3

4

3

6

2

2

-

1

-

1

2

-

1

-

1

-

2

2

3

1

1

2

1

-

8

-

2

3

6

6

3

7

7

-

2

1

1

-

-

1

-

10

-

1

4

2

-

-

-

-

-

41

17

20

14

18

12

19

17

28

A. MEHEDINȚI COUNTY:
Total units: 2
Total no. of children and pupils: 56
Total no. of teaching staff who teaches in Czech language: 2 of whom 1 teacher from
the Czech Republic.

102

The education process is carried on in the Romanian language and the pupils study the
Czech language as a separate discipline.
B. CARAȘ SEVERIN COUNTY:
Total units: 6
Total no. of children and pupils: 130
Total no. of teaching staff who teaches in Czech language: 10 of whom 2 teachers
from the Czech Republic.
The education process is carried on in the Czech language in the pre-school cycle and
in the primary cycle in the schools of Sfânta Elena, Gârnic, Șumița, Ravensca and
Bigăr localities. In the gymnasium cycle the education process is carried out in the
Romanian language and the pupils study the Czech language as a separate discipline.
Besides the Czech language, the pupils study in their mother tongue disciplines such
as History and traditions of the Czech minority in grades 1-8, as well as religion. The
manuals for the discipline History and traditions of the Czech minority were
elaborated by specialists within the ranks of the minority, based on the curriculum
approved by order of the Minister. The Democratic Union of Slovaks and Czechs of
Romania financed the editing and the publication of the handbooks for this discipline.
In the last years, the situation concerning assuring the school manuals in Czech
language war regulated. Besides the original handbooks in the Czech language for
grades 1-8, re-edited by the Didactic and Pedagogic Publishing House, financed by
the Ministry of Education, Research, Youth and Sports, the handbooks for grades 1-4
were translated in the Czech language.
Information on the curriculum for the Czech language and literature or information
concerning the national commission for the Czech language can be accessed on the
Ministry’s web page (www.edu.ro). The curricula for the Czech language and
literature - grades 1-10, as well as the curricula for the Czech language and literature
needed for the teachers’ didactic degrees and those for occupying the vacancies
(kindergarten educators, elementary teachers, and professors) were elaborated by a
work group formed of experts and approved by order of the Minister of Education.
For a better monitoring of the Czech language study, Gecse Alena was appointed as
teaching methods teacher in Caraş Severin county. She is also in charge with
Mehedinţi county. This specialist in teaching methods cooperates both with the
School Inspectorate of Caraş Severin county, as well as with the Directorate General
for Education in Minority Languages within the Ministry of Education.
Teaching staff continuous training is carried out both at local level (within the
teaching methods activities organized by the Teaching Staff Resource Centre in the
above-mentioned counties), as well as in the method teaching centres of the Czech
Republic, which are attended on a yearly basis by 4-5 teaching staff members within
the University of Bucharest, at the faculty of foreign languages and literatures
activates the Czech language grade that trains professors of Czech language.
The localities in the counties where individuals belonging to the Czech ethnic group
live benefited from financial aid for education from the Czech Republic. One of these
aids was materialized in building a school in the locality of Sfânta Elena, Caraş

103

Severin county, bearing the name of the great professor J. A. Komenský. Its
endowment was ensured by the Ministry of Education of Romania.
The representatives of the Czech ethnic group cooperate with the central management
of the democratic Union of the Slovaks and Czechs of Romania with a view to
financing and organizing on a yearly basis the teaching staff conferences that function
in the schools of the two counties and of the county phase of the Czech language and
literature inter-school contests. As of 2003/2004 academic year, upon the request of
the management of the Democratic union of the Slovaks and Czech of Romania,
Ministry of Education, Research, Youth and Sports(MECI) organizes and finances the
national phase of the mother tongue contest for the pupils in grades 7-8, of Caraş
Severin and Mehedinţi counties. In the last years, this Olympics is organized jointly
with the Serb and Croat one, the competition beneficent to all the pupils attending it.
The pupils awarded with prizes at the national phase of the Interschool contest for the
Czech language were rewarded, besides the prizes offered by the Ministry of
Education, Research, Youth and Sports, by the Democratic Union of the Slovaks and
Czechs of Romania, by the embassy of the Czech Republic in Bucharest, as well as by
the Department for Interethnic Relations.
In accordance with the cooperation programmes in the field of education signed by
the Ministry of Education in Romania and the Czech Republic, in three schools of the
above-mentioned counties, there are three teachers of Czech language from the Czech
Republic. The schools of Caraş-Severin county carry on common projects with the
schools of the Czech Republic. These projects represent an exchange of expertise and
experience both between the teaching staffs of these schools and among the pupils
included in the project. The pupils of the school with 1-8 grades of the locality of
Eibenthal, Mehedinţi county, are co-opted in a project organized by the Czech party
on cultural topics and had success at the Dance festival of Prague.134
Measures taken on a yearly basis by the Democratic Union of the Slovaks and Czechs
of Romania in order to support the education dedicated to the Czech pupils:
Equip the schools with Czech teaching language with technical equipment:
CD players, TV sets, notebooks, electronic teaching supports etc;
Organize teaching staff conferences in the schools with Czech teaching
language, with guest lecturers from the Czech Republic;
Organize contests for the pupils that study in their mother tongue135.
- Paragraph 2. “With regard to education and in respect of territories other
than those in which the regional or minority languages are traditionally used,
the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language
justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the regional or
minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.”
Besides the above-mentioned areas, the Czech minority is not represented by a
sufficient number of Czech language speakers to justify the language teaching at the
level of education.

134
135

Raport MECI şi UDSCR
Raport UDSCR

104

From Article 9 – Judicial authorities – the following paragraphs and
subparagraphs were selected:
- Paragraph 1. The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in
which the number of residents using the regional or minority languages justifies
the measures specified below, according to the situation of each of these
languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the present
paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of
justice:
Subparagraph a) (ii) to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional
or minority language;
Subparagraph a) (iii) to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or
oral, shall not be considered inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a
regional or minority language;
Subparagraph b) (ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person
before a court, that he or she may use his or her regional or minority language
without thereby incurring additional expense;
Subparagraph b) (iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the
regional or minority languages if necessary by the use of interpreters and
translations;
Subparagraph c) (ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person
before a court, that he or she may use his or her regional or minority language
without thereby incurring additional expense;
Subparagraph c) (iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the
regional or minority languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and
translations;
Subparagraph d) to take steps to ensure that the application of subparagraphs i and iii of paragraphs b and c above and any necessary use of
interpreters and translations does not involve extra expense for the persons
concerned.
- Paragraph 2. The Parties undertake:
Subparagraph a) not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within
the State solely because they are drafted in a regional or minority language;
- Paragraph 3. The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or
minority languages the most important national statutory texts and those
relating particularly to users of these languages, unless they are otherwise
provided
We are not in possession of sufficient data about the use of the Czech language in
justice by the Romanian citizens belonging to Czech ethnic group.
From Article 10 - Administrative authorities and public services:
- Paragraph 1. Within the administrative districts of the State in which the
number of residents who are users of regional or minority languages justifies the
measures specified below and according to the situation of each language, the
Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:

105

Subparagraph a) (ii) to ensure that such of their officers as are in contact with
the public use the regional or minority languages in their relations with persons
applying to them in these languages; or
Subparagraph a) (iii) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages
may submit oral or written applications and receive a reply in these languages;
Subparagraph a) (iv) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may
submit oral or written applications in these languages;
Subparagraph a) (v) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages
may validly submit a document in these languages;
- Paragraph 2. In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose
territory the number of residents who are users of regional or minority
languages is such as to justify the measures specified below, the Parties
undertake to allow and/or encourage:
Subparagraph b) the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to
submit oral or written applications in these languages;
Subparagraph c) the publication by regional authorities of their official
documents also in the relevant regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph d) the publication by local authorities of their official
documents also in the relevant regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph e) the use by regional authorities of regional or minority
languages in debates in their assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of
the official language(s) of the State;
Subparagraph f) the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages
in debates in their assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official
language(s) of the State;
Subparagraph g) the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the
name in the official language(s), of traditional and correct forms of place-names
in regional or minority languages.
- Paragraph 3. With regard to public services provided by the administrative
authorities or other persons acting on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within
the territory in which regional or minority languages are used, in accordance
with the situation of each language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
Subparagraph a) to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in
the provision of the service; or
Subparagraph b) to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a
request and receive a reply in these languages; or
Subparagraph c) to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a
request in these languages.
- Paragraph 4. With a view to putting into effect those provisions of
paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the Parties undertake to take one or
more of the following measures:
Subparagraph b) recruitment and, where necessary, training of the officials
and other public service employees required;

106

Subparagraph c) compliance as far as possible with requests from public
service employees having a knowledge of a regional or minority language to be
appointed in the territory in which that language is used.
- Paragraph 5. The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family
names in the regional or minority languages, at the request of those concerned.
Within the Caraş-Severin County Police Inspectorate it was considered opportune
to employ policemen that know/ speak the Czech language, who are able to ensure
the relation with the citizens belonging to the respective minority, by taking over and
processing the requests worded by then citizens of Czech nationality.
From Article 11 – Media Romania has chosen the following paragraphs and
subparagraphs:
- Paragraph 1. The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority
languages within the territories in which those languages are spoken, according
to the situation of each language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly
or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this field, and
respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
a) to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:
Subparagraph a) (iii) to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer
programmes in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph b) (ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio
programmes in the regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
Subparagraph c) (ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of
television programmes in the regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
Subparagraph d) to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution
of audio and audiovisual works in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph e)(i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or
maintenance of at least one newspaper in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph g) to support the training of journalists and other staff for media
using regional or minority languages.
Romanian Broadcasting Society, in accordance with the provisions of the Romanian
legislation and in compliance with the provisions of the international legislation, give
a special importance to the minority programmes, ensures the conditions of creating a
full package of services for the ethnic minorities. In the programmes of the Romanian
Broadcasting Society the following programmes are found:
RADIO REŞIŢA (Reşiţa city, Caraş-Severin county): Radio Reşiţa, set up in 1996,
answered (in 2000) the request launched by the representatives of the minorities in the
area. AS a result, the programmes are broadcast in Ukrainian, Serb, Hungarian,
German, Croat, Slovak, Czech and Romani 30 minutes per week for each language.
The weight of the programmes for minorities of the total programmes is of 28.57%.
Programmes produced in the Czech and Slovak languages are broadcast each
Saturday.136
RADIO TIMIŞOARA (Timişoara municipality, Timiş county): The weight of the
programmes for minorities is of 21.43%. Unique among the TV programmes of the
136

Romanian Broadcasting Society ( SRR) Report

107

Romanian Radio-Broadcasting, the Czech Programme is the concrete proof of the
respect and tolerance towards the other national communities, their culture, their
aspirations, towards their need to express themselves in their mother tongue, to use it
currently, to also be able to hear it on the radio. The correct information, prompt
information, but also culture promotion traditions and ethnic identity preservation,
enriching the knowledge of the audience are pursued through the broadcast
programmes. The programme occurred in April 1990 in a bilingual form (SlovakCzech), half an hour per week. It started to be contoured and to be emphasized only
when it became a self-standing programme, in September 1998. It lasts half an hour
per week and it is broadcast each Sunday, starting with 16,30.137
The programmes in the Czech language are dedicated first of all to the Czech
communities from the Caraş - Severin, Timiş, Arad and Mehedinţi counties, but
letters, phone calls are received (and even visits are paid), from listeners from
Hungary, Vojvodina, Croatia, and the Czech Republic.138
Taking into consideration the provisions of the Charter applicable to the domain and
coordinated within the Romanian Radio Broadcasting Society by the Minorities
Editor Office in Bucharest, a project was elaborated targeting the extension of the
broadcasting time of the Editor office with 2 hours/day, proposing also a programme
in Czech language that would contain a news bulletin, reportages about events,
interviews etc., broadcast Tuesday between 22.30-23.15.139
The Romanian Television Society is the public service of national interest, which,
by its legal nature and mission, is dedicated to all citizens of Romania, to the Diaspora
and all those who are interested in Romania and its values.
The Romanian television plays an important role in informing the public about the
identity, history and traditions of the national minorities that are recognized in our
country. The TVR programmes about and with minorities have tried, under different
contents, according to the programme strategy of TVR, to express the multitude of
forms of expressions in different languages. All these programmes are Romanianlanguage programmes or are translated and subtitled in Romanian, so that all TV
viewers are able to understand them, irrespective of their nationality.
It can be asserted that 2008 represented a crucial year for the national minorities’
programmes. For the first time, the distinction between the programmes in the
minority languages and the programmes about national minorities dedicated to the
large TV audience in Romanian language is made. Setting up in October 2008 of
channel TVR 3 allowed increasing the time of the programmes in the minorities
languages and lead to creating new programmes. For the first time in TVR history, in
the TVR 3 programmes grid entered in October 2008, programmes in the Bulgarian,
Croatian, Russian, Turkish, Tartar, Greek, Czech, Slovak and Ukrainian languages.
To the weekly programmes in Hungarian, German, Serb and Romani languages were
added on TVR 3 other 9 (nine) new weekly programmes in Bulgarian, Croat
(accomplished at TVR Timişoara), Russian, Turkish, Tatar, Greek (carried out by
TVR Bucharest), Czech, Slovak and Ukrainian (carried out on alternative basis by
137

www.radiotimisoara.ro
National AudioVisual Commission (CNA) Report
139
SRR (Romanian Broadcasting Society) Report
138

108

TVR Cluj and TVR Timişoara) were added.140 The duration of the programmes in the
Czech language is of 5 minutes and are broadcast by TVR CLUJ on a weekly basis,
each Thursday.141
- Paragraph 2. The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct
reception of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a
language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language,
and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from
neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure
that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and free
circulation of information in the written press in a language used in identical or
similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of the abovementioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be
subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed
by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national
security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or
crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation
or rights of others, for preventing disclosure of information received in
confidence, or for maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
At the proposal of Raico Cornea (editor, member of the Board of Administrators of
the Romanian Television Society), the National TV station reserved a programme
time to broadcast on a weekly basis on TVR 3 art films from the state of origin of the
national minorities, with subtitling in the Romanian language. In this direction, TVR
started actions with a view to signing or renewing cooperation agreements
(programmes, art films, documentaries, reportages etc.) between the public television
of Romania and those of Albania, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Croatia, Germany,
Greece, Israel, Macedonia, Russia, Serbia, Slovakia, Turkey, the Ukraine and
Hungary. This project will contribute to the promotion of national minority languages
and of the European cinema in Romania, by transmitting productions of the abovementioned states, as well as broadcasting Romanian art films in the afore-mentioned
states.142
- Paragraph 3. The Parties undertake to ensure that the interests of the
users of regional or minority languages are represented or taken into account
within such bodies as may be established in accordance with the law with
responsibility for guaranteeing the freedom and pluralism of the media.
In the Board of Administration of the Public Radio and Television as well as in the
structure of the National Audiovisual Council, there are individuals among the ranks
of the national minorities two represent their interests.
From Article 12 - Cultural activities and facilities–were selected:
- Paragraph 1. With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially
libraries, video libraries, cultural centres, museums, archives, academies,
theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production, vernacular
forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries, including inter
140

After a SRTv Report
After Annex no.2 of SRTv Report
142
Raport SRTv
141

109

alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are
competent, have power or play a role in this field:
Subparagraph a) to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to
regional or minority languages and foster the different means of access to works
produced in these languages;
Subparagraph b) to foster the different means of access in other languages to
works produced in regional or minority languages by aiding and developing
translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;
Subparagraph c) to foster access in regional or minority languages to works
produced in other languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing,
post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;
Subparagraph d) to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or
supporting cultural activities of various kinds make appropriate allowance for
incorporating the knowledge and use of regional or minority languages and
cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for which they provide
backing;
Subparagraph e) to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible
for organising or supporting cultural activities have at their disposal staff who
have a full command of the regional or minority language concerned, as well as
of the language(s) of the rest of the population;
Subparagraph f) to encourage direct participation by representatives of the
users of a given regional or minority language in providing facilities and
planning cultural activities;
Subparagraph g) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or
bodies responsible for collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing
works produced in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph h) if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance
translation and terminological research services, particularly with a view to
maintaining and developing appropriate administrative, commercial, economic,
social, technical or legal terminology in each regional or minority language.
The Democratic Union of Slovaks and Czechs of Romania (UDSCR) is a member of
the Council of National Minorities, which has a statute of consultative body of the
Government of Romania and that is constituted of 19 organizations of the citizens
belonging to national minorities, all with representation in the Parliament. UDSCR
received 2 280 thousand RON from the Staten Budget in 2008 and 2 429.22 thousand
RON in 2009 to cover partially the expenses necessary to carry on their activity,
including for cultural activities.
The Democratic Union of Slovaks and Czechs of Romania was set up in 1990 as
higher body of the Czech and Slovak minority of Romania. Even if on 31st December
1992, Czechoslovakia was divided, The Union continued to exist as such, having
autonomy both for the Slovak minority and for the Czech minority. UDSCR defines
itself as being, first of all, a social-cultural organization.
All cultural, scientific, folkloric, school-related programmes organized and financed
by UDSCR are carried out in the Czech language.

110

The main publication of the Democratic Union of Slovaks and Czechs in Romania is
“Naše snahy” (“Our endeavour”), a publication that resumed its activity in 1990, after
an interruption of 50 years. “Naše snahy” is a monthly cultural magazine, it is
bilingual (in Slovak and Czech languages), having a summary in the Romanian
language. The magazine includes a column dedicated to the representative in the
Parliament, articles of general interest, as well as short stories, poems and studies.
The magazine has also a supplement, “Naše snahy plus” a quarterly literary magazine
in the Slovak and Czech languages. The following school magazines are published
every month:
- “Gernicky zvonecek” at Gârnic and Eibenthal;
- “Heleneske slunicko” at Sfânta Elena;
- “Eibenthalske obzory” at Eibenthal.
On an annual basis, with the support of the Union books belonging to Czech authors
of Romania are published.
The following books were published in 2008:
- Dezideriu Gecse and Alena Gecse “Dejiny a tradice ceske mensiny v Rumunscu, II
Diel”;
- Frantisek Draxel – “Premozitele hor”, translated also in Romanian- “The
Conquerors of the mountain”.
The library of Nădlac and the school libraries also have books in the Czech language.
On a national level, UDSCR organizes the “Czech Folklore festival” each year, in the
localities where individuals belonging to the Czech ethnic group live. Other actions
organized by UDSCR and participations to inter-ethnic actions in 2008 would be the
following: choreography course for Czech ensembles in Gărnic, the Czechs Day in
Timişoara, Punch and Judy tour in the villages of the Czech Republic, The Festival of
the Czech Diaspora in Prague, teaching methods training course for the Czech
teaching staff in Nove Mesto, participation of the pupils in the multiethnic camp of
Băile Herculane and summer camp in Greece (organized by the Department for
Interethnic Relations for the prize awarded to pupils at the mother tongue Olympics,
etc. The organization attended various Festivals in Romania (for example Pro Etnica
Festival in Sighişoara, Interethnic Festival in Timişoara), at Interculturality Week
Seminar in Costineşti, etc.143
- Paragraph 2 In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or
minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number
of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or
provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in accordance with the
preceding paragraph.
We are not in the possession of relevant data about the use of the Czech language in
other regions than those already mentioned.

143

UDSCR Report

111

- Paragraph 3 The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing
their cultural policy abroad, for regional or minority languages and the cultures
they reflect.
There is a continuous and fruitful cooperation between the Czech community of
Romania and the Czech Republic, especially in the fields of education and culture.
From Article 13 – Economic and social life
- Paragraph 1. With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties
undertake, within the whole country:
Subparagraph a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting
or limiting without justifiable reasons the use of regional or minority languages
in documents relating to economic or social life, particularly contracts of
employment, and in technical documents such as instructions for the use of
products or installations;
Subparagraph b) to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of companies
and private documents of any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional
or minority languages, at least between users of the same language;”
- were selected:
We are not in the possession of relevant data as concerns the use of the Czech
language in this field.
From Article 14 - Transfrontier exchanges - the following points were selected:
The Parties undertake:
- Paragraph a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which
bind them with the States in which the same language is used in identical or
similar form, or if necessary to seek to conclude such agreements, in such a way
as to foster contacts between the users of the same language in the States
concerned in the fields of culture, education, information, vocational training
and permanent education;
- Paragraph b) for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate
and/ or promote co-operation across borders, in particular between regional or
local authorities in whose territory the same language is used in identical or
similar form.”
When official meetings take place between the Prefect, the Chairman of the County
Council and officials of the mother country of the minorities living together on the
area of Mehedinţi county, English language is used, but each time Romanian citizens
belonging to the respective ethnic group were called with the support of DRI
representative in the county. On the 26th June 2008, the Ambassador of the Czech
Republic, Mr. Petr Dokladal, paid a visit in Mehedinţi county and met with the
Chairman of the County Council, Mr. Marius Balu. Czech language was used; the
translator was Mr. Draxel Francisc, Chairman of Mehedinţi branch of the Union of
Slovaks and Czechs of Romania.144

c) The Croat Language
144

Report of the DRI representative in Drobeta Tr.Severin

112

According to the data of the 2002 national census, the population belonging to Croat
ethnic group of Romania counts 6 807 individuals, of whom 6 304 individuals
declared themselves as having the Croat language as their mother tongue. The
remaining 503 individuals declared as having another mother tongue than the Croat
language, as follows: 338 individuals –Romanian; 15 individuals – Hungarian; 2
individuals – Ukrainian; 13 individuals – German; 6 individuals –Lipovan Russian; 9
individuals – Turkish; 19 individuals –Serb; 7 individuals – Greek; 2 individuals –
Italian; 1 individual – Armenian; 86 individuals – other mother tongues; 5 individuals
– did not declare their mother tongue. The individuals belonging to the Croat minority
of Romania live with prevalence in the Caraş-Severin and Timiş counties.
The individuals belonging to the Croatian minority of Romania are represented at
political level (one in the Parliament and the other locally) by the Union of Croatians
of Romania (UCR), having two commune organizations and one territorial
organization.
From Article 8 – Education – Romania has selected:
- Paragraph 1. With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the
territory in which such languages are used, according to the situation of each of
these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s)
of the State:
Subparagraph a)(i) “to make available pre-school education in the relevant
regional or minority languages”;
Subparagraph b)(i) “to make available primary education in the relevant
regional or minority languages”,
Subparagraph c)(ii) “to make available a substantial part of secondary
education in the relevant regional or minority languages;”
Subparagraph e)(iii) “if, by reason of the role of the State in relation to higher
education institutions, sub-paragraphs i and ii cannot be applied, to encourage
and/or allow the provision of university or other forms of higher education in
regional or minority languages or of facilities for the study of these languages as
university or higher education subjects;”
Subparagraph g) to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history
and the culture, which is reflected by the regional or minority language;
Subparagraph h) to provide the basic and further training of the teachers
required to implement those of paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;
Subparagraph i) to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for
monitoring the measures taken and progress achieved in establishing or
developing the teaching of regional or minority languages and for drawing up
periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.
- Paragraph 2. “With regard to education and in respect of territories other
than those in which the regional or minority languages are traditionally used,
the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language
justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the regional or
minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.”
Caraşova (situated in Caraş-Severin county) is regarded by the Union of Croatians
from Romania as being the cultural centre of the Croatian community of Romania.

113

The Bilingual Croatian High School is located in Caraşova, where the education
process is carried on partially in the Croat language and partially in the Romanian
language. Other localities where inhabit compact communities of Croatians in
Romania are Rafnic, Clocotici, Lupac, Vodnic, Iabalcea, Nermet.
A. Education in Croat language in Caraşova and in the surroundings (2008-2009
academic year):145
1. CARAŞOVA:
- Preschool education (25 children)
⇒ Group with teaching in mother tongue (25 children)
- Primary education:
⇒ School with grades 1-4 no. 1 (39 pupils)
Grade 2 (14 pupils) – teaching in mother tongue
Grades 1-3 (10+6) pupils–teaching in mother tongue
Grades 3-4 teaching in the Romanian language
⇒ School with grades 1-4 no.2
Grade I (9 pupils) - teaching in the Romanian language
Grade II (13 pupils) - teaching in mother tongue
Grade III (10 pupils) - teaching in mother tongue
- Gymnasium and high school education:
Romanian –Croat Bilingual High School - bilingual education
Gymnasium education with teaching in Romanian language (121 students study
mother tongue 4 classes per week)
⇒ In grade 9-12 – (22+9+15+17students)
⇒ Grade 12 night form of teaching -20 students
2. IABALCEA:
⇒ Preschool education with teaching in the mother tongue (10
children)
⇒ Primary school with teaching in the Romanian language (1+5+2
pupils)
3. NERMET:
⇒ Preschool education with teaching in the mother tongue
⇒ Primary school with teaching in the Romanian language
(1+0+10+7 pupils)
B. Education with teaching in Croat language in Lupac and the surroundings
(2008-2009 academic year):
⇒ School with grades 1-8 Lupac
- Preschool education with teaching in the Romanian language
- Primary school with teaching in the Romanian language
- Gymnasium education with teaching in the Romanian language
- Croat mother tongue study (4 classes per week)
⇒ School with grades 1-4 Vodnic - structure in Lupac
145

According to the document sent to the Grade for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of Education,
Reserch and Innovationi - Directorate General for Education in Minority Languages.

114

- Preschool education with teaching in mother tongue (17 children)
- Croat mother tongue study: Grade 1 (6 pupils –education with mother
tongue teaching)
⇒ School with grades 1-8 Clocotici - structure in Lupac
- Preschool education (11 children)
- Primary and gymnasium education with teaching in the Romanian language
⇒ School with grades 1-8 Rafnic – structure in Lupac
- Preschool education: in mother tongue - 2 groups (total 33 pupils)
- Primary and gymnasium education with teaching in the Romanian language
According to the information offered by the Ministry of Education, at present there is
an initiative of republishing new manuals of Croat Language and Literature and the
History and Traditions of the Croatian Minority. In 2007, the Ministry of Education of
the Croat Republic donated to the Croatian community a number of 8 040 manuals of
Croat Language and Literature, for grades 4-12. The Ministry of Education of Croatia
organizes continuous education training courses (teaching methods) attended by the
teaching staff of the schools belonging to the undergraduate education. It is important
to specify that during the 2006-2007 academic year, the Ministry of Education in
Romania approved funds for lifelong courses of the undergraduate teaching staff (at
the level of Caraş-Severin county). The teaching staff attends continuing education
courses in Zagreb each summer.146
As concerns the monitoring and control system of the way Croat language is used in
education, the interschool Croat language contest is attended by approximately 30
pupils each year.
As concerns the cross-border changes in this field, there is an Intergovernmental
Protocol with Croatia. The Croat minority received from the Government of Croatia a
number of 1 800 - school manuals of Croat Language and Literature for grades 5-8, in
2007.147
As concerns the measures that are estimated to be put in application in the near future,
the Ministry of Education specifies there is the initiative to organize summer camps
for the pupils.
The study of the Croat language also takes place at the higher education level, as
follows:
I. Within the University of Bucharest – the Faculty of Foreign Languages and
Literatures, activates the Slav Languages Chair – Croat Language Department.
There are 15 students whose studies are funded by the state within this department.
There is a possibility to supplement this number with additional ones, but the tuition
has to be covered by the admitted students themselves. There are 21 students
registered in the 2008-2009 academic year. The admission in the first year of studies
has been made once every 2 years. Within this department the students chose a double
146

According with the documentation sent to the grade of Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of
Education, Research, Youth and Sports - Directorate General for Education in Minority Languages.
147
According with the documentation sent to the grade of Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of
Education, Research, Youth and Sports - Directorate General for Education in Minority Languages.

115

specialization (the Croat language and literature and a modern language and literature
/ Romanian language and literature). Due to the fact the students belonging to the
Croat minority of Romania are geographically localised in the Western part of the
country, the students of the Croat language Department of the University of Bucharest
are generally of Romanian nationality. As such, the Croat language is taught as a
foreign language, not as mother tongue. The courses within the department are held
both in Romanian language (the general courses), as well as in Croat language (the
specialty courses). There is also the possibility at the MA or PHD levels for the
students of the faculty to choose subjects applied to the study area of the Croat
language, literature and culture. The dissertation theses are however drawn up in the
Romanian language. Within the department there are two lecturers. One of these
positions is reserved for lecturers from Croatia, being at present occupied by one of
such a lecturer.
As concerns the student exchanges between the University of Bucharest and the,
University of Zagreb, the signing a Framework Agreement between the two
universities in 2009 is to be noted. This Agreement provides exchanges of professors
and students, cooperation for the implementation of common projects and activities.
At the level of Croat language department within the faculty of Foreign Languages
(university of Bucharest) the students benefit from scholarships of 1 semester in
Croatia offered by the Ministry of Education of Croatia, ever since the setting up of
the Department, in 1996. In the 2008-2009 academic year, two students within the
department benefited from these scholarships.
II. Within the West University of Timişoara – Faculty of Philology, History and
Theology activates the Slav languages Chair – one of the double academic
specialization available being Serb and Croat Language and Literature – Romanian
Language and Literature or a foreign language and literature. As in the case of the
University of Bucharest, based on the Treaty of Friendship, Good Neighbourhood and
Cooperation between Romania and Serbia, a lecturer from Serbia is employed within
the chair of Slav languages during one academic year, existing the possibility of
extending the contract for a higher period. As concerns the admission, it takes place
annually for the above-mentioned specialization, the total number of seats being 15
(10 budget paid seats and 5 seats paid with tuition fee). As in the case of the
University of Bucharest, teaching of courses at the Serb and Croat languages is
carried on in major part in the respective languages, but there are also several courses
taught in Romanian.
The professors within the Serb and Croat specialization participate as trainers to the
continuous education courses organized for the teaching staff who teach Serbian and
Croat at gymnasium or high school level (for example: Professor Mihai Radan - who
is at the same time the President of the Union of Croatians of Romania – has attended
as trainer two continuous education courses: in Baziaş –October 2007 and in Reşiţa –
December 2008). Moreover, the professors that teach Serbian and Croat language and
literature also attend scientific symposiums organised within the West University of
Timişoara that took place in the last few years, reuniting teaching staff specialized in
teaching Slav languages and literature from several countries of Europe. The debates
finalized with the publication of a collective volume, under the coordination of the
members of the Slav languages chair. Within the West University Timişoara there is

116

also the department concerned with modern Applied Languages, where the students
have the right to choose three languages as fields if specialization, one of these being
a Slav language.
From Article 9 – Judicial authorities
- Paragraph 1. The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in
which the number of residents using the regional or minority languages justifies
the measures specified below, according to the situation of each of these
languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the present
paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of
justice:
Subparagraph a) (ii) to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional
or minority language;
Subparagraph a) (iii) to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or
oral, shall not be considered inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a
regional or minority language;
Subparagraph b) (ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person
before a court, that he or she may use his or her regional or minority language
without thereby incurring additional expense;
Subparagraph b) (iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the
regional or minority languages if necessary by the use of interpreters and
translations;
Subparagraph c) (ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person
before a court, that he or she may use his or her regional or minority language
without thereby incurring additional expense;
Subparagraph c) (iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the
regional or minority languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and
translations;
Subparagraph d) to take steps to ensure that the application of subparagraphs i and iii of paragraphs b and c above and any necessary use of
interpreters and translations does not involve extra expense for the persons
concerned.
- Paragraph 2. The Parties undertake:
Subparagraph a) not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within
the State solely because they are drafted in a regional or minority language;
- Paragraph 3. The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or
minority languages the most important national statutory texts and those
relating particularly to users of these languages, unless they are otherwise
provided
–were selected:
We are not in the possession of relevant data concerning the use of the Croat language
in this field.
From Article 10 - Administrative authorities and public services:
- Paragraph 1. Within the administrative districts of the State in which the
number of residents who are users of regional or minority languages justifies the

117

measures specified below and according to the situation of each language, the
Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
Subparagraph a) (ii) to ensure that such of their officers as are in contact with
the public use the regional or minority languages in their relations with persons
applying to them in these languages; or
Subparagraph a) (iii) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages
may submit oral or written applications and receive a reply in these languages;
Subparagraph a) (iv) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may
submit oral or written applications in these languages;
Subparagraph a) (v) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages
may validly submit a document in these languages;
- Paragraph 2. In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose
territory the number of residents who are users of regional or minority
languages is such as to justify the measures specified below, the Parties
undertake to allow and/or encourage:
Subparagraph b) the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to
submit oral or written applications in these languages;
Subparagraph d) the publication by local authorities of their official
documents also in the relevant regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph f) the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in
debates in their assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official
language(s) of the State;
Subparagraph g) the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the
name in the official language(s), of traditional and correct forms of place-names
in regional or minority languages.
- Paragraph 3. With regard to public services provided by the administrative
authorities or other persons acting on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within
the territory in which regional or minority languages are used, in accordance
with the situation of each language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
Subparagraph a) to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in
the provision of the service; or
Subparagraph b) to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a
request and receive a reply in these languages; or
- Paragraph 4. With a view to putting into effect those provisions of
paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the Parties undertake to take one or
more of the following measures:
Subparagraph b) recruitment and, where necessary, training of the officials
and other public service employees required;
Subparagraph c) compliance as far as possible with requests from public
service employees having a knowledge of a regional or minority language to be
appointed in the territory in which that language is used.
Paragraph 5. The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family
names in the regional or minority languages, at the request of those concerned.
In Caraş-Severin county the authorities of the local public administration worded in
the Croat language answers to the petitions filed by the citizens belonging to the Croat
minority, in mother tongue. Within the Caraş-Severin Police County Inspectorate it
118

was considered appropriate to employ policemen that speak the Croat language, who
are able to assure the relation with the citizens belonging to the respective minority,
by taking over and processing the written requests forwarded by the citizens of
Croatian nationality.
From Article 11 - Media:
- Paragraph 1. The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority
languages within the territories in which those languages are spoken, according
to the situation of each language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly
or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this field, and
respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
a) to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:
Subparagraph a) (iii) to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer
programmes in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph c) (ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of
television programmes in the regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
Subparagraph d) to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution
of audio and audiovisual works in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph e)(i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or
maintenance of at least one newspaper in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph g) to support the training of journalists and other staff for media
using regional or minority languages.
Radio programmes in the Croat language: Among the programmes of the
Romanian Radio Broadcasting Society exist Croat languages programmes on Radio
Reşita and in Bucharest. Radio Reşiţa was set up in 1996, answered in 2000 to the
requests of the minority representatives of the region, broadcasting thus in several
national minority languages (among them the Croat language, 30 minutes per week).
Taking into consideration the provisions of the Charter applicable to the domain and
coordinated within the Romanian Broadcasting Society by the Minorities Editor
Office in Bucharest, a project was elaborated targeting the extension of the
broadcasting time of the Editor office with 2 hours/day, an additional radio
programme in the Croat language with a duration of 45 minutes being included in the
grid (containing news bulletins, reportages about events, interviews, etc).
TV programmes in the Croat language: The Romanian TV Broadcasting Society
ensures the transmission of the programmes in the national minority languages on
four of the national TV channels: TVR1, TVR2, TVR Cultural, and TVR3. The
Bureau for Other Minorities produces seven weekly programmes, amounting to 4
hours and 30 minutes on the channels TVR 1, TVR 2 and TVR Cultural. The
programmes transmitted on these channels do not include programmes in the Croat
language, but there are programmes dedicated to the interethnic and intercultural topic
that promote cultural values of the various national minorities of Romania that catch
and express the multifaceted social field in Romania. Examples of such programmes,
transmitted each week on one of the three above-mentioned TV channels are the
following: Luggage for Europe / Living together (TVR 1, duration 50 minutes, on
Wednesday, starting with 16.00), Together in Europe (TVR 2, duration 52 minutes,
on Friday, starting with 15.00), Identities (TVR Cultural, on Tuesday and Wednesday,
starting with 19.00 and starting with 16.00).

119

It must be mentioned that before the setting up TVR3 channel (October 2008), the
programmes about the communities of the national minorities created by the Bureau
for for Other Minorities were in Romanian language only, but the territorial studio of
Timişoara produced and broadcast on the regional frequency weekly programmes in
the Croat language. All together with creating the TVR 3 channel, the abovedescribed programmes entered the programme grid of this channel, the programmes
that were only regionally transmitted before, being at present accessible to the public
all over the territory of Romania. Moreover, in the TVR 3 grid programmes in more
languages of the national minorities of Romania were integrated in October 2008,
including in the Croat language (produced at TVR Timişoara). The number of
programmes about the national minorities was supplemented by creating new ones
(nine of them) broadcast on a weekly basis, increasing thus the allocated time of
broadcast.148
According to the information sent, the Romanian TV Broadcasting Society has
planned to apply the following types of actions:
- Organizing during 2009 continuing education courses for the collaborators
who create new programmes in national minority languages at TVR 3;
- Initiating (within the limits of the allocated budget) a project of producing 19
documentaries about outstanding personalities from the ranks of national
minorities as well as a series of reports about monuments, buildings and
museums representative for the national minorities of Romania;
- Reserving a transmission time on TVR 3 channel for broadcasting, on a
weekly basis, an art film from the states of origin of the national minorities,
with subtitling in Romanian language. In this direction, TVR initiated actions
in order to sign or renew cooperation agreements between the public television
of Romania and televisions of different states, among them Croatia. These
agreements have as purpose exchanges of movies, reports etc., their broadcast
being made for the purpose of promoting national minority languages.
There is a Croat-Romanian bilingual journal (accompanied by a supplement) whose
publishing is ensured with state budget funds: Hrvatska Grancica and Supliment
Hrvatska Grancica. The publication is edited by the Union of Croatians of Romania,
with the financial support of the Department for Interethnic Relations.149
- Paragraph 2. The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct
reception of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a
language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language,
and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from
neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure
that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and free
circulation of information in the written press in a language used in identical or
similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of the abovementioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be
subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed
by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national
148

According to the document sent to the Departament for Interethnic Relations by the Romanian
Television Society.
149
According to the document sent to the Departament for Interethnic Relations by the Union of
Croatians of Romania .

120

security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or
crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation
or rights of others, for preventing disclosure of information received in
confidence, or for maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
According to the provisions of Article 75(1), (2) in Law nr.504/2002 on Audiovisual,
the following provisions shall be applied: “(1) Retransmission of any service of
programmes, transmitted legally by broadcasters being under the jurisdiction of
Romania or under the jurisdiction of a state with whom Romania concluded an
international agreement of free retransmission in the field of the audiovisual, shall be
free, under the conditions of law. (2) Retransmission on the territory of Romania of
the services of programmes, broadcasted by the broadcasters being under the
jurisdiction of the Member States of the European Union, shall be free and does not
need any previous authorization.”150 In accordance with the provisions of Law on the
Audiovisual, provided in Article 82(1), the distributors of services shall have the
obligation to include in their offer the programmes of the Romanian Television
Broadcast Society, that lead to the extension of the possibility of reception of the
public stations programmes dedicated to national minorities. Moreover, according to
the provisions in Article. 82, paragraph 4, for the localities where the national
minorities represent a weigh exceeding 20%of the total population, it shall be had in
view to enhance their access to programmes, entering also the obligation of the
transmission of programmes with free retransmission, in the language of the
respective minority.151
Law no. 504/2002 on the Audiovisual, with further changes and completions
stipulates the following in Article 82: “(1) Any distributor who retransmits services of
programmes by telecommunication networks shall have the obligation to include in its
offer services of programmes of the Romanian television Society dedicated to the
public of Romania, as well as other services of programmes, free for retransmission
and without technical or financial conditioning of the private broadcasters, being
under the jurisdiction of Romania, within the 25% limit of the total number of
services of programmes distributed by the respective network. (4) In the localities
where the national minority represents a 20% exceeding weigh of the total population,
the distributors shall also assure the transmission of the services of the programmes
free for retransmission, in the language of the respective minority.”152 In the CaraşSeverin area there are two stations of television of Croatia that are received, namely
HRT1 and HRT2.

From Article 12 - Cultural activities and facilities–were selected:
- Paragraph 1. With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially
libraries, video libraries, cultural centres, museums, archives, academies,
150

According to the document sent to the Departament for Interethnic Relations by the National
Audiovisual Council (CNA).
151
According to the document sent to the Departament for Interethnic Relations by the National
Audiovisual Council (CNA).
152

According to the document sent to the Departament for Interethnic Relations by the National
Audiovisual Council (CNA).

121

theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production, vernacular
forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries, including inter
alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are
competent, have power or play a role in this field:
Subparagraph a) to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to
regional or minority languages and foster the different means of access to works
produced in these languages;
Subparagraph b) to foster the different means of access in other languages to
works produced in regional or minority languages by aiding and developing
translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;
Subparagraph c) to foster access in regional or minority languages to works
produced in other languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing,
post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;
Subparagraph d) to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or
supporting cultural activities of various kinds make appropriate allowance for
incorporating the knowledge and use of regional or minority languages and
cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for which they provide
backing;
Subparagraph e) to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible
for organising or supporting cultural activities have at their disposal staff who
have a full command of the regional or minority language concerned, as well as
of the language(s) of the rest of the population;
Subparagraph f) to encourage direct participation by representatives of the
users of a given regional or minority language in providing facilities and
planning cultural activities;
Subparagraph g) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or
bodies responsible for collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing
works produced in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph h) if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance
translation and terminological research services, particularly with a view to
maintaining and developing appropriate administrative, commercial, economic,
social, technical or legal terminology in each regional or minority language.
Each year, the Union of Croatians of Romania produces cultural-linguistic
programmes benefiting from substantial financial support from the Romanian state, by
means of the Department for Interethnic Relations, and attends programmes produced
by other institutions or organizations. Examples from the last 4 years are listed below:
2005: Participation to the performance “Together in Europe”, Cultural event -“Young
artists” pipe-organ concert, Vinkovci International Folklore festival, Seminar of Croat
language and literature Kvarnera region, Festival of ethnic communities of the Banat,
“PROETNICA” Festival, “Mother Tongue Statute and the problem of ensuring school
manuals in the Croat language” Seminar, Participation of Clocotici artistic ensemble
to the Festival of Veliko, Participation of Karasevska Zora group to the “Hercules”
Festival, Participation to the Caraş Valley Festival, Participation to the “National
Minorities day” Festival, “Karasevska Zora” group tour in all Croatian localities of
Caraş Severin and Timiş counties, Supporting the participation of Căluşarii – Soceni
group to the international festival of Croatia, Cultural exchange Laudate Dominum –
Recaş chorus, “Sinaia Forever” Festival, etc.

122

2006: Organizing a round table with the topic “bilingual education and the role of the
teaching staff in the schools with bilingual teaching”, Participation of the artistic
“Karasevska Zora” and “Mladost” Clocotici art groups at the Festival in Oraviţa,
Participation of the Croat language and literature teachers to the Seminar of Zadar
(Croatia), Administrative experience exchange between the county and communal
level in the environment of the Croatian community etc.
2007: Participation to the “Feast of Caraş Valley” Folklore festival”, Participation of
the Croat language and literature teachers to the annual Seminar of Opatja (Croatia)
etc.
2008: “ProEtnica Festival” (in 2008 being at the eighth edition) – organised by the
Interethnic Education Centre for Young People – reunites on annual basis hundreds of
representatives of the 20 national minorities of Romania within the medieval
environment of the Sighişoara fortified city. The events include exhibits,
handicraftsmen stands, exhibition stands of the communities organizations, movies
watching, artistic programmes, programmes for children, interethnic balls, scientific
programmes (debates, conference, round tables, session for information, book
launching). Individuals belonging to the Croatian minority of Romania attended, each
year, along with the other national minorities of Romania, this festival.
The Croatian linguistic thesaurus was preserved by researches of both the Croatian
Romanian and Serbian linguist in dialectology studies. The Union of Croatians of
Romania organises each year a seminar with international character having as
objective the promotion and the support of the researches in the linguistic field. It is
important to specify that the folklore thesaurus is preseved on electronic support (CD
with songs and dances). As concerns projects to be carried on, during 2008 the project
of arranging the central and ethnic documentation museum of the Croatians of
Romania was initiated, following to start the construction. In the centre designed it
follows to make the inventory of the material culture created by the Croatians in the
Romanian region for its preservation.153
The Ministry of Culture and National Heritage plays also an important role in
promoting the cultural activities and facilities. The Decision of the Government no.
78/2005 on organising and functioning of the Ministry of Culture and National
Heritage, republished, provides the fact the activity of the Ministry of Culture and
National Heritage “assures the observance and promotion of the fundamental rights
and liberties, sanctioned by the Constitution of Romania and by the international
treaties and conventions Romania is part”, the following aspects being included:
liberty of expression and creation; equal chances and free access to culture;
participation at the cultural life, including in wording cultural policies; liberty of
conscience and of religious believes (art. 2).154 In the area of the general objectives
pursued by the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage, of Religious Affairs and
National Patrimony the promotion of the diversity and the preservation of the cultural
identity, the promotion of multiculturalism and the protection of the minorities
153

According to the material sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Union of Croats in
Romania.
154
According to the documentation sent to the Grade for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of
Culture.

123

culture, supporting the circulations of productions and creations, promotion of
intercultural dialogue and of the cultural creation, etc, are found. (Article 4).155
By elaborating the Strategy for decentralization in the culture field (October 2006),
the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage intended to trace directing lines of
cultural policies and strategies application at the level local authorities, favouring to
put at their disposal individuals knowing regional or minority languages. Thus it was
tried to meet the social-linguistic needs expressed by the local communities
members.156
The objective of the legislation regulating the cinematography domain was the one to
promote regional or minority languages (Emergency Ordinance of the Government
no. 7/2008, of modifying and completing the Order of the Government no. 396/2005).
Thus the possibility is given to produce a movie in any language spoken in the
communities of Romania, the access to the Cinematography Fund being allowed to
any creator.157
By the chapters referring to culture within the intergovernmental agreements of
Romania with other countries, it is possible to promote the good relations of
cooperation between the national minorities of Romania and the states where that
nationality is majority, as well as between the national minorities of Romania and the
similar communities of the diaspora. Thus, the initiatives targeting to express in or the
free access to the literary creations in the regional or minority languages is facilitated
and encouraged. For instance, the bookstands the Ministry of Culture and National
Heritage attends the international book fairs include also volumes referring to the
national minorities of Romania.
- Paragraph 2 In respect of territories other than those in which the regional
or minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the
number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow,
encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in
accordance with the preceding paragraph.
- Paragraph 3 The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in
pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for regional or minority languages and the
cultures they reflect.
We are not in the possession of relevant data on the use of Croatian language in this
field.
From Article 13 – Economic and social life
- Paragraph 1. With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties
undertake, within the whole country:
Subparagraph a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting
or limiting without justifiable reasons the use of regional or minority languages
in documents relating to economic or social life, particularly contracts of

155

According to the documentation sent to the Grade for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of
Culture.
156
Idem.
157
Idem.

124

employment, and in technical documents such as instructions for the use of
products or installations;
Subparagraph b) to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of companies
and private documents of any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional
or minority languages, at least between users of the same language;”
–were selected
We are not in the possession of relevant data on the use of Croatian language in this
field.
From Article 14 - Transfrontier exchanges – were selected:
The Parties undertake:
- Paragraph a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which
bind them with the States in which the same language is used in identical or
similar form, or if necessary to seek to conclude such agreements, in such a way
as to foster contacts between the users of the same language in the States
concerned in the fields of culture, education, information, vocational training
and permanent education;
- Paragraph b) for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/
or promote co-operation across borders, in particular between regional or local
authorities in whose territory the same language is used in identical or similar
form.”
During September 2007, a delegation from Romania, organised by the Department for
Interethnic relations, carried out an official visit in Croatia. The delegation was
formed by the representatives of the Ministry of Education, the National Agency for
Roma, of the national minorities Parliamentary Group of the Chamber of Deputies, of
the working commissions of the Council of National Minorities and of TVR. The
purpose of the visit was attending the second stage of the programmes RomanianCroatian Dialogue on the national minorities topic that started by the visit of a
Croatian governmental delegation in Romania in May 2007. The objective of the
programme represented the continuation of the dialogue between the authorities and
the representatives of the national minorities of the two states in a view of promoting
the minority languages in the communities, education and media. The meetings were
the occasion of an experience change on the topics of good practice in the field of
national minority protection and of the promotion of intercultural dialogue. The visit
has a double purpose. On the one hand, official dialogues of the Romanian delegation
with the Croatian authorities (the management of the Office for National Minorities
within the Government of Croatia, the Chairman of the Council of National
Minorities; the Chairman of the Commission for human rights and national minorities
within the Parliament of Croatia, with the Directorate for Minorities from the Ministry
of Science, Education and Sport), including with Parliament member belonging to
minority ethnic group. On the other hand, numerous contacts were established with
various national visited cultural buildings of the minority communities in Pola
(Italians, Rroma), Peroj (Montenegrins), Rijeka/ Fiume (Italians, Serbians), Daruvar
(Czechs), Jelisavaţ (Slovakians), Osiek (Hungarians, Germans), Zagreb (Jewish,
Serbians, Muslim community). The similarities and differences between the
protection systems of the minorities of the two countries was also subject of
discussions, between DRI and the corresponding institution of Croatia encouraging
direct contacts between the communities of the two countries.

125

The Union of Croatians of Romania organises exchange of visits with art and sport
groups, by participating to actions dedicated to the minorities problems, promoting
individuals contacts between the Croatian minority of Romania and an organization of
the Croatians of Austria; 2 Croatian organizations of Hungary; a Croatian
organization in Serbia; 4 organizations and associations of Croatia.158
The bilateral relations between Romania and Croatia intensified in the last few years.
The two countries signed the Cooperation Agreement in the culture, education and
Technical-scientific field (1994), as well as the Interministerial cultural cooperation
protocol (1999).159 It is important to specify that within the University of Zagreb there
is a department of Romanian language and literature, and starting with 2005-2006
academic year, the Romanian language became a study subject at the faculty of
Philosophy of the University of Zagreb.160

d) The German Language
More than 850 years ago, the first Germans settled down on the territory of Romania.
The Germans in Romania are not a compact and unitary group, because during time,
they came from several regions of Europe, some of their own will, called by the rulers
of the country and attracted by a better living standards that of their homeland, others
were brought and settled by force in different periods and under various historical
conditions and in different territories of the country, without having very tight
contacts to each other and speaking different dialects of the German language. From
this reason, today we cannot speak of a single homogeneous German community but
of several German communities in Romania. As they occurred, over the history, in
our country, the Transylvanian Saxons, the Satu Mare Swabians in the North West of
Romania, Banat Swabians in the Banat Plain, the Montane Banat Germans in the area
of the present Caraş-Severin county, Transylvanian Landlers in a few localities in the
Sibiu area, Zipser Germans in the North of Transylvania, Bukovina Germans in the
North of Moldova and Dobrujan Germans in Dobrogea. Beside these large groups,
there were small communities, which settled during the time in the big cities of
Romania: Bucharest (the German minority in Bucharest was quite numerous, among
them being the Storck and the Saligny families) Iaşi (Alexandru Flechtenmacher, who
composed, among others, the music for the “Hora Unirii” and was at the head of the
Music and Declamation Conservatory in Bucharest after 1864), Craiova and others.
Moreover, for a limited period of time, between the two World Wars, the Bessarabian
Germans were added to these groups. (from the collective volume History of National
Minorities in Romania, EDP, 2008).
At present a total of 59 764 Germans live in Romania, of whom 42 014 declared their
mother tongue is the German language, according to the data of the last census. It is
interested to observe than over 11 000 of the peoples belonging to the German ethnic
group declared Romanian language as their mother tongue, and over 6 000 –
Hungarian language (especially in the case of the Satu-Mare Swabian population,
158

According to the documentation sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Union of
Croatians of Romania.
159
http://zagreb.mae.ro/index.php?lang=ro&id=25362, accesssed on 2 April 2009.
160
http://zagreb.mae.ro/index.php?lang=ro&id=25362, accesssed on 2 April 2009.

126

where the Magyarization process was very strong). The speeches still preserved by the
German communities of the different regions are extremely interesting for the
linguists, but-under the pressure of literary language - they are lesser and lesser
spoken.
The Democratic Forum of Germans in Romania with the national seat in Sibiu is the
organization that represents the German minority in public life, having a deputy in the
Parliament of Romania. It is worth noting the President of the organization was
elected three times consecutively, with a percentage of over 80%, as mayor of Sibiu
Municipality, fact that shows a massive support from the entire local community
From Article 8 – Education – Romania selected the following points:
- Paragraph 1. With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the
territory in which such languages are used, according to the situation of each of
these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s)
of the State:
Subparagraph a)(i) “to make available pre-school education in the relevant
regional or minority languages”;
Subparagraph b)(i) “to make available primary education in the relevant
regional or minority languages”,
Subparagraph c)(i) “to make available secondary education in the relevant
regional or minority languages;”
Subparagraph d)(i) “to make available technical and vocational education in
the relevant regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph e)(i) “to make available university and other higher education
in regional or minority languages;”
Subparagraph f)(iii)” if the public authorities have no direct competence in the
field of adult education, to favour and/or encourage the offering of such
languages as subjects of adult and continuing education;
Subparagraph g) to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history
and the culture, which is reflected by the regional or minority language;
Subparagraph h) to provide the basic and further training of the teachers
required to implement those of paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;
Subparagraph i) to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for
monitoring the measures taken and progress achieved in establishing or
developing the teaching of regional or minority languages and for drawing up
periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.
- Paragraph 2. “With regard to education and in respect of territories other
than those in which the regional or minority languages are traditionally used,
the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language
justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the regional or
minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.”
Education with tuition in German has a tradition of centuries in Romania and is
framed in a traditional system of units with tuition in the mother tongue. It includes
children and young peoples from the ranks of the German minority, being open also to
the Romanian children or to those who belong to this minority, under the conditions
their parents or their legal guardians make an option for this form of teaching.

127

The undergraduate education with teaching in German language is represented in:
Alba, Arad, Bihor, Bistriţa-Năsăud, Braşov, Caraş-Severin, Cluj, Hunedoara,
Maramureş, Mureş, Satu-Mare, Sibiu, Timiş counties and in Bucharest Municipality.
In Mehedinţi and Suceava counties there is a pre-school education and a department at
the level of the primary education. In Sălaj county, where until two years ago, the
education was organized at pre-school and primary school level, there is also
gymnasium education, at present. In other counties there are kindergartens with
teaching in German language, but in the absence of the teaching staff, it is not
possible to access the other levels.
In well ground cases, the Ministry of Education approves the functioning of classes
under the approved number of pupils according to Law 84/1995 (subsequently
modified).
Besides the schools with remarkable traditions such as the „Samuel von Brukenthal”
National College www.brukenthal.ro and „Andrei Şaguna” Pedagogical College in
Sibiu, „Johannes Honterus” General Education High School in Braşov, „Joseph
Haltrich” General Education High School in Sighişoara, known as „The School
Uphill”, „Stefan Ludwig Roth” General Education High School in Mediaş, „Goethe
German College” in Bucharest, known as the German School in Bucharest, „J.
Ettinger” General Education High School in Satu Mare, „Adam Müller Guttenbrunn”
General Education High School in Arad, „Liviu Rebreanu”National College in
Bistriţa, „Diaconovici Tietz” General Education High School in Reşiţa, „George
Coşbuc” National College in Cluj, activates in the last years high school grades, as at
the „Alexandru Vlahuţă” General Education High School in Bucharest, „Onisifor
Ghibu” in Sibiu, „Papiu Ilarian” National College in Tg. Mureş, “The Banat College”
in Timişoara ş.a.
In the education units and in the grades with German teaching language teaching staff
from the ranks of the German minority teach, other teaching staff who have good
knowledge of German language. Teaching staff from the Federal Republic of
Germany and Austria, based on the documents of bilateral cooperation.
The initial education and training of the educators and of the primary schools
teachers for the pre-school and primary school education, with teaching in German
language, is carried out in the pedagogical profile grades from the „Andrei Şaguna”
Pedagogical College in Sibiu. In the future, the training will be carried out at „Andrei
Şaguna” Pedagogical University College in Sibiu, within „Babeş-Bolyai” University.
In Sibiu there is a Department for the Training of teachers, an extension of the
„Babeş-Bolyai” University.
The initial education and training of the teachers of German language is carried out in
the Universities of Bucharest, Timişoara, Cluj-Napoca, Iaşi, and Sibiu. In the few last
years the offer extended. Thus the Universities of Baia Mare, Braşov, Constanţa,
Craiova, Oradea and Suceava organized German philology studies, specialty A or B.
The academic centres that offer studies with various specialties in German language
or with double specialty (German language and a non philological specialty) are the
potential providers of human resources for teaching other disciplines in German
language. For instance: Babeş-Bolyai University in Cluj, The technical University of
Cluj, “Politehnica” University of Timişoara and Bucharest, Bucharest Academy of

128

Economic Studies. „Babeş-Bolyai” University has been since 1995, through the
University Charter, a multicultural university with three study lines: the one in the
Romanian language, the one in Hungarian (7000 students) and the one in German
(over 1400 students). To this one can add the Center for Jewish Studies. There is
currently German language tuition in a number of 14 faculties, each faculty having a
coordinator for the German study line, while the University itself has a vice-rector for
this study line. „Babeş-Bolyai” University has the most extensive study offer in the
German language outside the German language area (Germany, Austria and
Switzerland). This is supported by professors from Germany and Austria and by
common study programmes with universities from these countries. We only cite here
the programmes that grant a double diploma, as part of agreements made with the
Regensburg, Magdenburg and Rostock Universities, the partnerships with the Vienna,
Graz, Innsbruck Universities, as well as with many others (MA level programmes,
with, for ex. the University of Graz – Austria and Ljubljana – Slovenia), the
collaboration with the Universities of Koln, Munich, Oldeburg etc. This offer is
beginning to be tempting for the students from Germany and Austria, and even more,
the collaboration with the University of Regensburg – as part of the “Secondos”
programme – is attempting to attract students that have a background in Romania,
regardless of their ethnic background.
The continuing education courses of the teaching staff for the undergraduate
education with teaching in German language is carried on in the academic centres and
within Continuing Education Centre in German language of Mediaş (further referred
to as C.F.C.L.G), supported by „Babeş-Bolyai” University, with a branch in
Timişoara. C.F.C.L.G. carries on activities of continuing education for the teaching
staff, which teach German language or various disciplines in German language in
Mediaş, Timişoara and other localities in the country. The programmes of continuing
education are made by the trainers of the centre, in cooperation with the specialty
consultants, with German teaching staff, with specialists educated at Goethe Institute
of Bucharest, as well as with specialists from the continuing education centres of the
Federal Republic of Germany.
The Ministry of Education, Research, Youth and Sportsapprove the framework
curriculum and the manuals for the pre-academic education, by its qualified
structures. In the common trunk of the National Curriculum the discipline German
Language and Literature, is included in the curriculum chapter “Language and
Communication”. The Curricula for the discipline German language and literature
were revised. Due to the prolongation of the mandatory education to ten grades, new
curricula were elaborated. Original school manuals were also created for the
discipline Mother Tongue Language and Literature, for grades 1-8. For 9th and 10th
grades the manuals were not carried out according to the schedule, although the
Ministry of Education made several attempts. At present the manuscripts were
finalised, their evaluation and publishing is following. In 2003 the manual for the
History and Traditions of the German minority, discipline taught in grades 6 and 7
was published.
For the other disciplines that are taught in the mother tongue, most of the manuals
needed for the mandatory education were translated from Romanian in German
language and were published. As concerns the republishing there are some
outstanding, that will be settled by C.N.C.I.P.
129

Starting with 2005, by Order of the Minister nr. 3950/2005 the elaboration of the
handbook in the national minorities languages as well as the use of some handbooks
from the German language space, to the extent at which the curricula approved by the
Ministry of Education, Research, Youth and Sports. The curricula and the manuals for
the Music discipline provide in addition a specific repertoire.
In the last few years, a series of auxiliary staffs were elaborated. A work group,
coordinated initially by a specialty consultant of the Federal republic of Germany
achieved “the handbook for educators”, approved by the ministry and used in the
kindergartens with teaching in German language. Elaboration of the auxiliary staffs
was continued. Thus the “Activity with parents” was published along with a series of
other staffs published by the Centre of Continuing Education in German language Mediaş. A collection of exercises for the primary education was published and at
present a work group coordinated by a specialty consultant of Bucharest finalized the
elaboration of a collection of exercises for grades 5-8. For the German language and
literature “there are two collections of texts, for grades 9 and 10 and for 11 and 12
grades, respectively, published by E.D.P. (Didactical and Pedagogical Publishing
House) after 1995, but unfortunately not republished. Other three collections were
elaborated under the coordination of the specialty consultant of Sibiu. “Old German
Literature”, “German Lyrics” and “German Literature in brief’, respectively.
The national phase of the German mother tongue - language and literature, organized
on annual basis by the Ministry of Education, promotes especially the creativity of the
pupils and students of the German schools/grades with teaching in German language.
The Ministry of Education rewarded the pupils and students with remarkable results at
the national level. In addition, the pupils and students have the possibility to
participate at literary contests in the countries with German language speakers, among
others at the contest launched on annual basis by the Embassy of the Federal Republic
of Germany in Bucharest.
Based on the Agreement between the Government of Romania and the Government of
the Federal republic of Germany, concerning the cooperation in the school field, the
pupils of the “special grades” of Bucharest and Timeshare and the pupils who attend
units/grades recognized by the German party as centres for the taking the examination
finalised finalist with German Diploma II of the Permanent Conference of the
Ministries of the Federal Republic of Germany as well as those attending units
/department of high school education, who provide candidates for the German
language examination II, C1 according to the European reference Framework benefit
of the advantages given by the diplomas recognized on European plan. The curricula,
the syllabus for the “special grades”, finalised with the German-Romanian high
school leaving examination, meet the curricula requirements of both parties. The
school programmes are in a process of continuing revising. During the last two years
the Ministry of Education and Research and Innovation, as well as the qualified
forums of the Federal Republic of Germany negotiate entering of a new model that
gives to the Romanian party a higher responsibility than until present.
Under the conditions of the Romanian and German education dynamic the need of
continuing and intensifying the dialogue, in a view of harmonizing the requirements
of both parties is foreshadowed.

130

In Bucharest that high school leaving examination is taken since 1994, and in
Timişoara the first examination was taken in 2004.
As of 1995 Romania obtains constantly very good results at the examination finalised
with the German Diploma II of the Permanent Conference of the Ministers of the
Federal Republic of Germany. Annually the major part of the candidates, becoming
with prevalence from the pre-academic education with German language teaching
pass this exigent examination, consisting of several tests, obtain the diploma that
certifies the solid knowledge of German language. At the level of the entire country in
2008, 1087 students attended this examination. For the first time partial certificate
were also awarded, for attaining the competence in certain fields.
On annual basis, the Department for Pedagogical Exchanges of the Federal Republic
of Germany offers a number of scholarships for the students with special results at the
Olympics of German and German mother tongue and Living German language or at
the contests initiated by the Embassy. The Cultural Service of the Embassy of the
Federal republic of Germany offer at its turn books as prize to the winners of the
national Olympics of German Language – mother tongue and living language. The
Department for Pedagogical Exchanges offers annually a few one-year scholarships
for teaching staff of the education with teaching in German language and short
duration stages of continuing education courses. The Department for Academic
Exchanges of the Federal Republic of Germany offers, on annual basis, besides the
scholarships dedicated to the young researchers from different domains, a limited
number of scholarships for young peoples from the ranks of the German community,
as well as a few scholarships for study for the valuable graduates of the “special
grades” in Bucharest and Timişoara and for the graduates with very good school
results and special intellectual competence.
Having in view that the school represents for the Democratic Forum of Germans in
Romania (F.D.G.R) a priority, its commission for education supports the efforts of
the Ministry of Education of consolidating the education with teaching in German
language. With the support of F.D.G.R and of the Department for Interethnic
Relations within the Government of Romania, the major part of the titles of manuals
for the post-mandatory education was translated in Romanian and was published.
For the education with teaching in German language the Centre for Continuing
Education in German Language of Mediaş (CFCLG) takes over all the attributions of
a Teaching Staff Resource Centre, with the difference it achieves the activity of
continuing education and training of the teaching staff that teaches in German
language, at national level.
The Centre for Continuing Education in German
Language of Mediaş, institution subordinated to the Ministry of Education, set up by
the Order no. 3466/1998 of the Minister, with legal personality based on the decision
of the Government of Romania no. 485/17.06.1999, activates with the following
compartments:
• German language (as living language and mother tongue),
• Pre-school education in German language (mother tongue),
• Primary school education in German language (mother tongue),
• Specialty disciplines at gymnasium-high school level in German language
(mother tongue).

131

One or several teachers-teaching methods specialists coordinate the activity of these
compartments. At present 6 teaching methods teachers carry on their activity in the
central seat of Mediaş, in the branch of Timişoara and in the office in Sibiu.
The activities of the Centre (seminars at the week ends, stages, other activities) are
carried on with the support of some external collaborators also. The activities for the
teaching staff from the pre-school and primary education, as well as those for the
teaching staff teaching German language as living language, is carried on, usually, in
zone or in county centres. The activities for the gymnasium and high school masters
whose number for each discipline is lower than of the previous categories, takes
usually place in Mediaş. CFCLG obtained in the 11th October 2006 from CNFP the
decision concerning the equivalence of transferable professional credits for 21
courses. The CFCLG activities are published at the beginning of each academic year
in a programme notebook This is distributed to the school units in the country
(including to the School Inspectorates and Teaching Staff Resource Centres (CCD))
having departments with teaching in German language, or grades where German
language is taught as a living language.
The Centre for Continuing Education in the German Language contributes to the
achievement of the reform in Romanian pre-academic education, promoting modern,
creative teaching-learning methods. A priority objective of the Centre is represented
by the correct assimilation of the German language by the students and as
consequence preparing the teaching staff in this direction.
The Centre for Continuing Education in German Language cooperates with other
education and culture institutions (schools, school inspectorates, Teaching Staff
Resource Centres, universities, Goethe Institute, Continuing education institutions
form abroad). The centre enjoys a special support from the German specialty
consultants who carry on their activity in Romania, based on the cooperation bilateral
documents. These attend as Readers the seminars and grant CFCLG financial support
for the achievement of certain seminars. The activities of the programme are carried
out in cooperation with Goethe Institute of Bucharest and with the Fundaţia
„Donauschwäbische Kulturstiftung des Landes Baden-Württemberg“ Foundation Germany.
The Centre enjoys also the support of the Institute of Foreign Relations (ifa) of
Stuttgart, of the Ministry of education of Baden-Württemberg Federal land, of the
State Chancellor’s office of Bavaria, cooperates successfully with the Popular
University Sambachshof of Bad Königshofen / Bavaria. CFCLG is partner in the
Comenius CCLL network.
Since 1919, the date of the „Babeş-Bolyai” University establishment, there is a
German language Department within the Philology Faculty, where prominent
personalities of the German studies field – Gustav Kisch or Karl Kurt Klein – have
contributed with their work. After 1990, a separate department for the study of
German language and literature was established. Since 2004, a professor that
received funding from the Republic of Germany worked there and taught the course
entitled “German literature in Central and South-Eastern Europe”. This department
was taken incorporated in the university in 2009. The German Institute has been
operational since 1998 as part of the European Studies Faculty, which has become in

132

2010 the “Institute for research and education in the German language”. The “Library
of Austria” has been part of the University since 2003, which has a collection of
approx. 7000 volumes. Next to these there is also an Austrian lecturer who teaches
the German language courses and contributes to the organization of the cultural
activities of the Library of Austria. Currently, the German language department
offers two MA level programmes in German: “German Cultural Studies” and
“German literature in South-East Europe”. Within the „Babeş-Bolyai” University,
there are also MA programmes under the Faculty of History (South-east Europe
History) and the Faculty of Economic Sciences and Affairs Managemen (department
of International Economic Relations). The programmes on German are carried out by
two DAAD lecturers and by the OAD lecturers.
In 2005, The Chair of Germanic Languages and Literatures celebrated the 100
anniversaries of its setting up at the University of Bucharest, being – in 1905 – the
first institutionalised form of studying at academic level the German language and
literature in Romania. The rich traditions and the vast experience accumulated in this
century of existing were fructified in the departments of German language study, of
knowledge and deepening of the German literature and culture, the as high as
possible linguistic competence being emphasized and as consequence the emphasis
on the ample comprising of the cultural and literary phenomenon in Germany and
Austria. At the same time, attention was paid to the history of the language and of the
spoken literature, created respectively by the German minority of Romania. The
highly cultivate men employed in the teaching process at this chair- creators of
school, cultural intermediaries, Romanian Deterministic research founders – have
created during the time the main work tools in the field, publishing valuable studies,
manuals, translations, articles, dictionaries.
At present the study of the German language and literature, but also of the Dutch and
Swedish languages, is under a full modernizing process of teaching and assimilating
these languages and literatures, considering the new challenges of the economic,
social and cultural dynamics, amplifying the international cooperation ands
exchanges of experience within the Socrates, Erasmus or CEPUS programmes.
In the study years 3-4 a group of translators, interpreters and terminologists
department exists, connected to the experience of the big European profile schools.
Since 2004, the chair participates to the new department of translators-interpretersterminologists with duration of 3 years.
Master studies deepen the knowledge and direct the Germanic disciplines research in
the direction of inter-discipline and intercultural. In the same spirit are guided the
candidates for a doctor degree in the specialties Language, literature and teaching
methods of German language as foreign language, continuing thus the noble
traditions of the Romanian research school in this field and adjusting them to the
contemporary requirements.
The Society of Germanists in Romania (S.G.R.) was set up on 22 March 1990; S.G.R.
members are German language teachers at all the education system levels, as well as
the highly cultivated men of Romania and from abroad. Their web site is www.ggr.ro,
on the Internet since 2004.

133

The German Language Professors Associations from Romania reunites those who
teach the German language and in the German language. The annual conferences of
this Association constitute an occasion to disseminate the good practices examples
among the representatives of the Education and Youth Commission of the National
Minorities Council. The annual reunions of the professors in Transylvania and Banat,
supported by the German Democratic Forum offer a forum for debating the problems
that the promotion of the German language teaching faces.
From Article 9 – Judicial authorities - Romania selected the following points:
- Paragraph 1. The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in
which the number of residents using the regional or minority languages justifies
the measures specified below, according to the situation of each of these
languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the present
paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of
justice:
Subparagraph a) (ii) to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional
or minority language;
Subparagraph a) (iii) to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or
oral, shall not be considered inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a
regional or minority language;
Subparagraph b) (ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person
before a court, that he or she may use his or her regional or minority language
without thereby incurring additional expense;
Subparagraph b) (iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the
regional or minority languages if necessary by the use of interpreters and
translations;
Subparagraph c) (ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person
before a court, that he or she may use his or her regional or minority language
without thereby incurring additional expense;
Subparagraph c) (iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the
regional or minority languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and
translations;
Subparagraph d) to take steps to ensure that the application of subparagraphs i and iii of paragraphs b and c above and any necessary use of
interpreters and translations does not involve extra expense for the persons
concerned.
- Paragraph 2. The Parties undertake:
Subparagraph a) not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within
the State solely because they are drafted in a regional or minority language;
- Paragraph 3. The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or
minority languages the most important national statutory texts and those
relating particularly to users of these languages, unless they are otherwise
provided
–were selected
We are not in the possession of relevant data concerning the German language use in
Justice.

134

From Article 10 - Administrative authorities and public services:
- Paragraph 1. Within the administrative districts of the State in which the
number of residents who are users of regional or minority languages justifies the
measures specified below and according to the situation of each language, the
Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
Subparagraph a) (ii) to ensure that such of their officers as are in contact with
the public use the regional or minority languages in their relations with persons
applying to them in these languages; or
Subparagraph a) (iii) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages
may submit oral or written applications and receive a reply in these languages;
Subparagraph a) (iv) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may
submit oral or written applications in these languages;
Subparagraph a) (v) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages
may validly submit a document in these languages;
Subparagraph b) to make available widely used administrative texts and forms
for the population in the regional or minority languages or in bilingual versions;
Subparagraph c) to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in
a regional or minority language.
- Paragraph 2. In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose
territory the number of residents who are users of regional or minority
languages is such as to justify the measures specified below, the Parties
undertake to allow and/or encourage:
Subparagraph b) the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to
submit oral or written applications in these languages;
Subparagraph c) the publication by regional authorities of their official
documents also in the relevant regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph d) the publication by local authorities of their official
documents also in the relevant regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph e) the use by regional authorities of regional or minority
languages in debates in their assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of
the official language(s) of the State;
Subparagraph f) the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages
in debates in their assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official
language(s) of the State;
Subparagraph g) the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the
name in the official language(s), of traditional and correct forms of place-names
in regional or minority languages.
- Paragraph 3. With regard to public services provided by the administrative
authorities or other persons acting on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within
the territory in which regional or minority languages are used, in accordance
with the situation of each language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
Subparagraph a) to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in
the provision of the service; or
Subparagraph b) to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a
request and receive a reply in these languages; or
Subparagraph c) to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a
request in these languages.

135

At the level of the border police, the implementation of the Charter’s provisions
concerning the linguistic rights of the citizens belonging to the German ethnic group
is reported to a number of individuals who do not rise to 20%. There are areas where
although the citizens belonging to the German ethnic group do not reach the aforementioned percentage of the total existing population, the measure of recruitment of
professionals among the ranks of those knowing this language, was taken. Thus, at an
1% ratio of the population of Maramureş county speaking German language, the
Maramureş County Border Police Inspectorate employed in its structure a
number of 13 agents speaker of this language, who carry on their activity with
prevalence in the localities where this language is spoken. Moreover, in order to
assure the observance of the individual right to have access to the public information,
at the level of Bihor County Border Police Inspectorate 54 employees knowing
German language, carry on their activity, but the number of the requests worded in
the respective language was until present relatively reduced. Most of the employees
speaking German language carry on their activity in the cross – border points or in
the structures coming in direct contact with the population, for the purpose to solve
their requests.
At the level of the Alba Police Inspectorate, conditions were created so that the
minority languages speakers word their oral or written applications and for receiving
official answers in these languages, together with the answer communicated in the
official language. For the policemen employed in the police subunits professional
qualification programmes and programmes of knowing the minority languages spoken
on the Territory of Alba County were organized. Another issue considered were the
requests of the policemen who speak/understand a minority language to be sent to the
areas where that language is spoken.
At the level Cluj and Olt counties, the percentage of the individuals belonging to
German minority is under 1%, but in order to facilitate the dialogue with the citizens
belonging to the German ethnic group, at the level of the (I.P.J.) Cluj county Police
Inspectorate 20 officers and agents knowing this language were employed. Within
(I.P.J.) Olt county Police Inspectorate 1 policeman was employed, whose
knowledge of the German language may be of real use in order to assure the rights of
the citizen belonging to the German ethnic group to address in mother tongue the state
police institution.
The reoccupation for putting into practice the legal provisions referring to the right of
the citizens belonging to national minorities to use their mother tongue in the relations
with the public administration authorities is recognized also at the level of Timiş
county. Thus at the level of (I.P.J.) Timiş county Police Inspectorate a policeman of
German nationality is registered. In the picture described previously it is also put
down Sibiu county. At the level of (I.P.J.) Sibiu county Police Inspectorate
policemen that speak German, under the conditions in this county the citizens
belonging to the German ethnic group do not represent 20% of the population.
In the direction of improving the linguistic portfolio, for 2009, the management of
I.P.J. Sibiu decided to organize German language courses for beginners within the
activities of professional training of the staff employed compartments assuring the
relation with public.

136

- Paragraph 4. With a view to putting into effect those provisions of
paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the Parties undertake to take one or
more of the following measures:
Subparagraph b) recruitment and, where necessary, training of the officials
and other public service employees required;
Subparagraph c) compliance as far as possible with requests from public
service employees having a knowledge of a regional or minority language to be
appointed in the territory in which that language is used.
- Paragraph 5. The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family
names in the regional or minority languages, at the request of those concerned.
The surnames in German are usually used in all areas, including in the identity
documents and those of population registration. In most of cases they have been
preserved with the standard German method of writing.
From Article 11 - Media:
- Paragraph 1. The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority
languages within the territories in which those languages are spoken, according
to the situation of each language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly
or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this field, and
respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
a) to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:
Subparagraph a) (iii) to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer
programmes in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph b) (ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio
programmes in the regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
Subparagraph d) to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution
of audio and audiovisual works in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph e)(i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or
maintenance of at least one newspaper in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph f) (i) to cover the additional costs of those media which use
regional or minority languages, wherever the law provides for financial
assistance in general for the media;
Subparagraph g) to support the training of journalists and other staff for media
using regional or minority languages.
The German minority has an active presence on the Internet, having many web-sites of
the local communities and on-line editions of the more important publications.
Within the German minority, the daily “Allgemeine Deutsche Zeitung für Rumänien” is
published, which has weekly supplements of the German communities of Braşov
(“Karpetenrundschau”) and the Banat (“Banater Zeitung”), a weekly publication in Sibiu
(“Hermannstadter Zeitung”). The communities of Satu Mare (“Schwabenpost”) and
Resiţa (“Echo der Vortragsreihe”) publish on a monthly basis a newspaper and a
magazine, respectively. Moreover, a yearbook in German is also published (“Deutsches
Jahrbuch für Rumänien”). At the University in Cluj, the students belonging to the German
line of study in the Political Science and Communications Faculty – Department of
Journalism – edit their own journal in the German language.

137

The TV programmes in the national minority languages are produced and transmitted
at present by the Minority Editor Office of Bucharest of the public radio (in
Hungarian and German) and by Cluj, Constanţa, Iaşi, Reşiţa, Târgu-Mureş and
Timişoara regional TV stations. Radio Romania transmits in 14 languages,
predominantly in the regional studios. The Editor Office in Bucharest carries on
weekly basis 370 minutes in German language. A special success have the crossborder programmes that are transmitted by Radio Timişoara since 10 years now,
created twice per month, in German language (Funkforum), by the public radio
studios of Germany, Austria, Hungary and Romania (Radio Bucharest, Timişoara, TgMureş).
* Radio Timişoara creates programmes for minorities – 21.43% of the total
programmes. It transmits also programmes in the German language - 840 de minutes.
* Radio Târgu-Mureş: programmes for minorities – 44.61%, on AM and 39.70%, on
FM of the total programmes. Programmes in German language: 200 minutes on
medium frequency waves.
* Radio Reşiţa: programmes for minorities – 28.57% of the total programmes.
Programmes in German language – 30 minutes. At the University in Cluj, the students
belonging to the German line of study in the Political Science and Communications
Faculty – Department of Journalism carry out German language radio shows that are
broadcast by the University’s radio station.
“TVR carries on its activity under the control of the Parliament, in accordance with
the Law no. 41/1994, with the aim to create TV programmes in Romanian, in the
national minorities languages or in other languages, with informative, cultural,
educational and entertainment purposes. Article 4, paragraph (1) provides that the
Romanian Television Broadcasting Society, as public service, when accomplishing
the general objectives that is information, education, entertainment, is obliged to
promote, with competence and exigency, the values of the Romanian language, of the
authentic cultural, scientific, national and universal and of national minorities
creation, as well as the democratic, civic, moral and sportive values. Article 7
paragraph (3) mentions that at least 30% of the European creation transmitted shall be
Romanian creation, including national minorities specific creations.
In accordance with Law no.41/1994, the national minorities parliamentary group has
a representative in the Board of Administrators of the Romanian Television
Society.“161
The coverage area of the programmes created and transmitted by the Romanian
public Television covers the entire territory of the country and by TVR International
channel the access of the information transmitted also for the Romanian communities
abroad is assured.
In addition, the National Audiovisual Council specifies that in accordance with the
provisions of Law no. 504/2002 on audiovisual article 82 (1), all cable distributors
have the obligation to include in their offer the programmes of the Romanian
Television Society channels, that leads to the extension of the possibilities of
receiving programmes dedicated to national minorities.
161

Data taken over from the document sent to DRI by TVR.

138

According to the provisions in Article 82 paragraph (4), for the localities where
national minorities represents a higher than 20% weigh of the total population,
legislator had in view to enhance their access to programmes, introducing also
obligation to send the programmes free to be re-transmitted, in the language of
respective minority.”162

the
the
the
the

After the accession to EU on the 1 January 2007, the Audiovisual Media Services
Directive, Directive 2007/65/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council that
provides at point 4, Article 2* that “(1) Member States shall ensure freedom of
reception and shall not restrict retransmissions on their territory of audiovisual media
services from other Member States for reasons which fall within the fields
coordinated by this Directive”, is applicable on the territory of Romania.
The “Department of programmes in German” assures the creation of the programmes
dedicated to the German minority by the public television www.tvr.ro The 5 territorial
studios - TVR Cluj, TVR Iaşi, TVR Timişoara, TVR Craiova and TVR Târgu-Mureş
– create their own programmes that are also taken over by TVR 3. Some of them
create programmes in German language.
Setting up in October 2008 of TVR3 channel, with the slogan Better together!
allowed the extension of geographical coverage, the increase of the time allocated to
the programmes in the minority languages and creation of new programmes. This new
channel solved also a part of the requests related to the transmission time of the
programmes for the minorities, as well as the schedule of their retransmission. TVR 3
transmits the already established programmes in German, as well as local
programmes. Thus, a series of programmes, reports and news about multiculturalism,
intercultural and interethnic issues in the Banat region were carried out. Adverts
promoting the “National Minorities Day” and intercultural News Programmes were
produced.
TVR reserved a transmission time for TVR 3 channel where the transmission of art
films from the kin states of the national minorities (with subtitling in Romanian) is
done on a weekly basis. Actions started with a view to signing or renewing the cooperation agreements (exchange of programmes, art films, documentaries, reportages
etc.) with televisions in different states, including Germany.
The programmes in German transmitted by the five TVR channels, within 2005-2007,
are as follows:

Channel

Title

TVR 1
TVR 2

Akzente
Together
Europe
Programme
Friday
in
the
German

TVR Cultural

162

Day
of Time slot
Transmission
Thursday
15:30-17:00
in Tuesday
15:00-16:00
16:00-16:30

Quoted from the data sent to DRI by the National Audiovisual Council

139

Duration

Remarks

90min
60min

Bimonthly

60min

Selections of
programmes
of
TVR1

language
TVR
International

andTVR2

Programme
Monday
in
German
language

14:00-15:00

60min

Selections of
programmes
of TVR1 and
TVR2

The German department assured on weekly basis 150 minutes of its own production
on the channels TVR 1 and TVR 2 the programmes of TVR International and TVR
Cultural are reruns). To these the special programmes for Eastern and Christmas are
added. Moreover, a few documentaries of portfolio, such as the ’Price of liberty’ (a
movie about the “sales” Germans who left for Germany) are also produced and a
series of monthly programmes created on the occasion of the events carried on at
Sibiu – European cultural capital city in 2007. At the same time, TVR German
Department produced at Timişoara, in the Dome Plaza, a show under the credits « A
summer dream », which included Opera arias, popular dances, ballet, sketches, brass
band and classical music.
Programmes in German language

Emisiuni în limba germană

Time
of programme
ore emisie
140
121
120
100
80
60
indisponibil
40
defalcat
20
0
0
2005
TVR 1 şi TVR 2

110

105
88

2006

95

2007

TVR 1 şi TVR 2

The regional stations – TVR Iaşi, TVR Cluj, TVR Craiova and TVR Timişoara - allocated
time for the programmes dedicated to national minorities. On daily basis, at Timişoara and
Cluj, of Monday to Thursday including, are transmitted programmes in Hungarian,
German, Serb and Roma languages, with a 30 minutes duration.
- Paragraph 2. The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception
of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language
used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language, and not to
oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring
countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure that no
restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of
information in the written press in a language used in identical or similar form to
a regional or minority language. The exercise of the above-mentioned freedoms,
since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such
formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are
necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial
integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the

140

protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of
others, for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for
maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
On the entire territory of Romania, some TV cable operators and operators of other
TV systems rarely take over and transmit some German TV channels.
- Paragraph 3. The Parties undertake to ensure that the interests of the users
of regional or minority languages are represented or taken into account within
such bodies as may be established in accordance with the law with responsibility
for guaranteeing the freedom and pluralism of the media.
In the structure of the German language Editor Offices in Radio, Television, press
work numerous journalists belonging to the German ethnic group. In the Boards of
Administrators of the Radio, Television and in the National Audiovisual Council, the
Parliament designated also individuals from the ranks of the minorities, who promote
their interests.
From Article 12 - Cultural activities and facilities–the following points were
selected for German language:
- Paragraph 1. With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially
libraries, video libraries, cultural centres, museums, archives, academies,
theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production, vernacular
forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries, including inter
alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are
competent, have power or play a role in this field:
Subparagraph a) to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to
regional or minority languages and foster the different means of access to works
produced in these languages;
Subparagraph b) to foster the different means of access in other languages to
works produced in regional or minority languages by aiding and developing
translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;
Subparagraph c) to foster access in regional or minority languages to works
produced in other languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing,
post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;
Subparagraph d) to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or
supporting cultural activities of various kinds make appropriate allowance for
incorporating the knowledge and use of regional or minority languages and
cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for which they provide
backing;
Subparagraph e) to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible
for organising or supporting cultural activities have at their disposal staff who
have a full command of the regional or minority language concerned, as well as
of the language(s) of the rest of the population;
Subparagraph f) to encourage direct participation by representatives of the
users of a given regional or minority language in providing facilities and
planning cultural activities;

141

Subparagraph g) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or
bodies responsible for collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing
works produced in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph h) if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance
translation and terminological research services, particularly with a view to
maintaining and developing appropriate administrative, commercial, economic,
social, technical or legal terminology in each regional or minority language.
Among the 12 theatres in the national minority languages of Romania there are two
dedicated to German language speaking public, and namely: the German State
Theatre of Timişoara and the Radu Stanca Theatre in Sibiu, the German Department.
Moreover, in Sibiu activates Gong Punch and Judy show, German department. These
theatres have an active presence not only in the Timişoara and Sibiu areas, where
there is a numerous public that understands German, but also at theatre festivals
organized on annual basis in Romania. In the last years, with the support of the
Department of Interethnic Relations, from two in two years the Minority Theatre
Festival is carried on, where German theatrical companies are also participating. In
the years where is no festival, the professionals of all minority theatre met at the
Theatres Colloquium in Gheorgheni. The German State Theatre of Timişoara
organised several ample events with the financial support of the Department for
Interethnic Relations.
As the other organizations of the national Minority Council, the Democratic Forum of
Germans in Romania (FDGR) is a promoter of cultural projects, by national entity,
branches or youth organization. The financial and technical assistance granted by the
Romanian authorities, for sustaining its won activities has a considerable contribution
to promote traditional values, values of the language and culture, in preserving the
cultural patrimony of the German minority in Romania.
Numerous programmes and projects proposed by the branches of the Forum of
Germans received financial support of the Government, by means of the Department
for Interethnic Relations. Among these the “Interethnic Festival of religious
ecumenical music”, “Ethnic group-Habitat-Faith”, “Kirva – saint patron of Catholic
Church in Gărâna”, “Ecclesiastic geography of the Midle Age Banat”, the Festival of
the German Theatre of Timişoara etc. Organizing traditional concerts, demonstrations
and contests of customs and popular dances are find among the preoccupations of all
the national minorities, almost all these making recent investments in acquiring
popular garbs, objects and traditional musical instruments. There are ensembles and
folklore ensemble very appreciated in Bucharest (Friedrich Schiller Culture Centre),
Sibiu, Arad, Timişoara etc.
The Regional Forum Satu Mare is notable, for instance, by the richness of the cultural
activities: it had organized activities specific both to German ethnic group as well as
representative for it. Thus, besides the traditional meetings on the occasion of the
Christmas and Eastern, the meeting of the former deported persons in the USSR and
the events occasioned by National day of Germany, it organized the photography
exhibit t “Presence of the German minority in Dobrogea” at Constanţa, the Germans
day in Craiova – annual traditional event of the Germans of Dolj county, lectures
(“Customs and traditions of the Germans of Romania“, “the Transylvanian Saxons in
Iaşi”), musical nights supported by students of the Music High schools and students of

142

the Academy of Music with pieces of German classical and contemporary authors,
meeting with the members of the Forum of survivors of the World War II, who
narrated the events they witnessed (“The War was not finished in one day“).
A few of the important elements of the cultural inheritance of the national minorities
are the architecture, historical and Religious – the Brukenthal Museum, one of the
oldest Museum in Romania, the city of Sighişoara and the fortified churches in
Transylvania, among which 7 are declared UNESCO site are representatives for the
German communities. The city of Sibiu recovered its medieval aspect in a major part
due to the investments made on the occasion of Sibiu, European cultural capital city
programme (2007).
As concerns the publications, the Forum of Bucharest published in 2008 the book
„Adventzeit und Laternenfest”, a collection of songs, plays, poems and texts for the
feasts of Saint Nicholas and Christmas for the kindergartens with teaching in German
language. From the amounts allocated to cover the administrative expenses, in 2008 a
few furniture object were acquired and an electronic organ for the German Forum of
Constanţa, traditional German garbs for the artistic ensembles of the Bacău and
Tulcea Forums, that participate to county and inter-county festivals as well as two
speakers for the electronic organ acquire by the German Forum of Bacău a year ago.
Regarding the publications, reference must be made to the arduous editorial activity of
the teaching staff at the German study line in the Cluj University: the German
language department publishes the “Klausenburger Beitrage zur Germanistik”, the
German Institute (the Institute for education and research in the German language”) is
editing two publications – the history series: “Reihe Geschichte, Quellen und
Urkunden” – 5 volumes) and Studia Germanica Napocensia, 2 volumes – 2008 and
2010.
Some of the cultural programmes organized by the Banat German Forum, carried out
from budgetary funds are listed below:
- the financing of approximately 90% of activities such as the Cultural Days of
the Banat Germans, the German Culture Decade in the Banat mountainous
regions, the Days of German Literature in Resita, the Cultural Days of the
Germans in Timisoara, the Commemoration of the deportation of the Germans
in the former USSR, church-related commemorations, concerts etc;
- the financing of the monthly magazine Echo der Vortragsreihe – the magazine
of the Germans from the mountainous region in Banat;
- the financing of book publishing and CD editing, as well as other promotional
objects that celebrate important aspects from the culture, history and life of the
Germans in the Banat region. Most of the titles were edited by the regional
organizations from the Banat, Timisoara and Resita (over 40 titles);
- the financing of different activities of the youth organizations, among which
the Rosmareiner band in Timisoara, the German folk dance band from Aard
and the Enzian German folk dance band in Resita;
- partial financing of the adult educational activities in Timisoara and Resita;
- public reading, carried out by means of local public libraries located at every
organization, as well as the institutionalized ones (ex.: the Alexander Tietz
German section of the County Library Paul Iorgovici in Resita).

143

Some examples of cultural programmes carried out by the Democratic Forum of
Germans from Transylvania from budgetary and extra-budgetary funds:
- The meeting of the Saxons in Biertan (2009) and Bistrita (2010);
- Teacher’s Day (annually since 1991)
- Diletto musicale (Brasov)
- Festivities at the Sanpetru and Cisnadie citadelles;
- Easter fair – Bistrita;
- Maial (Sibiu);
- The Crown Celebration
Numerous books were also published:
- “Sommertage in Birthalm” by Gerda Ziegler;
- Bauaufnahmen der Stadt Schaβburg” by Kurt Leonhardt;
- “Im Dienst der Kirche und Gemeinschaft” by Albert Klein;
- “Frei” by Anne Junesch;
- “Aus Urkunden und Chroniken de Gernot Nussbacher”.

Cultural programmes created by the German Forum of the North Transylvania,
accompanied by budgetary funds, were:
- Financing in a very high proportion (over 90% in average) the cultural events
such as Days of Satu Mare Germans culture, Commemoration of Satu Mare
Swabians deportationi, Harvest Day, Fasching, Saint Patron of the Chuirchi,
Concerse of fanfares, Chrtistmas Bazaars, Swabians Meeting, Minorities
meeting and many others.
- Schwabenpost publication financed each month – the Northern Transylvania
Swabians publication of the North Transylvania Region.
- Books publishing and CDs writing that immortalize important aspects of the
culture, history and life of the Swabians in the North Region of Transylvania.
We mention below the effects of the activities of the German Forum of North
Transylvania referring to the German minority, as an example of good practice:
- Attracting German young peoples in artistic ensembles (fanfares, chorus,
dance teams, clubs for young peoples)
- Raising awareness among the Swabian population who in part due to the
historical conditions lost their conscious of their belonging to the history of the
Satu Mare Swanbians, customs and traditions
- Correct information of the German population about the preoccupations of the
Forum, of Gemeinsam Youth organization and of the Satu Mare Foundation.
- Information about the results of their activities and the opportunities they
offer (Schwabenpost, the German language radio station of the Satu Mare
County German Democratic Forum, which started on 6 December 2008)
- Strengthening the unity of the Satu Mare Swabians of the entire region (by the
Meeting of Satu Mare Swabians, Harvest feast, Saint Patron of the Church,
meeting of fanfares and chorus)
- More powerful involvement of the Swabians in the cultural, social, community
and political life of the localities where they live (by the information received,
by cultural programmes).
- Perspectives for the young peoples attending German schools to work and
cooperate with German and Austrian companies or to cooperate with those.

144

-

-

Cultural actions organised that discipline and educate the youth in the labour
spirit, cultural values and traditions. These actions are factors of preservation
of traditions, emphasizing the Swabian’s traditions as well as of affirmation of
cultural skills (prose, poetry, painting)
Harmonizing the cultural activities of the youth in the North-West region of
Transylvania with those of the German youth, especially by cooperating with
the young peoples of Germany.

- Paragraph 2 In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or
minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number
of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or
provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in accordance with the
preceding paragraph.
Due to the fact in Romania, the German language is studied on a large scale as a
living language and more and more used in the tourist services and in companies,
there are facilities related to this language in many regions of the country.
- Paragraph 3 The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in
pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for regional or minority languages and the
cultures they reflect.
The cultural Romanian –German cooperation has very good traditions and is carried
on in a pragmatic and continuous way, based on the bilateral treaty and of the
agreements between concluded between the two countries. A series of cultural
programmes the German minority of Romania benefits of is carrying on by means of
ifa in Stuttgart.
An example is the first edition of the Bavarian Film Festival called „Bavaria meets
Romania” carried out during 5-8 April 2008, at a Studio Cinema the Union Hall
Cinema in Bucharest. The festival was open by „Beste Zeit” comedy, in the presence
of Romanian and German dignitaries as well as of other officials in our country, of the
main actors and the producers of this film. The movies presented in Bucharest within
this festival were exclusively produced in Bavaria, the most extended Federal land of
Germany, were awarded at various international festivals („Das Leben der Anderen”,
Oscar prize for the best foreign movie, 2007).
Cultural activities are carried out at the Babes-Bolyai University within the German
Cultural Center, financed until 2010 by the Robert Bosch Foundation. The financing
was taken over by the University in 2010. Within the Library of Austria - which is
supported by the Ministery of External Affairs of Austria through the Austrian
Cultural Forum - scientific sessions, lecture series, musical evenings, the days of the
German and Austrian movies took place etc.
From Article 13 – Economic and social life
- Paragraph 1. With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties
undertake, within the whole country:
Subparagraph a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting
or limiting without justifiable reasons the use of regional or minority languages
in documents relating to economic or social life, particularly contracts of

145

employment, and in technical documents such as instructions for the use of
products or installations;
Subparagraph b) “to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of
companies and private documents of any clauses excluding or restricting the use
of regional or minority languages, at least between users of the same language;
Subparagraph c) to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional
or minority languages in connection with economic or social activities;
- Paragraph 2. With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties
undertake, in so far as the public authorities are competent, within the territory
in which the regional or minority languages are used, and as far as this is
reasonably possible:
Subparagraph c) to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals,
retirement homes and hostels offer the possibility of receiving and treating in
their own language persons using a regional or minority language who are in
need of care on grounds of ill-health, old age or for other reasons;
Subparagraph d) to ensure by appropriate means that safety instructions are
also drawn up in regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph e) to arrange for information provided by the competent public
authorities concerning the rights of consumers to be made available in regional
or minority languages.
–were selected
We are not in the possession of relevant data to certify the limitation of using German
language in the different contexts of the social-economic life. On the contrary, the
German language is more and more requested and used, especially in the economic
environment. An acute need is noticeable of specialists with German language
knowledge in numerous areas of the country, including in Bucharest, where the
German and Austrian investors are present on a large scale.
In the homes for elders, some of them are sustained with Germany’s support (such as
the one of Timişoara) the staff uses German language.
From Article 14 - Transfrontier exchanges
The Parties undertake:
- Paragraph a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which
bind them with the States in which the same language is used in identical or
similar form, or if necessary to seek to conclude such agreements, in such a way
as to foster contacts between the users of the same language in the States
concerned in the fields of culture, education, information, vocational training
and permanent education;
- Paragraph b) for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate
and/ or promote co-operation across borders, in particular between regional or
local authorities in whose territory the same language is used in identical or
similar form.
The relations of the German community of Romania with the authorities and
organizations in Germany, Austria, Switzerland, and Luxembourg are ones of the
best. The agreements and assistance programmes function with very good results,
each year being established by bilateral meetings an activity plan and the needed
support. As concerns transborder cooperation, the most successful programmes are

146

the international radio stations of Timişoara and Satu Mare. The German Democratic
Forum in Caras-Severin county has unfolded two transborder projects with the
Romanian minority and the local administration of the Alibunar township from the
Southern Banat, Voivodina – Republic of Serbia.
The Bucovina Regional Forum, through its branches in Suceava, Gura Humorului and
Campulung Moldovenesc organizes and participates in numerous cultural activities of
the German minority which is representative for that area. Some examples are listed
below:
- Christmas celebration with the “Kriepenspiel” song and the traditional songs
dedicated to the birth of Jesus;
- Traditional Easter celebrations;
- Christmas and Easter fairs;
- Church-related celebrations – the famous Kirchweifests;
- The participation of the community in the interethnic festival “Convietuiri”;
- Literary evenings organized for pupils and students;
- Exhibitions of the needle paiting artist “Erika Grazia”;
- “The meeting of Germans from Bucovina”, organized in Gura Humorului;
- Popular Germans dances, performed by the Pinocchio kindergarten pupils and
the pupils of the “Latcu Voda” Gymnasium in Siret;
- Faschinguln – the entrance in the Easter fasting.
The cultural programmes of the Bucovina Regional Forum were accomplished in the
highest proportion through budgetary funds; the objectives were to attract a high
number of young people that enjoy learning the German language. Like this, a high
number of students go to the schools and faculties in Suceava, the ones where German
is taught as mother tongue, intensively or bilingually, as well as in the colleges that
offer the “Sprachdiplom”. This enables young people to work for the German or
Austrian companies in the region or in the country that operate within the touristic
field.
Throughout its activity, the German Forum has informed the Germans from Bucovina,
as well as their co-nationals about the activity of the Forum and has helped small
enterprisers through a Foundation (Fundatia Bucovinenilor). The German youth in
Bucovina, through its cultural activities, has relations with the youth in Northern
Bucovina, Germany, but firstly with the members of other minorities in the region.

e). The Hungarian Language
The number of those who declare themselves Hungarian, based on the 2002 census, is
1 434 377 individuals, representing 6.6% of the total population, being in decline in
comparison with the figures of the previous census by 190.600 individuals.
Irrespectively, according to the last official census, the Hungarian minority is the most
numerous in Romania. At the processing and showing of the results, at certain ethnic
groups were included certain ethnical names, thus: Hungarian – include also the
Szeklers (583 individuals).163 The Csango were included in the group called "other
ethnic groups", (1370 individuals); many of them speak Hungarian language as their
163

www.recensamant.ro

147

mother tongue. 52.9% of the Hungarians live in the urban area, their number
decreasing compared to 1992 with 17.1%, while the decrease of the Hungarians in the
rural area was of only 4.9%.
The population belonging to the Hungarian ethnic group represents the majority in the
counties of Harghita (84.6%) and Covasna (73.8%). The population has decresed as
compared with 1992, when the Hungarian population in Covasna was of 75.2%, for
example. Significant proportions of the population belonging to the Hungarian ethnic
group (over 20%) are also in: Mures (39.3%), Sate Mare (35.2%), Bihor (25.9%) and
Sălaj (23.1%) counties.164 The individuals who declared Hungarian to be their mother
tongue have a 6.7% weight of the total population, being in decrease with 11.7% as
compared with 1992. This decrease is found out in the distribution per areas, being
more accentuated in the urban area (17.2%) than in the rural area (4.7%), determining
thus the reduction of the weight of individuals who declared Hungarian as their
mother tongue in the urban area (from 55.7% in 1992 to 52.2%). When correlating the
ethnic group with the mother tongue a difference appears between the number of
Hungarians and the number of individuals who declare Hungarian as their mother
tongue, thus for each 1000 ethnic Hungarians there are 1009 individuals with
Hungarian as their mother tongue.165

From Article 8 – Education –the following points were selected:
- Paragraph 1. With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the
territory in which such languages are used, according to the situation of each of
these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s)
of the State:
Subparagraph a)(i) “to make available pre-school education in the relevant
regional or minority languages”;
Subparagraph b)(i) “to make available primary education in the relevant
regional or minority languages”,
Subparagraph c)(i) “to make available secondary education in the relevant
regional or minority languages;”
Subparagraph d)(i) “to make available technical and vocational education in
the relevant regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph e)(i) “to make available university and other higher education
in regional or minority languages;”
Subparagraph f)(i)” to arrange for the provision of adult and continuing
education courses which are taught mainly or wholly in the regional or minority
languages;”
Subparagraph g) to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history
and the culture, which is reflected by the regional or minority language;
Subparagraph h) to provide the basic and further training of the teachers
required to implement those of paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;
Subparagraph i) to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for
monitoring the measures taken and progress achieved in establishing or
164
165

Idem
Idem

148

developing the teaching of regional or minority languages and for drawing up
periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.
Article 32 in the Constitution of Romania guarantees the right of the individuals
belonging to national minorities to study their mother tongue and the right of being
educated in this language, as well as the liberty of the religious education, according
to the specific requirements of each religion. In state schools, religious education is
organized and guaranteed by law.
Law no. 84/1995 on education, republished based on Article II in Law no. 151/1999
on the approval of the Emergency Ordinance no. 36/1997 on the amendment and
completion of Law no. 84/1995 on education, published in the Official Journal of
Romania, Part I, no. 370 of 3 August 1999 stipulates that the citizens of Romania
have equal rights of access to all levels and forms of education, irrespective of the
social and material status, gender, nationality, political or religious belonging. In
each locality are organized and functions units, grades or study groups with
Romanian teaching language and, as the case may be, with the teaching in the
national minority languages or schooling in mother tongue in the nearest possible
locality is provided.
Learning Romanian in school, as the official state language, is mandatory for all the
Romanian citizens, regardless of their nationality. The Curriculum must include the
needed number of classes and, at the same time, the conditions to allow assimilation
of the official state language shall be provided.
In Chapter XII – Article 118-126 in the Law on education the conditions of organizing
and carrying on the education for the individuals belonging to national minorities are
regulated. With a view to the organization of the education field in Romania, the main
responsibility in providing these rights falls on the Ministry of Education, on county
school inspectorates (and that of Bucharest) as well as on the management of the
education units. Since state education is free of charge, the Romanian state bears the
expenses for learning mother tongue or for teaching within the undergraduate and
higher education state units in the respective minority mother tongue, in accordance
with the legal provisions.
The curriculum, the school syllabus needed in the teaching process carried out in the
mother tongue as well as the handbooks in the mandatory state education (Article 174
in the Law on education) are provided by the Ministry of Education. The education
system with teaching in national minority languages benefits also, of teaching staff
who is qualified, and attends continuing education courses, within the higher
education system in Romania. Many of them are members of the respective minority
group.
In the localities with minority population, the state ensures the organization and
functioning of education in national minority languages, the partial teaching of
disciplines of study or the study of the mother tongue, of the history and traditions of
the minorities. The education system for the national minorities corresponds with the
general one in Romania and includes kindergartens, primary schools and
gymnasiums, high schools, vocational schools, apprentice schools, post high school
education and foremen schools.

149

The mother tongue education is organized in self-standing units and in departments,
where, besides the grades where Romanian is the main teaching language are also
grades with Hungarian language teaching. Both in units and departments, the
education process is carried out in the respective mother tongue. In the mixed units
the material resources - classrooms, laboratories, libraries - is jointly used, the
management of the school is unique, deputy principles are assured from the ranks of
the national minorities in school, in accordance with the provisions article 126 in
Law on education, and a series of extra school activities are organized either in
Romanian, or in Romanian and in mother tongue.
Starting with the 1990-1991 academic year, several education alternatives entered the
pre-academic education in Romania of Freinet, Waldorf, Step by Step or Montessori
type. As concerns the education for the national minorities, pre-school groups in
Waldorf kindergartens din Cluj-Napoca, Braşov and Oradea or Montessori in
Odorheiu Secuiesc – for the Hungarian minority were set up. At the same time for the
alternative education, based on the provisions in Law no. 84/1995 on education, as
republished, in Article 14, primary and gymnasium grades were set up for the
Hungarian minority (for example in Cluj-Napoca).166
Statistics regarding all forms of education where the Hungarian language is
used, including in the higher education:
1. The undergraduate education system with Hungarian as the main teaching language
in Romania:
2007-2008 Academic year167
Language of Total
units
teaching
and
departments
19 222
Total country
2 395
Total
minorities
2 112
Hungarian

%

Total children %
and students

100
12.4

3 480 367
196 805

100
5.6

10.9

174 885

5

2. Pre-academic education system in Romania per education cycle and teaching
language
2007-2008 Academic year
Education
Units
system

Pre-school
education
Primary
education
166
167

Departments

Total
(U+S)

%

551

452

1003

6

-

6

MECT
Data sent by MECT (Ministry of Education , Research and Youth)

150

%

7.7

Total
children
and
students
41 054

14.6

47 603

5.5

6.3

(grades 1-4)
Gymnasium
education
(grades 5-8)
High
school
education
(grades 9-12)
Vocational
education
Post
high
school
and
foremen
education

531

398

929

20.2

44 697

4.8

62

91

153

10.3

31 559

3.9

2

15

17

11.5

8 870

4

-

4

4

4.8

1 102

2.4

In the 2007-2008 academic years there were 1 003 units and departments in preschool education with teaching in Hungarian language. This represents 7.7% of the
total units and departments of the pre-school education in Romania. The number of
units and departments increased with almost 200 – which in absolute figures
represents a development at the institutional level. On the national level, in this period
the total number of units and departments were developed more dynamically. The
number of children attending kindergartens with Hungarian language teaching is of 41
054 – it is almost the same as during 2005-2006 academic year; the percentage did not
modify (6.30%).
During 2007-2008 academic years there were 6 units and departments in primary
education with teaching in the Hungarian language. This represents 19.3% of the total
units and departments of primary education in Romania. The number of units and
departments in the primary education decreased in the last two years on the national
level.
During the 2007-2008 academic years there were 929 units and departments in the
gymnasium education with teaching in the Hungarian language (with 370 more than
in 2005-2006 academic year). This represents 20.2% of the total units and sections of
gymnasium education in Romania. The number of units and departments in
gymnasium education dropped in the last two years on the national level. The number
of Hungarian students at the gymnasium level decreased with 1 430, but the
percentage as a whole did not modify (4.80%) – so the demographic decrease equally
affected the whole country.
During the 2007-2008 academic year there were 153 units and departments in the in
high school education with teaching in Hungarian (with 9 more than in 2005-2006
academic year). This represents 10.3% of the total units and departments of high
school education in Romania. The total number of Hungarian students in high school
education in the last two years increased with 683, but the total percentage dropped
(3.90%) – so the number of total students is development more dynamically.
During 2007-2008 academic year, there were 17 units and departments in the
vocational education with teaching in Hungarian language, 16 more than in 20052006 academic years. This represents 11.5% of the total units and departments of the
vocational education in Romania. The increase in the last two years was significant: in

151

2005-2006 academic year there was only a units activating with teaching in
Hungarian language, this representing 1.10% of the total units and departments in
Romania.
The number of the Hungarian students in the vocational education dropped in the last
two years with 1269, but the percentage still increased (4%) – we may speak of a
national trend: after finalising the gymnasium cycle the students prefer high school
education. The total number of students in grades IX-XII dropped on a national
level. The percentage of the students attending vocational education is 21.78%, the
percentage of the Hungarian students is almost identical: 21.94% – so the vocational
education represents a national problem. During the 2007-2008 academic year, there
were 4 units and departments in post high school and foremen education with teaching
in Hungarian language, with 2 more than during 2005-2006 academic years. This
represents 4.8% of the total units and departments in the post high school and foremen
education in Romania.
It can be concluded that the school network with teaching in Hungarian has
dynamically developed in the last 2 years, but the number of students has dropped
because of the general demographic decline.
2005-2006

50000,00

2007-2008

45000,00
40000,00
35000,00
30000,00
25000,00
20000,00
15000,00
10000,00
5000,00
0,00
Prescolar

I-IV

V-VIII

Pre-school

Liceal

High school

Profesional

Vocational

Postliceal
Post high school

Figure 1 Number of children and students attending studies in Hungarian
language
If we compare the data for all the education forms in the undergraduate education
with Hungarian language teaching, we see that in the last two years the number of
students who learn in Hungarian language at the high school level has increased – but
this increase has not been favourable for the vocational education.

152

2005-2006
2007-2008

6,00
5,00
4,00
3,00
2,00
1,00
0,00
Prescolar

I-IV

V-VIII

Liceal

Profesional

Postliceal

High School
Vocational
Figure 2Pre-school
The percentage of pupils and students
attending
school Post
in high
theschool
Hungarian language

If we look on the relative data, than we see the percentage of students and children in
the education with teaching in Hungarian language drops depending on the form of
education: from the pre-school education to the high school education. In the last two
years high school students number has relatively increased – but this increase was not
favourable to vocational education.

Anul colar 2007-2008

Anul colar 2005-2006

2005-2006 academic year

High school
Liceal

Vocational
Profesional
5.65%
5,65%

Post high school
Postliceal
0.84%
0,84%

2007-2008 academic year
Vocational

Pre-school
High school
18.05%Liceal
18,05%

Prescolar
22,91%

17,21%

V-VIII
25,71%

I-IV
27,68%

Profesional
5,07%

V-VIII
25,56%

Postliceal
Post high school
0,63%
0.63%

Pre-school
Prescolar
23,47%

I-IV
27,22%

Figure 3 The structure of the pre-academic education in the Hungarian language
based on the number of children and students
If we compare the weigh of the students per education form, we find out the highest
number of students attends grades 1-4 – this foresees the increase of the number of
gymnasium attending students.

3. Teaching staff organized following teaching cycles and language of teaching in the
pre-academic education
2007-2008 academic year
Teaching

Grand

total, Educators

153

Teaching

Teachers/foremen

language

of which

Total country
Hungarian

244 576
10 859

37 348
2 138

staff grades
1-4
54 241
2 491

instructors grades
5-12/13
152 987
6. 30

In the last two years the number of educators increased with 53, the number of
schoolteachers for grades 1-4 dropped with 104, and in grades 5-12/13 with 341. In
pre-academic education in Romania all those trends affected the number of teaching
staff.

Educators

Teaching staff grades 1-4

Teachers foremeninstructors grades 5-12/13

Figure 4 Number of Teaching staff teaching in Hungarian language

If we compare the evolution of the number of teaching staff at the undergraduate level
with mother tongue tuition, we can conclude that at each level of education there is a
decrease as compared with the total number of teaching personnel in Romania.

154

Educators

Teaching staff grades 1-4

Teachers foremeninstructors grades 5-12/13

Figure 5 Percentage of teaching staff that teach in Hungarian language

The percentage of the teaching staff in the pre-academic education with teaching in
Hungarian language does not correspond with the percentage of students, structured
on forms of teaching:

Teaching staff
No of children
and
students

Pre-school

Figure 6 Percentage of children, students and teaching staff in the pre-academic
education with teaching in Hungarian language
The percentage of the teaching staff in the education with teaching in Hungarian
language is lower than the percentage of students – so in the pre-academic education
with teaching in Hungarian language there are more students falling on one teacher
than on national plan.

155

Pre-school

Figure 7 Number of children and students/ one teacher in the pre-academic
education

In the EU Member States there are, on average, 14 students per teacher at the primary
level and 10 students per teacher at the gymnasium level. This number in Romania is
higher, and in the education with teaching in Hungarian language even higher. In the
pre-school education, there are, on the average, 19 children per educator, and in
grades 5-12/13, 14 students per teacher.
Article 125 in the Law on education no. 84/1995, republished, stipulates that the
teaching staff hould benefit from the continuous training that is specifically needed in
the teaching-learning activity carried out in Hungarian language. As part of the reform
aimed at ensuring a better education for the school teachers, pedagogical colleges
activate within the „Babeş-Bolyai” University of Cluj, which also benefit from
teaching in Hungarian language in the following towns: Aiud, Cluj-Napoca, Odorheiu
Secuiesc, Satu Mare, Târgu Secuiesc.
The model character Romania offers to Europe as concerns the education with
teaching in national minorities languages also has an impact on the decision factors of
the education reform, the initial qualification and the continuing education,
respectively, of the teaching staff. The structural reform of the education system has
in view to professionalism the title of school manager. In order to improve the
qualifications of the teachers, the Strategy on initial qualification and continuing
education of the teachers and of the managers in the field of education (2001 – 2004)
was adopted in 2001. Under these conditions, in the filed of education with teaching
in the national minority languages, the initial qualification and continuing education
of the teaching staff represents not only a need, but also a central component of the
reform.
In the last two years (2007, 2008) by Order of the Minister (OM 541/8.03.2007, OM
3352/03.03.2008) 35 continuing education priority courses within the Directorate
General for Education in the Minority Languages and the Relation with the

156

Parliament (CNCEÎP) for the teaching staff who teach in Hungarian languages were
held. These courses were attended by 1959 teaching staff (educators, school masters,
teachers), which teaches in Hungarian language. CNCEIP organised continuing
education courses accredited by DeCeE, attended by teachers of Hungarian language.
The course was held in their mother tongue and they have also taken the examination
in the Hungarian language. In the offer of the Teaching Staff Resource Centre, where
there is also Hungarian teaching staff, there are continuing education courses in
Hungarian that all teachers may attend.
4. The number of students registered in Romania during 2007-2008 academic years
Type of higher education

Public
Private
Total

Number
of
Hungarian % (Calculated of the
students registered
students total registered per
country at the respective
education type)
29 587
5.71%
11 352
2.85%
40 939
4.47%

During 2007-2008 academic year, 4 .939 Hungarian students were registered – 7 000
more (33 562) than in the 2005-2006 academic year. In the public higher education
the number of Hungarian students increased with 4 000 – this increase is also notable
in percentage, they represent 5.71% of the total students in Romania. During the
2007-2008 academic year, 29 587 students studied in Hungarian within the public
system of education. This number is higher with 3911 than in the 2005-2006
academic year.
During 2000-2001 academic year lines of teaching in Hungarian language were
created within „Babeş-Bolyai” University in Cluj for over 50 specialties, within the
University of medicine and Pharmacy of Targu Mureş (general medicine, pediatrics,
dentistry, pharmacy etc.), as well as within „Szentgyörgyi István” Theatre University
of Tg. Mureş. During the 1998-1999 academic year university colleges with teaching
sections in the Hungarian language were set up in Gheorgheni, Miercurea Ciuc, Târgu
Secuiesc, Sfântu Gheorghe and Satu Mare.
The University with the highest number of Hungarian students is Babeş-Bolyai
University of Cluj Napoca. Out of the 21 faculties of the University, 17 offer at
present courses in Romanian and Hungarian, and 11 in Romanian and German. There
are also two faculties (Reformed Theology and Roman-Catholic Theology) where the
syllabus is taught exclusively in Hungarian. For the 2008-2009 academic year,
admission was organised to almost 60 specialties in Hungarian, at 18 faculties, from
computer science to anthropology, from political science to various specialties in
religion, from environment to philosophy, from geography to sociology.168
The pedagogic College of School masters have branches in Aiud, Odorheiu Secuiesc,
Târgu Secuiesc, Satu Mare and Tîrgu Mureş. Babeş-Bolyai University offers a large
range of master courses in Hungarian, whose number is of 20 course options. The
University of Medicine and Pharmacy in Tîrgu Mureş, Mureş county, is the only
faculty of medicine in the country with two study lines: Romanian and Hungarian. At
168

http://www.ubbcluj.ro/hu/index.html

157

the University of Bucharest there is the Chair of Hungarology, for those who wish to
learn Hungarian and a foreign language.
PhD studies in the Hungarian language exist in Romania at the University of
Bucharest and the University of Cluj, in the philology department – Hungarian
language and literature and ethnography and in the social science department, together
with philology.
Several examples: kindergartens, general school, high schools and vocational schools
with teaching lines in Hungarian language per counties:
Timiş county
Kindergarten with normal programme in Dumbrava
General School with grades 1-8. No. 1., Timişoara
“Bartók Béla” Theoretical High School in Timişoara is the only school with tuition in
Hungarian in the county. 169
Gerhardinum Roman-Catholic Theological High School, Timişoara
Arad county
Kindergarten No. 11 with prolonged programme in Arad
Aurel Vlaicu school with grades 1-8, Arad
Csíky Gergely School Group Arad, Gymnasium, vocational school and general
education high school with teaching only in Hungarian language.
Bihor county
Salard Kindergarten with normal programme, with teaching in Hungarian language
only
"Toldy" General School with grades 1-8 in Sânicolau de Munte, with teaching only in
Hungarian language
“Ady Endre” Theoretical High School in Oradea
“Lorántffy Zsuzsanna” Reformed Theological High School, Oradea
“Octavian Goga” Theoretical and Vocational School Group, Marghita,
“Szent László” Roman-Catholic Theological High School, Oradea
Satu Mare county
School with grades I-VIII, Bercu, with teaching in Hungarian language only
Theoretical High School, Carei, with Hungarian language department
“Aurel Popp” Art School, with Hungarian language department
“Hám János” Catholic High School, Satu Mare, with teaching in Hungarian language
only
Industrial School Group, Tăşnad, with Hungarian language department
Maramureş County
Kindergarten No. 11, with prolonged programme, Baia Mare
Dragoş Vodă National College, Sighetul Marmaţiei
School with grades 1-8, Coltău

169

www.bartok.ro/aboutus.php

158

"Németh László" General Education High School, Baia Mare, with teaching in
Hungarian language only
Sălaj County
"Silvania" National College, Zalău, with Hungarian language department
“Gheorghe Şincai” Pedagogical High School, Zalău, with Hungarian language
department
Industrial School Group, Crasna, general school and vocational school with
Hungarian language department
"Wesselényi Reformed High School", Zalău, with teaching in Hungarian language
only
Cluj County
Kindergarten Izvorul Crişului, with teaching in Hungarian language only
School with grades I-IV, Băgara village, com. Aghireș, with teaching in Hungarian
language only
“Apáczai Csere János” Theoretical High School, Cluj Napoca, with teaching in
Hungarian language only
“Brassai Sámuel” Theoretical High School, Cluj Napoca, general school, vocational
school, high school with teaching in Hungarian language only
“Báthory István” Theoretical High School, Cluj Napoca, with teaching in Hungarian
language only
Reformed Theologic High School Cluj Napoca
˝Sigismund Toduţă˝ Music High School Cluj Napoca, with optional teaching of
Hungarian language
“Janos Zsigmond”, Unitarian Theologic High School, Cluj Napoca, with teaching in
Hungarian language only
Alba County
Kindergarten no. 1. Teiuş, with teaching in Hungarian language only
Bethlen Gábor National College, Aiud, with teaching in Hungarian language only
Roman-Catholic High School, Alba Iulia, with teaching in Hungarian language only
Hunedoara County
General School No. 1., Lupeni, with Hungarian language department
“Teglas Gabor”Technical College, Deva, with tuition in Hungarian
Sibiu County
General School No. 15, Sibiu, with Hungarian language tuition department
School with grades I-VIII. No. 8, Mediaş, with Hungarian language tuition
department
“Axente Sever” General Education High School Mediaş, with Hungarian language
tuition department
Bistriţa Năsăud County
Kindergarten No. 10. Bistrita, with Hungarian language tuition department
Sintereag Reformed Kindergarten, with Hungarian language tuition department
“Andrei Mureşanu” National College, Bistriţa, with Hungarian language tuition
department

159

Mureş County
Wesselényi Miklós General School “Wesselényi Miklós”, Ghindari, with teaching in
Hungarian language only
“Unirea” National College, Târgu Mureş, with Hungarian language tuition department
“Traian Vuia” School Group, Târgu Mureş, vocational school, with Hungarian
language tuition department
High School with Sports programme, Târgu Mureş, with Hungarian language tuition
department
Reformed Theological High School, Târgu Mureş, with teaching in Hungarian
language only
“Bolyai Farkas” Theoretical High School, Târgu Mureş, with teaching in Hungarian
only
“Mihai Eminescu” Pedagogical High School, Târgu Mureş, with Hungarian language
tuition department
"Lucian Blaga" School Group, Reghin, vocational school and high school with
Hungarian language tuition department
Forestry School Group, Sovata, with Hungarian language tuition department
Arts High School, Târgu Mureş, with Hungarian language tuition department

Harghita County
There are more than 450 kindergartens, general schools, vocational schools, high
schools in the county with teaching in Hungarian language, among which:
Kindergarten No. 1 with prolonged programme, Gheorghieni, with teaching in
Hungarian language only
“János Zsigmond” General School, Darjiu, with teaching in Hungarian language only
“Kós Károly” Industrial School Group, Odorheiu Secuiesc, general school, vocational
school, with teaching in Hungarian language only
“Márton Áron” High School, Miercurea Ciuc, with teaching in Hungarian language
only
Covasna County
There are more than 280 kindergartens, general schools, vocational schools, high
schools in the county with teaching in Hungarian language, among which.
Petőfi Sándor School with grades 1-8, Târgu Secuiesc
Borbáth Károly General School, Vărghiş, with teaching in Hungarian language only
Post High School Sanitary School, Sfântu Gheorghe, with teaching in Hungarian
language only
Székely Mikó General Education High School, Sfântu Gheorghe, with teaching in
Hungarian language only
Puskás Tivadar School Group, Sfântu Gheorghe, with teaching in Hungarian language
only
Reformed Theological High School, Sfântu Gheorghe, with teaching in Hungarian
language only
Arts High School, Sfântu Gheorghe, with Hungarian language tuition department
Braşov County
Kindergarten No. 3, with normal programme, Săcele, with Hungarian language tuition
department
General school No. 3., Zărneşti, with Hungarian language tuition department

160

“Áprily Lajos” High Scool, Braşov
“George Moroianu” General Education High School, Săcele, with Hungarian
language tuition department
Bacău County
General School with teaching in Hungarian language Ghimeș-Făget
Bucharest
Kindergarten 142 with prolonged programme, Sector 2, with teaching in Hungarian
language only
“Ady Endre” General Education High School, Sector 2, General School, vocational
school and High School, with teaching in Hungarian language only.
5. Concrete measures taken in a view of carry on the above-mentioned public
policies/ strategies, with example at national and local level (short description of
projects and programmes as well as the budget allocated for their achievement).
In the last four years the school institutions where Hungarian is taught by government
decision to restore the infrastructure, received the following amounts (the amounts are
showed per counties and are given in 100 RON):
County
Alba
Arad
Bacău
Bihor
Bistriţa-Năsăud
Braşov
Cluj
Covasna
Harghita
Hunedoara
Maramureş
Mureş
Sălaj
Satu Mare
Sibiu
Timiş
Total

2005
0
0
0
0
1000
15
501
670
5 646
1 000
200
430
174
2 861
0
0
0

2006
705
2 602
1 900
1 050
12 698
1 405
12 644
8 224
13 695
500
1 615
10 865
7 280
11135
3621
8 945
15709

2007
2 416
6 514
1 436
4 828
3 0463
6 622
12 176
14 511
27 009
2 406
4 781
2 8127
13 323
18 699
3 101
7 836
17379

2008
2713
450
4 481
9 273
4 185
6 296
14 039
18 575
570
2 758
15 874
5 830
11147
100
5483
16730

6. Measures related to Hungarian minority history and culture teaching
In 2007 the curriculum to occupy the teaching vacancies declared in the pre-school
education system at the discipline Hungarian Minority History and Traditions (the
curriculum was approved by the Order of Minister OM 2600/14.11.2007). As
consequence the vacancies resulted from the classes of the discipline Hungarian
Minority History and Traditions may be occupied by contest.

161

During 2007-2008 academic year, the project of decongestion of the curricula in the
gymnasium education was carried on. DGÎLMRP has decongested the curriculum of
the discipline Hungarian Minority History and Traditions (the curriculum was
approved by Order of Minister OM 5260/02.09.2008).

7. Measures taken in the technical and vocational education
The school network concerning the technical education in Hungarian language is
developed only in Harghita, Covasna and Mureş counties – where the number of
students is high. In the other counties the school network concerning the technical
education in Hungarian language remains behind the general education.
The problem of the other counties is the small number of students: in order to form a
grade there must be 10 students – this making impossible the alternative concerning
the high school grades at a low number of students. This is the cause the students
choose Romanian profile.
The school network concerning the technical profile is shown in the table below:
No.

County
1.
2.
3.
4.

5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
Total

Alba
Arad
Bihor
BistriţaNăsăud
Braşov
Cluj
Covasna
Harghita
Hunedoara
Mureş
Satu Mare
Sălaj
Sibiu
Timiş

No. of No. of students
grades
Services
Technical
7
113
36
4
107
53
558
656

Ecological
72
223

221
107
1437

1

-

22

-

22

18
18
158
366
10
144
73
33
4
8
897

147
54
1 462
3 447
19
896
463
244
97
7 607

129
277
1725
3390
115
1 686
806
213
42
55
9 152

19
98
887
2 083
20
464
420
212
4 498

295
429
4 074
8 920
154
3 046
1 689
669
42
152
21 257

Total

The structure of the education is balanced, out of those 21 257 Hungarian students 7
607 have chosen specialties in services, 9 152 technical specialties, and 4 498 chose
the ecologic profile.

162

Ecological
21.16%

Technical

Services

Figure 8 Structure of the technical channel in Hungarian language
Four profiles represent the vocational system with the Hungarian language tuition:
pedagogical profile, theological profile, visual arts profile and musical profile. These
profiles are studied per counties, as shown in the table below:

Number
of
County
finalising
grades
2
Alba
4
Bihor
5
Cluj
Covasna 6
Harghita 9
5
Mureş
2
Sălaj
Satu
5
Mare
1
Timiş
39
Total

Visual
Arts

Musical
Arts

Theological

Pedagogical

1
2
4
3
3
2
1

1
1
1
2
1
1

1
2
1

1
1
2
1

3
1
20

1

0,5

0,5

8

5,5

5,5

1

The structure of the vocational profiles in Hungarian language is: theological profile:
51.28%, pedagogical profile 20. 51%, visual arts and music have an equal weigh:
14.10%.

163

Visual arts

Pedagogical

Theological

Musical arts

Figure 9 Structure of vocational profiles in Hungarian language
- Paragraph 2. “With regard to education and in respect of territories other
than those in which the regional or minority languages are traditionally used,
the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language
justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the regional or
minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.”
The school inspectors general in Covasna and Harghita counties and each of the
deputy school inspectors general in Arad, Bihor, Bistriţa-Năsăud, Braşov, Cluj,
Hunedoara, Mureş, Maramureş, Satu Mare, Sălaj and Timiş counties are Hungarian
nationality. A number of about 85 school inspectors of Hungarian nationality assure
the direct guidance and control of the education with teaching in Hungarian language
in Romania.
Examples of schools, vocational schools and high schools in the areas where the
Hungarians do not live in a compact manner are given in the above lists; in these
schools the possibility to learn in an optional manner the Hungarian language is
provided.
From Article 9 – Judicial authorities –were selected:
- Paragraph 1. The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in
which the number of residents using the regional or minority languages justifies
the measures specified below, according to the situation of each of these
languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the present
paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of
justice:
Subparagraph a) (ii) to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional
or minority language;
Subparagraph a) (iii) to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or
oral, shall not be considered inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a
regional or minority language;

164

Subparagraph b) (ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person
before a court, that he or she may use his or her regional or minority language
without thereby incurring additional expense;
Subparagraph b) (iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the
regional or minority languages if necessary by the use of interpreters and
translations;
Subparagraph c) (ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person
before a court, that he or she may use his or her regional or minority language
without thereby incurring additional expense;
Subparagraph c) (iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the
regional or minority languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and
translations;
Subparagraph d) to take steps to ensure that the application of subparagraphs i and iii of paragraphs b and c above and any necessary use of
interpreters and translations does not involve extra expense for the persons
concerned.
- Paragraph 2. The Parties undertake:
Subparagraph a) not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within
the State solely because they are drafted in a regional or minority language;
- Paragraph 3. The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or
minority languages the most important national statutory texts and those
relating particularly to users of these languages, unless they are otherwise
provided

There are no relevant statistics in the courts of law concerning the use of Hungarian
language, but it is known from concrete examples that this practice exists, especially
in the areas where there is a large concentration of population speaking Hungarian –
Covasna, Harghita, Mureş counties. The lawsuits may unfold in Hungarian if all the
parties involved do know the language and the documents of the session are drawn up
in Romanian.
From Article 10 - Administrative authorities and public services:
- Paragraph 1. Within the administrative districts of the State in which the
number of residents who are users of regional or minority languages justifies the
measures specified below and according to the situation of each language, the
Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
Subparagraph a) (ii) to ensure that such of their officers as are in contact with
the public use the regional or minority languages in their relations with persons
applying to them in these languages; or
Subparagraph a) (iii) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages
may submit oral or written applications and receive a reply in these languages;
Subparagraph a) (iv) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may
submit oral or written applications in these languages;
Subparagraph a) (v) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages
may validly submit a document in these languages;
Subparagraph b) to make available widely used administrative texts and
forms for the population in the regional or minority languages or in bilingual
versions;

165

Subparagraph c) to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in
a regional or minority language.
- Paragraph 2. In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose
territory the number of residents who are users of regional or minority
languages is such as to justify the measures specified below, the Parties
undertake to allow and/or encourage:
Subparagraph b) the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to
submit oral or written applications in these languages;
Subparagraph c) the publication by regional authorities of their official
documents also in the relevant regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph d) the publication by local authorities of their official
documents also in the relevant regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph e) the use by regional authorities of regional or minority
languages in debates in their assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of
the official language(s) of the State;
Subparagraph f) the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages
in debates in their assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official
language(s) of the State;
Subparagraph g) the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the
name in the official language(s), of traditional and correct forms of place-names
in regional or minority languages.
- Paragraph 3. With regard to public services provided by the administrative
authorities or other persons acting on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within
the territory in which regional or minority languages are used, in accordance
with the situation of each language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
Subparagraph a) to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in
the provision of the service; or
Subparagraph b) to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a
request and receive a reply in these languages; or
Subparagraph c) to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a
request in these languages.
- Paragraph 4. With a view to putting into effect those provisions of
paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the Parties undertake to take one or
more of the following measures:
Subparagraph b) recruitment and, where necessary, training of the officials
and other public service employees required;
Subparagraph c) compliance as far as possible with requests from public
service employees having a knowledge of a regional or minority language to be
appointed in the territory in which that language is used.
- Paragraph 5. The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family
names in the regional or minority languages, at the request of those concerned.
In Bihor, Covasna, Harghita, Mureş, Satu Mare, Sălaj and Sibiu county councils are
employed individuals knowing/ speaking Hungarian language, capable to answer the
oral/written requests worded by the citizens belonging to the Hungarian minority.

166

Bihor, Covasna, Harghita, Mureş, Sălaj, Satu Mare, Sibiu, and Suceava county
councils bring the agenda of the meetings to the public knowledge in Hungarian
language also.
Within the Covasna, Harghita, Mureş, Satu Mare, Sălaj, Sibiu county councils the
meetings are carried on in Hungarian language also.
The decisions adopted by the county council are brought to public knowledge and
communicated in Hungarian language also by the Covasna, Harghita, Mureş, Sălaj
county councils.
Bringing to public knowledge of the decisions with individual character is assured
also within the county councils in Bihor, Covasna, Harghita, Mureş, Sălaj, Sibiu,
Suceava.
The local public administration authorities in Arad, Bacău, Bihor, Braşov, Covasna,
Harghita, Maramureş, Mureş, Sălaj, Timiş counties worded replies to the requests
lodged to them by the citizens belonging to Hungarian minority in this language.
Within the local council and their subordinated bodies in Alba, Arad, Bacău, Bistriţa,
Braşov, Cluj, Covasna, Harghita, Maramureş, Mureş, Satu-Mare, Sălaj, Sibiu, Timiş
counties a significant number of employees know Hungarian language.
In Satu Mare county, Hungarian is spoken by less than 20% of the number of
inhabitants. Considering the ethnic structure of the population and taking into
consideration the legal provisions in force referring to the right of the citizens
belonging to national minorities to use their mother tongue in the relations with
administrative authorities, within the Sighetul Marmaţiei Border Police Direcţorate
the needed framework was created to put into application the above-mentioned
provisions. During the month of July 2008 at Satu Mare County Border Police
Inspectorate ( I.J.P.F.), a petition was worded in Hungarian, in writing, by an
individual of Hungarian ethnic origin, based on the provisions of Article 10,
paragraph 1 a) in the Charter.
In Maramureş county the Hungarian language is spoken by 9.1% of the citizens.
Within Maramureş county Border Police Inspectorate (I.J.P.F.) a number of 46
agents speaking Hungarian carry on their activity, particularly in the localities where
this language is spoken.
In the domain of competence of the Bihor county Border Police Inspectorate, the
citizens belonging to the Hungarian ethnic group have a weight of at least 20% of the
number of population. Within the inspectorate 289 border policemen knowing this
language carry on their activity. The most frequent cases met, where border
policemen contact the members of the Hungarian community takes place at border
checking. By means of the 959-telephone line, the workers of the inspectorate offer
information to the applicants in Hungarian language also.
At the level of Cluj County, the citizens belonging to the Hungarian ethnic group may
use their mother tongue in relations with public services provided by Cluj county
Police Inspectorate, though their percentage is 17.4% of the total population. Until

167

present, at the level of I.P.J. (Clue county Police Inspectorate) Clue there were no
citizens, coming to the Office for Public Relations, speaker of Hungarian language to
request to dialogite in their mother tongue or to lodge written or oral applications in
this language. n case in the future, the citizens belonging to Hungarian ethnic group
will address in writing or orally in their mother tongue, their requests are to be settled
because within this structure 38 agents and officers knowing Hungarian language
carry on their activity.
Within Covasna county Police Inspectorate were employed individuals that
understand/ speak Hungarian in functions whose attributions assume relations with
the public - proximity policemen, policemen within the Compartment of public
relations, policemen within the Compartment of criminality analysis and prevention.
Moreover, at the level of each police sub-unit (including police posts) at least one
individual that understands/ speaks Hungarian was designated. As concerns lodging
petitions, the citizens may present oral request or written applications in Hungarian,
I.P.J. (County Police Inspectorate) Covasna staff being able to reply to these requests.
Within judicial proceedings, the individuals involved benefit of the support of an
authorised translator for the translation of the declarations and of other documents.
Hungarian speakers may present valid documents draw up in Hungarian language at
I.P.J. Covasna (ex. wills, civil contracts, Land Book extracts, Agricultural Register
extracts, documents issued by the Republic of Hungary etc.).
At present, I.P.J. Covasna does not make available to population current
administrative in Hungarian or bilingual versions, but the management of I.P.J.
Covasna manifests its availability to make the needed steps to provide such
documents - upon the special request of the people belonging to Hungarian ethnic
group. I.P.J. Covasna presents information with prevention character in Hungarian
also or in bilingual format as brochures, folding leaflets. The application of the
provisions in Article 10 paragraph 4 subparagraph b) of the Charter determined
I.P.J. Covasna representatives to initiate a series of recruitment campaigns of the
young people belonging to the Hungarian ethnic group to attend the courses of the
schools of police agents in Câmpina, Cluj-Napoca localities as well as the courses of
the „Alexandru Ioan Cuza” Police Academy. The distribution of the policemen
knowing Hungarian language in the areas where this language is spoken represents
the preoccupation of I.P.J. Covasna representatives to apply the provisions of Article
10 paragraph subparagraph c) of the Charter. Moreover, at the level of each police
subunit (including police posts) at least one individual knowing Hungarian language
was designated.
At the level of Harghita County Police Inspectorate (I.P.J.) the following steps
were made to put into application the provisions in Law no. 282/2007 on ratifying the
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, adopted at Strasbourg on the
5th November 1992:
Paragraph 3 subparagraphs a) and b)
-at present, at the level of I.P.J. Harghita, policemen of Hungarian nationality
constitute 20% of the staff within this structure;
-the staff working in the public relations field use Hungarian in the official
relations with the citizens belonging to Hungarian ethnic group, as part of the activity
of receiving oral or written applications and of drawing up replies in Hungarian;

168

- with a view to taking over and promptly directing the calls transmitted by the
112 emergency number, where police crew intervention is requested, on the 5
operator positions policemen knowing Hungarian language were employed;
- having in view the important role of the proximity police in the relation with
the citizens, it was had in view to employ also policemen knowing Hungarian
language in the positions within the sub-units on which competence area the
population of Hungarian nationality held a high weigh;
-within the actions of criminal research, IPJ Harghita representatives provided
the use of Hungarian language for the individuals, party in the criminal lawsuit;
-within the actions carried on according to the programmes and preventing
projects, 5600 printed documents were sent, published in Hungarian language and in
Romanian, to the target groups;
-during 2006 two series of examinations were organized to occupy the
positions of police agents, dedicated exclusively to individuals knowing Hungarian;
these positions were entirely occupied.
- at the level of I.P.J. Mureş contests to occupy positions of police officers
and agents by candidates of Hungarian nationality were organised. At present, within
I.P.J. Mureş 5 officers and 49 police agents of Hungarian nationality are employed.
Employees of I.P.J. Mureş attend Hungarian language courses organized within the
training and continuing education centres within the framework of the Ministry of
Administration and Internal Affairs so that it may be appreciated that currently 20%
of the staff of this police unit knows Hungarian language.
Within I.J.P Sălaj, measures were taken by means of which the use of Hungarian is
guaranteed in the relations with the citizens belonging to Hungarian minority and the
structures of public safety and order:
- the human resources needed to translate in Hungarian the replies to the
petitions drawn up in mother tongue, written or oral by the citizens belonging to the
Hungarian ethnic group, were provided;
-the presence of some employees knowing Hungarian language within the
hearings organised at the IJP Sălaj headquarters was provided;
-consulting
activities in Hungarian language, in the field of police
competence, in the communities where are concentrated citizens belonging to this
ethnic group, were carried on;
-knowing Hungarian language represents a relevant criterion to appoint and
promote the staff employed within the police units in Sălaj county;
-the education offer or the staff recruitment within the police units was
presented in mass media in Hungarian also;
- in the area where live with prevalence citizens belonging to the Hungarian
ethnic group, in the police structures were employed citizens belonging to the
Hungarian ethnic group.
In the counties where the citizens belonging to Hungarian ethnic group ahs a weigh of
20%of the number of inhabitants, the representatives of other public services spend all
efforts to assure the observance of the right of linguistic identity. Thus, due to the
specific of the activities developed by the Romanian Gendarmerie, activities that
suppose direct relation with the population, the importance adequate to this aspect was
granted by employing a significant number of personnel knowing Hungarian
language, able to put into application the provisions in Article 10 of the Charter.

169

The National Archives170 represent an example of good practice in this field. Thus,
in the counties where the citizens belonging to the Hungarian ethnic group represents
20% of their total population– Bihor, Covasna, Harghita, Mureş, Satu-Mare, Sălaj -,
the public relations are assured by clerks knowing Hungarian language also.
Furthermore, the right of the citizens belonging to the Hungarian ethnic group to
lodge in writing, in their mother tongue applications referring to the reconstruction of
some individual rights based on archive documents is assured. The translation of these
requests in the official language of the state is also ensured by the structures
constituted at the county level. Replies to the requests addressed in Hungarian are
drawn up in Romanian, the official language of the state, being translated on request
in Hungarian as well.
As concerns the application for information of public interest in Hungarian language,
based on the provisions of Law no. 544/2001 on the free access to the information of
public interest, with further amendments and completions, replies to these will also be
worded in Hungarian.
Within the territorial structures of the Inspectorate General for Emergency
Situations171 organized in the localities where the citizens belonging to the Hungarian
ethnic group represent at least 20% of the total population (in Covasna, Harghita,
Mureş counties), the use of Hungarian language is assured, meaning these citizens
word they written/oral applications in their mother tongue. The replies to these
applications are in Romanian. Citizens belonging to the Hungarian ethnic group or
speakers of this language occupy 35% of the positions existing within the territorial
structures of the Inspectorate General for Emergency Situations. The documents with
informative character in the field of civil protection and of fire prevention are also
published in Hungarian. The announcements for occupying positions within the
territorial structures are published in Hungarian language also. Moreover, within the
commissions for organizing contests for occupying certain positions in the Satu Mare,
Bihor, Mureş, Covasna and Harghita in the county inspectorates structures, were
appointed as members, individuals knowing Hungarian language also.
In the direction of observing the linguistic identity the steps made by the National
Agency for Cadastre and Land Registration (ANCPI) that by its territorial
structures performed the needed diligence to observe this desiderate. Thus, ANCPI
decided to employ public servants, knowing Hungarian language, able to take over
and process the various requests or applications lodged in Hungarian language, as
well as to word proper replies in this language. The measure was taken within the
administrative – territorial units where the citizens belonging to the Hungarian ethnic
group have a weigh exceeding 20%of the number of inhabitants, as well as in those
where this percentage is not met, in Alba, Bihor, Braşov, Harghita, Mureş, Sălaj
counties.
From Article 11 - Media:
- Paragraph 1. The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority
languages within the territories in which those languages are spoken, according
170

The National Archives are organised, at territorial level, in county directorates, as devolved
structures in each of the counties of this country.
171
Inspectorate General for Emergency Situation is organized at a territorial level, in inspectorates for
emergency situations, in all counties.

170

to the situation of each language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly
or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this field, and
respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
a) to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:
Subparagraph a) (ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one
radio station and one television channel in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph b) (i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one
radio station in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph c) (i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one
television channel in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph d) to encourage and/or facilitate the production and
distribution of audio and audiovisual works in the regional or minority
languages;
Subparagraph e)(i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or
maintenance of at least one newspaper in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph f) (i) to cover the additional costs of those media, which use
regional or minority languages, wherever the law provides for financial
assistance in general for the media;
Subparagraph g) to support the training of journalists and other staff for
media using regional or minority languages.
RadioProgrammes172
The Romanian Radio-Broadcasting Society (SRR), in accordance with the provisions
of the Romanian legislation and in compliance with the international legislation,
grants a special importance to the programmes in the Hungarian language, thus:
Minorities Editor Office in Bucharest existing in the headquarters of SRR as well as
Cluj, Reşiţa, Târgu-Mureş and Timişoara regional stations. Radio Cluj broadcast in
Hungarian language of 53 years now, Radio Tg Mureş broadcasts of 50 years, and
Radio Reşiţa that was set up in 1996, replied in 2000 to the applications of the
minorities representatives of the region, thus here are broadcasted in Hungarian
language 30 minutes each week.
Editor office

Days

Time interval

Minutes/week

Radio Cluj

MondaySaturday

8.00 – 10.00
15.00 – 18.00
14.00 –18.00

2100 minutes AM
1680 minutes FM

Programme
Creator
Maksay
Magdolna

Sunday
Monday14.00-15.00FM 840 minutes
Batha Csaba
Radio
Sunday
20.00-22.00AM
Timişoara
11.00-18.00
3000 minutes in Borbely
Radio
Tg MondayFriday
08.00-11.00
FM of which
Melinda
Mureş
Saturday
14.00-18.00
2 220 minutes on
Saturday
10.00-18.00
medium
Sunday
frequency waves
Wednesday
30 minutes
Makay Botond
Radio Reşiţa
Programmes created and broadcasted in Hungarian language on weekly basis
172

Analysis conerning the manner of implementation in the SRR activities of the provisions worded in
Part II and Part III in Law on ratifying the Language Charter

171

In the future it is desired to extend the broadcasting time of the Minorities editor
Office in Bucharest for the Hungarian language programmes. This project is still in
the phase of analysis in view of feasibility study.
Day
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday

Time
15.00-16.00
15.00-16.00
15.00-16.00
15.00-16.00
15.00-16.00
15.00-16.00
10.00-10.20

Programme
News, Cultural programme
News, Political programme
News, Social programme
News, Economic programme
News, Retrospect of the week
News, Diversity programme
Religious programme

TV Programmes173
The TV programmes created by the department of Programmes in the Hungarian
Language inform and offer entertainment to the Hungarian community in Romania.
The programmes in Hungarian language in 2007 represented about 152 transmission
hours in premiere on TVR 1 and TVR 2 and around. 50 hours of selections on TVR
International and TVR Cultural.
Channel

Title

TVR 1

Krónika

Date
of Time interval
transmission
Monday
15:30-17:00
Tuesday

16:00-17:00

TVR 2

Szieszta / Café

Thursday

15:00-17:00

TVR Cultural

Kultúra

Thursday

TVR
International

TV magazine
Monday
in Hungarian
language

19:00-19:30
16:00-16:30
15:00-16:00
12:00-13:00

Duration/act
ually
90min./75
min.
60min./
50 min.
60min./
52 min.
30min./
28 min.
60min./
58 min.
Bimonthly

Remarks

Together
in
Europe
Selection from
the archives
Selection from
TVR 1 and
TVR 2
programmes

The current listed programmes are TV programmes with columns that cover in a good
extent the types from EBU classification: informative bulletin – a weekly events
(14%); journalism/ infotainment - reportage, talk-show, discussions (28%); art and
culture – documentaries, interviews (28%); entertainment – soft music, humour,
sketches, show (10%); science – documentaries, interviews (9%); music – classical,
jazz, popular, dance (6%); education – school, interviews, discussions (3%); religion –
(3%). Moreover, TVR transmitted (additional) special editions of Hungarian language
programmes on the occasion of Eastern, Christmas and New Year’s Eve.
Graphic description of the 2005-2007 TV programmes in Hungarian language
(in hours of transmission)
173

Romanian Television and the European Charter for Regional or Minority languages.

172

TV programmes in Hungarian language

TVRi and TVR Cultural

As consequence of the approval by SRTv Board of Administrators of the
organisational structure change in July 2008, the grounds of reorganizing also the
editor offices for the national minorities. At TVR Tg. Mureş Hungarian Editor Office
was already set up, at TVR Timişoara an editor for Hungarian language was
employed. The Romanian Television intends to organize in 2009 continuing education
courses for the collaborators who accomplish the new programmes in the national
minority languages at TVR 3.
TVR will initiate, if the budget will allow it, a project of creating 19 documentaries
about prominent personalities within the ranks of the national minorities, as well as a
series of reports about monuments, buildings and museums representative for national
minorities in Romania.
- Paragraph 2. The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of
radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used
in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language, and not to oppose
the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring
countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure that no
restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of
information in the written press in a language used in identical or similar form to
a regional or minority language. The exercise of the above-mentioned freedoms,
since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such
formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are
necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial
integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of
others, for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for
maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.

173

Examples174 of TV programmes in Hungarian language taken over from Hungary,
retransmitted by the TV cable companies existing in Romania.

TV
M1
M2
Duna TV
Hir TV
Hallmark synchronized
Minimax synchronized
ATV
TV2
RTL Klub

Frequency (MHz)
273.25
119.25
182.25
407.25
479.25
543.25
607.25
599.25
583.25

Remarks

experimental programme
experimental programme
experimental programme

- Paragraph 3. The Parties undertake to ensure that the interests of the users
of regional or minority languages are represented or taken into account within
such bodies as may be established in accordance with the law with responsibility
for guaranteeing the freedom and pluralism of the media.
At the proposal of the Parliament members among the ranks of the national
minorities, in the Boards of Administration meetings of the Radio, television and in
the structure of the National Audio0visual Council were appointed individuals
belonging to the minorities. In all the three bodies there are representatives of the
Hungarian minority.
From Article 12 - Cultural activities and facilities–were selected:
- Paragraph 1. With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially
libraries, video libraries, cultural centres, museums, archives, academies,
theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production, vernacular
forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries, including inter
alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are
competent, have power or play a role in this field:
Subparagraph a) to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to
regional or minority languages and foster the different means of access to works
produced in these languages;
Subparagraph b) to foster the different means of access in other languages to
works produced in regional or minority languages by aiding and developing
translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;
Subparagraph c) to foster access in regional or minority languages to works
produced in other languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing,
post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;
Subparagraph d) to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or
supporting cultural activities of various kinds make appropriate allowance for
incorporating the knowledge and use of regional or minority languages and
174

RDS & RCS România, Pachet bază, zona Mureş.

174

cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for which they provide
backing;
Subparagraph e) to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible
for organising or supporting cultural activities have at their disposal staff who
have a full command of the regional or minority language concerned, as well as
of the language(s) of the rest of the population;
Subparagraph f) to encourage direct participation by representatives of the
users of a given regional or minority language in providing facilities and
planning cultural activities;
Subparagraph g) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or
bodies responsible for collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing
works produced in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph h) if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance
translation and terminological research services, particularly with a view to
maintaining and developing appropriate administrative, commercial, economic,
social, technical or legal terminology in each regional or minority language.
The Government of Romania - through the Department for Interethnic Relations cooperated and financed on an annual basis NGOs organizing programmes related to
the preservation and promotion of the Hungarian language and literature. The most
important programmes of this type supported in 2008 are listed below:

175

1

Programme
Minorities in the perspective of civil
organizations – documentary

Beneficiary
MIERT Association –
Miercurea Ciuc
Culturala
Nostra
Association
Hungarian
Cultural
Society of Transylvania
"Apaczai Csere Janos"
Cultural Association

Results
Contract cancelled on the request of the initiator.
Promoting ethnic, linguistic, cultural
religious diversity by old music concerts.

and

2

Old Music Festival 2008

3

Promoting national minorities dramatics
national by radio and on DVD

4

Theatre Interethnic Festival

5

Publishing the volume of studies Ido(m)
ertekek kontextusok

6

Folkloric Festival "Szejke"

7

Treasures of the “TELEKI” library of
Tg Mures

8

Culture bring us together

Pro Lyceum Association
Valea
lui
Mihai
Ermihalyfalva

9

Jimbolia Days Festival - model of
multiculturalism and multiethnic in the
Banat

ELET-Hungarian
Women Association

Promoting ethnic and linguistic diversity in
Jimbolia city.

10

"Izvorul limpede" Popular dances camp

ELET-Hungarian Women
Association

11

The 6th Workshop Camp of the students of
Oradea. Problems of minorities in the
students perspective.

Hungarian Students Union
of Bihor

Cultivating the knowledge of national minorities
culture.
Involvement of the young peoples in settling the
problems occurred in the national minorities
communities.

12

Civil Forum 2008

Hungarology Society of
Romania
Pro Cultura Association Odorhei
Kriterion
Bibliophile
Association

Federation
of
Hungarian
Nongovernmental
Organizations
Transylvania

of

The 20th Jubilee edition of the Popular
Dance and Music meeting in Sf. Gheorghe

14

Season of space – the 13th creation camp,
for professionals and the “Minimum Party”
Arts Festival

15

Ethnic traditions importance for the young
peoples of Bihor county

Hungarian Young Peoples
Association
of
the
Province

16

Portrait of Scientists – “Neves Tudosok”

Dr.
Bernady
Gyorgy
Cultural Foundation

18

19

20

“ALTER-NATIVE 16” Short reel film
International Festival

“ Website” Campaign - Emphasizing
Internet

"Youth and European Union” Seminar, in
the vision of national minorities of Romania
– the 5th edition
“Peninsula 2008” Festival - international
multicultural festival

Promoting interethnic relations and cultural
diversity by dramatic performance.
Promoting scientific research for the knowledge
of spiritual values created by the national
minorities in Romania.
Promoting folklore, cultural traditions and
customs of national minority.
Promoting cultural values of the national
minorities in Romania.
The project consisted of seeing certain drama
performances, both in Romanian and in
Hungarian, by students of the Agricultural
School Group in Valea lui Mihai, from grades
with Romanian and Hungarian teaching
language. 40 students, accompanied by 5
teachers, saw 8 drama performances.

the

13

17

Multicultural education development by art.

Lajtha Laszlo Foundation

"Minimum Party" Group
Association

Democratic Union
Hungarian Youth

of

Media Index Association

MIERT Association
Miercurea Ciuc

–

Facilitating the development of the civil society
by facilitating partnerships between the national
minorities organizations and the majority
Knowledge of Popular culture, of the popular
dance and music in Transylvania. Improvement
of the interethnic relations.
Cultivating
the
good
knowledge
and
understandings between the young peoples
belonging to different ethnic groups.
Promoting
ethnic-cultural and linguistic
diversity in the ranks of the young peoples
belonging to national minorities and the
majority.
Multicultural education.
Promoting ethnic and cultural diversity by
friendly confrontation, generating values on
which occasion the film directors from Romania
as well from over 40 attending countries
measured their talent and knowledge in an
international competition, over
crossing
spiritual, cultural and geographic borders
Promoting experience exchange is co production
between filmmakers belonging to of different
ethnic groups or nationalise.
Making the large public aware about the
realities in the localities the project covers by
involving the local civil organizations as well as
the young peoples organizations in the
respective localities. On-line contents were
created with information role, preserving local
values by Internet using.
Development of the pluri-ethnic consciousness.

Sziget Association

Interethnic relation baaed on knowledge

21

Szekler traditions Itinerant Festival

Foundation for Studies
and Seminars on Youth
Problems

Existing legislation and regulations for young
peoples, Hungarian language.

22

National information and education tour
with the topic
“Romania of the 21st
century” - Democracy and tolerance

Hungarian
176 Students Union
of Cluj

Involving young peoples in combating
intolerance – development of the civil society.

Education programme for multicultural

Foundation

Tranzit-

Recognition of the importance of the contact
between the members of different cultural

Out of the funds allotted from state budget, by DRI, the organizations of the Council
of National Minorities Communitas Foundation – care representing the Hungarian
minority- received for 2008 the amount of 14 200 thousand lei.175 These funds were
used as follows:176
1 935 398.08
Press publications, total
- Publications
1 148774.97
- Books
786623.11
7 200 884.71
Cultural actions, total
- Expenses with materials and
staff
1 337363.01
- Cultural activity
5 863 521.70
Expenses with organizing,
1 365 557.29
total
- Expenses with materials
169 142.29
- Expenses with the personal
1 196 415.00
1 315 539.76
Total endowments
TOTAL
11 817 379.84
Weigh expenses with culture
………………………
60.93%
Weigh
expenses
with
organizing………………
11.56%
The Ministry of Culture and National Heritage and Religious Affairs supported in
2008, within the Programme European Year of Intercultural Dialogue, by the
Department for Cultural Diversity, the following cultural projects relevant for
Hungarian language:
-„EMKE Folklore Festival” –Hungarian Cultural Society of Transylvania
17 – 19 May 2008 – The activities within the project had multicultural components
and intercultural dialogue and interdisciplinary components assuring the cultural
dialogue both with the target public and the with those who like song, dance, theatre
in Hungarian language, as well as the participation of the young peoples at the
interdisciplinary dialogue and between generations for the continuity of the traditional
models. Through “EMKE Folklore Festival” cultural project
the folklore and
interpretative potential and the architectural patrimony of Târgu-Mureş Municipality,
medieval fortified city, was capitalized being a model of good practice for promoting
intercultural dialogue and involvement of children and young peoples of Romania and
Hungary.
- „ Szejke Folklore Festival”, 42 edition – Municipality Culture House Odorheiul
Secuiesc between 05 - 08 June
- Bernady Days 2008 – Cultural Foundation „Dr. Bernady Gyorgy“ 23 - 25 October
- Bontzida Cultural days - Transylvania Trust Foundation, 30 – 31 August
Administration of the National Cultural Fund, public institution subordinated to
the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage and religious Affairs, offer each years
non reimbursable financing to artists, public institutions, non-governmental
175
176

According to Government Decision HG 103/2008.
According to the 2008 report of the Communitas Foundation.

177

organizations private right legal persons who carry on cultural activities. At the end of
2007, this public financer supported, in accordance with the provisions of the Charter,
the following cultural projects:

Domain
BOOKS

1
2
3

Requesting organization

Project coordinator

Utilitas Publishing House
Imola Kirizsán
S.C. Koinónia CE Editura
SRL
Dósa Páll Csaba

4
5
6
7
8
9

S.C. Pro-Print Kiado SRL

Burus Endre

10

Korunk
Association

Kántor Ludovic

Friendship

11

12

13

Association for Cultivating
Hungarian
language
in
Transylvania
Ördög-Gyárfás Lajos

14

Interart Triade Foundation

15

University Press of Cluj
Publishing House
(Presa
Universitară Clujeană)
Püsök István

Petru Jecza-Ianovici

178

Project title

Száz erdélyi műemlék (One
hundred historical monuments of
Transylvania), Weisz Attila (text),
Emődi Tamás and Hlavathy Carol
(photo)
A megfigyelt színpad - George
Banu
Album - Tompa Gábor
Foi de aur (Golden Leaves) Visky András
Poezii - Ruxandra Cesereanu
Magamnak egészen - Anna Magda
Gyógyító székek - Újvárossy
László
Total
Erdélyi Krónika (1608-1665) Georg Karus
Literatura
stalinismului
în
România, (Literature of Stalinism
in Romania) Balázs Imre József
coordinator
Călător în Europa Centrală,
(Traveller in Central Europe)
Kántor Lajos, Kovács Kiss
Gyöngy coordinators
Variantele literaturii pentru copii
(Variants
of
literature
for
children’s)
Nyelvek és nyelvváltozatok vol. III, prof. univ. dr. Szilágyi N.
Sándor, conf. dr. Benő Attila
(drawing up)
„Spirite umane”. Monografie
(Human Spirits. Monograph)
Neculai Păduraru - Alexandra Titu
Situaţia bisericii reformate din
Ardeal şi învăţămîntul teologic în
a doua jumătate a sec. al 19-lea
(Status of the Reformed Church in
Transylvania and the theological
education in the second half of the
19th century)- Olga Lukacs

Amount
allocated
(lei)

40 962
15 195
38 655
16 545
10 470
16 060
23 650
120 575
19 000

4 550

5 530

875

15 190

10 327

5 740

16

17

18
19

20

21

22

S.C. Noi Media Print SRL
Árpád Harangozó
Apostrof Cultural Foundation
, Apostrof Library Publishing
House
József Lukács

23
24
MAGAZINES

1
2
3
4
5
6

7
8

Utilitas Publishing House
Filmtett Association
S.C. Occident Media S.R.L.

Imola Kirizsán
Zágoni Balázs

Pagini din istoria bisericească a
Sibiului medieval (Pages of the
Church history of the Middle Age
Sibiu)- Paul Lucian Brusanowski
Mapamondul scenic din sec al 18lea până în sec. al 20-lea. Teatrul
de limba maghiară în provinciile
României de azi - Horst Fassel,
Rudolf Gräf
Operarii in Vinea Domini.
Misionarii iezuiţi în Transilvania,
Banat şi Partim 1579-1715, vol. I,
Tablouri
istorice
şi
spirituale(Vinea
Domini
Missioners. Jesuit Missionaries in
Transylvania, the Banat and
Partim 1579-1715, Tome 1,
Historical and spiritual paintings)Vasile Rus
Cartography
- Bartos-Elekes
Zsombor
Cluj-Napoca, Destinul unui oraş şi
al oamenilor săi în Europa (ClujNapoca, fate of a city and its
inhabitants in Europe) - Rudolf
Gräf
Pictura Gotică în Transilvania
(Gothic Painting in Transylvania)
- dr. Dana Jenei

6 430

4 780

3 800
4 580

2 560

85 887

Scriitorul şi trupul său (The writer
and his body) - Marta Petreu
6 800
Noica
necunoscut
(unknown
Noica) - Laura Pamfil
8 300
Clujul gotic (Gothic Cluj)- Lukács
József
22 000

Transsylvania
nostra
patrimony) nr. 3, 4-5
Filmtett

(built

13 563.00
14 754.00

Irodalmi Jelen

13 000.00

Aves Foundation
Korunk
Frinedship
Association
Kántor Ludovic

Erdélyi Nimród

4 172.00

Korunk

6 700.00

Művelődés Editor Office

Művelődés

4 505.00

Carpathian Society
Transylvania (SCA)

Szőke Mária
Attila Szabó

Zsolt Szabó
from

S.C. Napsugár Editura S.R.L.

Jozsef Lukacs
Zsigmond Emese

179

Erdélyi Gyopár
Transylvania)

(Edelweis

Supplement to the
magazine Napsugár

of

children

4 088.00
1 475.00

9

Arhitext Design Foundation

Árpád Zachi

Arhitext Magazine - Între/Întru
culturi (For/Between Cultures)
44 110.00

10

Fundaţia Culturală Apostof

József Lukács

Apostof

MUSEUM ACTIVITIES
Mureş County Museum
–
Archeology
1
Department
Soós Zoltán
S.C. Cazosa Consulting
2
SRL
Vigh Gyöngyi
VISUAL ARTS AND ARCHITECTURE
1

Josif Kiraly Augustin

Josif Király Augustin

AltArt Foundation for
Rariţa Szakáts
Alternative Art
New
gallery
3
Association
Aurora Kiraly
CULTURAL EDUCATION
2

1

Centre
for
Youth
Interethnic Education
Association
Reiter Volker

Plugor Sándor Art High
2
School
Kerezsi János
NATIONAL CULTURAL PATRIMONY

2

Mureş County Museum
- Ethnography and
Popular Art Department Soós Zoltán
Association
of
Restaurateurs
of
Historical monuments
in
Transylvania
Szabó Bálint György
(ARMIT)

3

Transylvania
Foundation

4

Kuckó Association

1

Trust
Csilla Hegeduş

Bencze Ilona

Habitat pe Valea Mureşului
Superior (Habitat on Higher Mures
Valley)
30 000
Muzeul virtual al microregiunii
istorice Bonţida (Virtual Museum
of Bonţida micro-region)
6 500

Cross Section

37 000

Binar Centre for Digital Culture 35 000
2007
MARTOR XXI

32 000

ProEtnica 2007 – Days of Ethnic
20 000
Communities of Romania
Diversity unites us- Art and
language for education and
friendship
2 900

Contemporary Villages in Romania
– Openings towards Europe, Zone
application – Mureş county
24 000

Interventions of first need upon
portent historical structures
17 000
Built patrimony- catalyzer of
regional development and of social
integration
30 000
Preserving and promoting local
cultural values of global rank in
Dârjiu
18 600

The Interferences International Festival was organized between November 30 and
December 10, 2007 by the Hungarian State Theatre in Cluj, with the occasion of the
celebration of 215 years from its establishing. Interferences brought together nine
theatres from 7 countries and 12 plays translated simultaneously into three languages:
Romanian, Hungarian and English. At the „Romanian Youth” National Art Centre,
Bucharest, the Hungarian Movie Week was organised from November 12, 2007.
180

3 832.00

The National Programme of Acquiring Books and Subscriptions to Magazines for
Public Libraries acquired in the last years a significant number of titles belonging to
Hungarian language authors, as well as subscriptions to magazines belonging to the
Hungarian community in Romania. It should be noted that except from Hungarian
publishing houses other minorities did not attended this programme.
Hungarian language theatres:
•
“Csiky Gergely” State Hungarian Theatre in Timişoara;
•
State Hungarian Theatre in Cluj;
•
National Theatre in Tg.Mures, “Tompa Miklos” Group;
•
State Theatre of Oradea, “Szigligeti” Group;
•
North Theatre of Satu Mare, “Harag Gyorgy” Group;
•
“Tamasi Aron” State Hungarian Theatre in Sfântu Gheorghe;
•
“Csiki Jatekszin” Municipality Theatre in Miercurea Ciuc;
•
Figura Studio Theatre in Gheorghieni;
•
“Tomcsa Sando”r Municipality Theatre in Odorheiu Secuiesc.
Opera House
•
State Hungarian Opera in Cluj.
Puppet Theatres
•
“Puck” Theatre in Cluj, Hungarian department;
•
“Ariel” Theatre in Tg. Mureş, Hungarian department;
•
State Puppet Theatre in Oradea;
•
Department of Puppet show of “Csiky Gergely” Theatre in Timişoara;
•
Department of Puppet show of “Harag Gyorgy” Company within North
Theatre in Satu Mare;
•
Department of Puppet show of “Tamasi Aron” Theatre in Sf. Gheorghe.
Dance and Folklore Hungarian Professional Ensembles
•
Mureş Ensemble, Tg. Mureş;
•
Harghita Ensemble, Miercurea Ciuc;
•
« Haromszek Ensemble », Sf. Gheorghe.
The Ministry of Culture and National Heritage and Religious Affairs contributed to
the encouraging of the forms of expression and initiatives specific for the regional or
minority languages and favoured the different means of access to the works produced
in these languages in 2008. Also favoured the ways of access to the works produced
in other languages, supporting the translations, doubling, post synchronization and
subtitling, for example:
1. Didactic and Pedagogic Publishing House- Flop, Gaza: Hold kersey? Hog
Kersey? (How to find information)
2. Koinónia Publishing House - Steinhardt, Nicolae Napló a boldogságról (Happiness
Diary)
4. Koinónia Publishing House - Borbely, Szilard Fény a magasból (the Light from
Above)
5. Koinónia Publishing House - Demény, Péter A fél flakon (Half phial )
6. Koinónia Publishing House - Kovacs, András Ferenc Időmadárkönyv - 69 Haiku
(Book of time bird– 69 haiku)
7. Koinónia Publishing House - Szrogh, Janos 12 tanítás a zsoltárokról (12 teachings
of the Psalms)

181

8. Kriterion Publishing House - 111 versparódiák (111 parodies of poems)
9. Kriterion Publishing House
- Bálint, Tibor Zarándoklás a panaszfalhoz
(Pilgrimage at the complaint wall)
10. Kriterion Publishing House - Dsida, Jenő Zarandokút (Pilgrimage)
11. Kriterion Publishing House - Műemlékes, Füzetek Torockószentgyörgy
12 Kriterion Publishing House - Tinódi Sebestyén és a régi Magyar verses epika
(Studies about Tinódi Sebestyén)
13. Kriterion Publishing House - *** A költő régi és új életei (The lives of the poet)
14. Kriterion Publishing House
- Balázs, Sándor Bölcselet az Erdélyi MúzeumEgyesületben (Philosophy in the Transylvania Museum Society)
15. Kriterion Publishing House
- Bordy, Margit Ahol nem pihen madarak
szárnycsapása (Versek)
16. Kriterion Publishing House - Faragó, József Az igazmondó varjú (Collections
of anecdotic stories)
- Paragraph 2 In respect of territories other than those in which the regional
or minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the
number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow,
encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in
accordance with the preceding paragraph.
See paragraph 1, where among the examples we find many programmes and projects
financed in the areas where Hungarians do not live in a compact community.
- Paragraph 3 The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in
pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for regional or minority languages and the
cultures they reflect.
As the Hungarian language is concerned, The Cultural Cooperation Programme
between the Minister of Culture and Religious Affairs and the Ministry of National
Cultural Patrimony of the Republic of Hungary, concluded for the period 2005 –
2008, contains the following provisions: "The parties pledge themselves to support by
donations the endowment with books and magazines of the cultural institutes of
Romania and Hungary, in accordance with the internal legislation of the two
countries. The parties express their availability to support the publishing of their
minority publications in the other country, by financial and material aid. The parties
will support the organizing, based on reciprocity, of the Romanian Film Week in
Hungary, and the Hungarian Film Week in Romania. The movies presented at the
Hungarian Film Gala, will be used to organize the Hungarian Film Week, which will
be presented in the big cities of Romania; and the films showed at the Romanian Film
Gala, will be presented at the Romanian Film Week in the big cities of Hungary. The
parties will support direct cooperation between the national libraries of the two states,
as well as setting up partnerships and cooperation between the public libraries by
exchanging specialists, informative materials, book exhibitions, attending sessions,
colloquiums, round tables, congresses. The parties will mutually support the activity
of the Romanian Cultural Institute in Budapest, the Hungarian Cultural Centre of
Bucharest.”
From Article 13 – Economic and social life

182

- Paragraph 1. With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties
undertake, within the whole country:
Subparagraph a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting
or limiting without justifiable reasons the use of regional or minority languages
in documents relating to economic or social life, particularly contracts of
employment, and in technical documents such as instructions for the use of
products or installations;
Subparagraph b) to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of companies
and private documents of any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional
or minority languages, at least between users of the same language;”
–Were selected
We do not have data concerning the forbidding or limiting of the use of Hungarian
language in documents or instructions referring to the economic and social life. On
the contrary, the practice proves that at least in the area where a large concentration of
Hungarian speakers live, this language is used at the work place, in the hospitals,
polyclinics, shops, post offices, telephones and various other services and activities.
The most representatives in this direction are Covasna county with approximately
75% Hungarian ethnic population, Harghita county – with approximately 80% and
Mureş county – with approximately 50%. Many of the Roma and Romanians of these
areas know Hungarian; thus, a tradition of bilingualism exists in these areas.
- Paragraph 2. With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties
undertake, in so far as the public authorities are competent, within the territory
in which the regional or minority languages are used, and as far as this is
reasonably possible:
Subparagraph c) to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals,
retirement homes and hostels offer the possibility of receiving and treating in
their own language persons using a regional or minority language who are in
need of care on grounds of ill-health, old age or for other reasons;
Subparagraph d) to ensure by appropriate means that safety instructions are
also drawn up in regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph e) to arrange for information provided by the competent public
authorities concerning the rights of consumers to be made available in regional
or minority languages.
As concerns the activity of the National Authority for Consumer Protection,
according to the data sent, there are no forms for claims in the national minority
languages, but:
-

-

-

At county offices of the Consumer Protection Covasna, Harghita and Mureş
and within the Regional Inspectorate for Consumer Protection Mureş, claims
written in Hungarian language may be received from consumers and replies
may be sent in Hungarian language based on the request of the interested
persons; folder leaflets were also published to inform the consumers in
Hungarian language.
At the Regional Inspectorate for Consumer Protection Satu Mare there is staff
speaking Hungarian, and the individuals who do not know Romanian language
are assisted /supported in lodging claims and intimations.
At the Regional Inspectorate for Consumer Protection Sibiu claims written in
Hungarian language may be received.

183

From Article 14 - Transfrontier exchanges –was selected:
The Parties undertake:
- Paragraph a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which
bind them with the States in which the same language is used in identical or
similar form, or if necessary to seek to conclude such agreements, in such a way
as to foster contacts between the users of the same language in the States
concerned in the fields of culture, education, information, vocational training
and permanent education;
During 2005 – 2009, cooperation between the Romanian authorities and the
Hungarian ones knew an unprecedented dynamics: 3 joint meeting of the
Governments of Bucharest and Budapest took place, 2 in our country (in Bucharest on
20 October 2005 in Sibiu on 14 November 2007) and a meeting in Hungary (in
Budapest on 16 November 2006). On yearly basis, by the decision of the Prime
Minister, Commissions for preparing the joint meeting were set up. Based on the
quarterly communications of the ministries, the Ministry of External Affairs (MAE)
draws up documents with the stage of fulfilment of the agreed tasks on the occasion of
the meetings of the two Governments. On the 14 May 2008 Government meeting,
information concerning the stage of fulfilment of the measures agreed upon within the
joint meetings of the Government of Romania and of the Republic of Hungary during
2005-2007 were presented.
The treaty of friendship and cooperation concluded between the two countries in 1996
operates very well, reunions of the mixed commissions taking place periodically that
follow the evolution of the cooperation on different domains. One of the favoured
domains of cooperation is the protection of the Hungarian minority in Romania, and
of the Romanian minority in Hungary, based on mutual engagements.
Numerous direct contacts take place between institutions and organizations. For
instance, CORVINEUM Foundation in Cluj-Napoca organised during 28 March – 3
April 2008 the micro - theatrical season of the State Hungarian Theatre Cluj-Napoca
with guests from the European Theatres Union, in a view of adhering to European
Theatres Union.
The same foundation mediated, between 5 and 10 October 2008, the presentation to
the State Hungarian Theatre in Cluj-Napoca the play "The long Friday " at Brussels
with the purpose to promote contemporary theatre art of Romania.
The “Association of Schools” (a network between 50 schools in the Bihor county,
Romania and Hajdu – Bihar, Hungary) was established in 2002 and is currently still
developing numerous activities, exchanges and competitions.
Paragraph b) for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate
and/ or promote co-operation across borders, in particular between regional
or local authorities in whose territory the same language is used in identical
or similar form.”
Cross border cooperation is more and more dynamic at the border with Hungary, as
well as around the borders with Serbia and the Ukraine.

184

Within the existing domains of the former Ministry of Regional Development and
Housing (MDLPL), currently the ministry for Regional Development and Tourism,
the following brochures are translated into Hungarian language:
ș
Regional Operational Programme – short practical guide
ș
Regional Operational Programme – funds for regions
ș
National and European financing by MDLPL programmes
ș
REGIO terms glossary
Romania-Hungary Cross Border cooperation programme 2007-2013 proposes to
consolidate the contacts between the communities from the frontier area, for the
purpose to facilitate the development correlated with the frontier zone. The total
budget for these programmes is of EUR 275 million for the period of 2007-2013.
Within the Romanian-Hungarian Cross Border cooperation programme the Phare
Romania – Hungary 2004-2006 programme was implemented: Approximately 19.8
million EUR were allocated for PHARE CBC Romania-Hungary 2004 - 2006,
financial support within the grant schemes of 136 projects of each 85 were finalised.
The programme entitled “Viable Cultural-artistic lines between Tran frontier microregions”, RO 2004/016-940.01.01.02.19, was carried out by the Carei and Ierul Plain
Rural Association from Petreşti commune (Satu-Mare county). As a result a three
lingual Romanian-Hungarian-German publication, the “Transfrontier Info-tour “
was published.
The resource centre CREST (Satu-Mare) initiated the project RO 2004/016940.01.01.02.19 “Cultural Globalisation with Impact upon the Rural Development”,
resulting in the three-lingual publication “Cultural Guide for the Micro-Regions in
Satu-Mare and Bihor”, in Romanian, Hungarian and English.
In the framework of the Understanding between the Ministry of Education and
Research and the Ministry of Education in Hungary, over 50 de students, candidates
for a doctor’s degree, learn based on reciprocity, in Hungary and the same number of
students from Hungary learn in Romania.

f) The Russian Language
According to the national census of 2002, the Lippovan Russian ethnic group in
Romania counts 35 791 individuals, of whom 28 334 declared the Russian language
as mother tongue. The remaining 7 457 individuals declared having other mother
tongue than Russian (7 382 individuals – Romanian language; 25 individuals –
Hungarian language; 4 individuals – Romani language; 12 individuals – Ukrainian
language; 2 individuals – German language; 4 individuals – Serb language; 8
individuals – Bulgarian language; 3 individuals – Croat language; 2 individuals –
Yiddish language; 8 individuals – other mother tongue; and 2 individuals– did not
declare their language).
As concerns the general distribution, the census emphasizes a massive concentration
of the Lippovan Russians in Dobrogea. The second region as weigh of Lippovan
Russians is Moldova, then come Wallachia and the other regions, where their number

185

is smaller. Thus, the geographic area inhabited by Lippovan Russians in Romania is
East Romania, in the other regions a smaller percentage is registered only.
The distribution based on rural/urban indicator offers a mostly rural configuration
indicating a 58% percentage. Wallachia region is representative for the urban
percentage by the communities of Brăila and Bucharest cities. Another urban
representative region is Dobrogea, by the communities of: Tulcea, Constanţa,
Năvodari cities.
The distribution per counties ranks on the first position Tulcea county with a 52.9
percentage. The following is Constanţa county with a 0.81 percentage, the ranking of
the other administrative-territorial units being as follows: Iaşi, Suceava, Brăila,
Bucharest, Botoşani, Ialomiţa, Neamţ, Galaţi, Vaslui, Braşov, Timiş.
The localities where the Lippovan Russians exceed 1.500 inhabitants present compact
communities; in such localities the Lippovan Russians represent the majority of the
population (for instance in. Tulcea county: Sarichioi, Carcaliu, Jurilovca, Slava Rusă,
Slava Cercheză; in Constanţa county: Ghindăreşti, to whom the community of Tulcea
and Brăila municipalities is added). On average positions rank localities such as:
Mahmudia, Bucharest, Constanţa, Botoşani, Năvodari, Târgu-Frumos, Sulina,
Climăuţi, Manolea, Brăteşti, Chilia, Mila 23, Periprava, Sfiştofca, Lipoveni etc.
From Article 8 – Education - the following points were selected for Russian
language:
- Paragraph 1. With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the
territory in which such languages are used, according to the situation of each of
these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s)
of the State:
Subparagraph a)(iii) “to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii
above at least to those pupils whose families so request and whose number is
considered sufficient;”
Subparagraph b)(iii) “to provide, within primary education, for the teaching
of the relevant regional or minority languages as an integral part of the
curriculum;”
Subparagraph c)(iii) to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching
of the relevant regional or minority languages as an integral part of the
curriculum;
Subparagraph d)(iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii
above at least to those pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish
in a number considered sufficient;
Subparagraph e)(ii) to provide facilities for the study of these languages as
university and higher education subjects;
Subparagraph f) (iii) if the public authorities have no direct competence in the
field of adult education, to favour and/or encourage the offering of such
languages as subjects of adult and continuing education;
Subparagraph g) to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history
and the culture, which is reflected by the regional or minority language;
Subparagraph h) to provide the basic and further training of the teachers
required to implement those of paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;

186

Subparagraph i) to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for
monitoring the measures taken and progress achieved in establishing or
developing the teaching of regional or minority languages and for drawing up
periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.
The language of communication of the Lippovan Russian minority of Romania is
Russian. The geo-linguistic environments they entered in contact during history
imposed linguistic adjustments (mainly lexical), some linguists considering the “the
Lippovan Russian's language is represented by the Lippovan dialect”. Irrespective of
the sphere of linguistic influence, the Lippovan Russian language is unitary on the
entire territory of Romania, but has some differences compared to the modern Russian
language.
According to the information made available by the Ministry of Education, Research
and Youth177, there are 59 schools in Romania, where Russian mother tongue is the
teaching language; there are a number of 3.486 students and 41 teachers in the
localities of: Sarichioi, Jurilovca, Slava Rusă, Slava Cercheză, Carcaliu, Măcin,
Babadag, Mahmudia, Tulcea, C.A. Rosetti, Mila 23, Sulina, Ghindăreşti, Constanţa,
Brăila, Iaşi, Brăteşti, Focuri, Tîrgu-Frumos, Rădăuţi, Fălticeni, Manolea, Lipoveni,
Mitocu - Dragomirnei, Climăuţi, Baineţ, Botoşani, belonging to Tulcea, Constanţa,
Suceava, Iaşi, Brăila, Botoşani counties. Out of the 3.486 students learning in
Russian mother tongue in the 59 education units, 2.112 pupils are in elementary
school, and 1.374 pupils in primary school.
As consequence of the continuous promotion and support of the Russian mother
tongue study, the number of students grew in the grades/groups of study of this
discipline. Thus, in 2005 a study group was set up in Babadag; in 2006, the optional
courses in the kindergartens in Sarichioi, Jurilovca, Slava Cercheză, and for 20082009 academic year, another group was set up in Târgu- Frumos and in “Arlechino”
Kindergarten in Brăila. At the kindergartens in Brăila, Sarichioi, Jurilovca the study
of Russian mother tongue is found in the structure of optional courses together with
language, culture and religion topic.
Based on the request of the Lippovan Russian Community, aiming at a better
coordinating of the Russian mother tongue study in the above-mentioned counties, the
management of the Ministry of Education, Research, Youth and Sportsapproved two
positions of specialty inspector within the Tulcea and Brăila, respectively, county
School Inspectorates, as well as a position of expert within the Directorate General for
Education in Minority Languages and the Relation with the Parliament within the
Ministry, occupied by contest.
The first school manuals were published during the 1991-1992 academic year, for all
grades. During 2005-2006 academic years, new manuals were published for grades 1
and 4 (“Russian mother tongue”), and for grades 6 and 7 (“History, customs and
traditions of the minority”). During 2008-2009 academic years, new manual will be
published for grades 7 and 8 (“language and literature of Russian mother tongue”), as
well as two manuals of “Traditional Orthodox Religion”, for grades 1-4 and grades 58, according to the curriculum approved by the Ministry.
177

„Education for the linguistic communities in Romania during 2006 -2007 and 2007-2008 academic
years”, p. 77

187

Starting with 1990-1991 academic year, Lippovan Russian students were accepted to
the Pedagogic School in Tulcea and to the one in Suceava, whom were provided with
mother tongue study. Part of the graduates were appointed educators and
schoolteachers in the localities whit Lippovan - Russian population. The last class
graduated in 1996, and there is an urge to set up this pedagogical profile again, with
an intensive study of mother tongue, to provide for the young teaching staff.
Each year, the teaching staff benefit of continuing education stages, both in the
country as well as in Moscow, at “A.S.Pushkin” Institute, based on the
intergovernmental programme of cultural and scientific cooperation concluded with
Russia.
The school network provides the continuation of studies, for adults, within the post
high school education and in foremen school, depending on the needs of the
respective areas.
The technical education on the minority languages is not comprehensive, being
representative only for the Hungarian language. According to the partial reports sent
by the counties, for the 2008-2009 academic years, there is a slow increase of the
number of students who study in technical profile schools on mother tongue. At the
technical disciplines, in Russian mother tongue, there are 2 profiles in Iaşi with a total
number of 8 students.
The different levels of the education system on mother tongue education benefit also
of qualified teaching staff, who receive training continuously within the higher
education system in Romania; most of the staff of teachers come from the ranks of the
individuals belonging to the respective minority. There are numerous qualified
teachers in Russian language.
The continuous cooperation with the Ministry of Education, Research, Youth and
Sports, with the department for Interethnic Relations as well as with partner
institutions made possible the organizing or the involving of the Lippovan Russian
Community in essential steps for a good functioning of the education system as
concerns Russian mother tongue teaching. Thus, within the works of Slav Languages
– method of knowledge and inter-human communication, a seminar carried on in the
Czech Republic in 2006, the national curricula for Russian mother tongue was
elaborated; proposals were made regarding the content of the manual entitled History
of Lippovan Russian Culture and Civilization in Romania – author professor Feodor
Chirilă. Within the same seminar in 2007, the curricula and subject variants for
Russian mother tongue Olympics were elaborated, drawing up a list of proposals for
modifying the manuals. Within „Challenges of Russian Mother Tongue Teachers in
the European Context” seminar that took place at Gura Humorului in August 2008,
models of a working notebook were elaborated for the specific education units in
Russian mother tongue.
With the support of the Lippovan Russian Community, which considers that
education represents a priority, a number of activities were organized for the teachers'
who want to benefit from more training: such as, various conferences, educational
courses, consulting sessions, demonstrative lessons, typical to the pedagogical circles

188

of the schools attached to the Embassy of the Russian Federation in Romania and in
school units where Russian mother tongue is taught, etc. Within these seminars,
courses of teaching methods and of specialty, presented by university professors from
the country or from abroad: Feodor Chirilă ( 2006), Natalia Şemeachina (2007), etc
were provided. The above mentioned demonstrative lessons were carried out at
national level in the schools of the Slava Cercheză (2006), Slava Rusă (2007),
Ghindăreşti (2008) localities, contributing to the familiarization of the school
environment as a whole where the mother tongue is studied.
The annual courses for the teachers, organized by prestigious pedagogical profile
institutions of the Russian Federation, represent another form for life-long education
that CRLR (Community of Lippovan - Russians of Romania) promoted and
supported. Note should be taken about the annual courses organized by the Distant
Education Institute of Moscow (2005. 2006, 2007) and by the State University of
Sankt-Petersburg (2008) for lifelong education of the teachers.
Teaching aids were distributed to the school units where Russian mother tongue is
studied, through the cooperation programme with various education institutions of the
Russian federation, such as: sketch boards for various disciplines (2006), teaching
methods, scientific and classical literature book stock (2007), audio-visual materials
as CD and DVD for the support of mother tongue study, set of writers portraits (2008)
etc.
As far as the school infrastructure is concerned the CRLR was involved in opening
Russian mother tongue classrooms in the schools including Russian on their
curriculum as a discipline. Thus, in 2006 a classroom was opened and a book stock
was set up in the Schools with grades 1-8, in Sarichioi and in School No. 21 in Brăila.
In 2007 the endowment programme was continued in the schools in Slava Cercheză,
Jurilovca, Slava Rusă, Carcaliu, Brăteşti, Climăuţi, Rădăuţi, Lipoveni, Fălticeni, and
in 2008 at the schools in Ghindăreşti and Focuri. The classrooms were equipped with
audio – video materials, modern teaching aids, some of these being connected with
didactical TV programmes in Russian Federation, with the support of the Embassy of
the Russian Federation in Bucharest, within the partnership project ”Shkolnik TV”.
- Paragraph 2. “With regard to education and in respect of territories other
than those in which the regional or minority languages are traditionally used,
the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language
justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the regional or
minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.”
As the external formal evaluation is concerned, the Russian mother tongue is included
in the calendar of the national and international school Olympics. The national
Olympics are carried out on a yearly basis, being the criterion of selection for the
international phase. The following prizes were obtained at the International Russian
mother tongue Olympics organized in Moscow in June 2008: Second prize: Mitri
Daniel, Third prize: Achim Ana Maria, Mitri Nadia, Filipov Olimpia, Echimov
Mihail, Parfon Ana, Trifanov Irina, under the conditions of an evaluation based on the
State Curriculum of the Russian Federation, a higher level than of the subjects
practiced at the International Olympics in Moscow in 2004. In 2004, the program was

189

differentiated on levels and then 2 gold medals were obtained at grades 7 and 8. Three
gold medals were obtained at modern Russian language, in the same year, thanks to
the fact that these students studied Russian as mother tongue during the gymnasium
cycle.
At the International Olympics of the Russian Youth Diaspora, organized in
Moscow, during 3 - 9 November 2008, the Romanian delegation won the following
prizes:
3rd prize at grade 9 – Militei Nadia (Diploma for the best
presentation of the ethnic-cultural “Portrait of my country”delegation of Romania)
Prize for the best interpretation of lyrics– Militei Nadia
Prize for special results in the first tour of the Russian language
Olympics – Ivan Iulia
Prize for special results in the first tour of the Russian language
Olympics – Mitri Daniel.
The Olympics had a modern system of evaluation promoted in the European
education, reuniting creation items, linguistic and literary approach of a text at first
sight and gathered in contest participants of all states of the Russian Diaspora, hence
students of the Independent States Community region also.
The school attached to the Embassy of the Russian Federation in Romania has
permanently offered teaching models, organizing yearly Russian language courses
presented during the entire academic year by professors as Pavel Nicolaevici
Siminovschi, Pavel Valerievici Crihmaliov, open lessons, master-classes, assistance
and by including in their extra school activities such as performance, movie watching,
exhibitions, anniversaries of reference dates for the Russian history and culture etc.
Attending pedagogical Conferences and Forums, organized by the institutions of the
Russian Federation, led to a better knowledge of the innovative projects implemented
in the field of education in partnership with international organizations (“Early
Education and School” Project carried out by the Department for Education of
Moscow and UNESCO in approximately 300 profile institutions in Moscow;
“Education for All” Project of the Mayor‘s Hall of Moscow carried out in
partnership with the Ministry of Education of the Russian Federation etc), through the
study of experimenting the principles of inclusive education, of cross - institutional
approach of education, of differentiated approach of the teaching measures, without
operating selections for homogenizing the group, etc.)
CRLR supports the programme of scholarships in the Russian Federation initiated by
the Academy of Economic Studies and the Faculty of Foreign Languages and
Literatures within the University of Bucharest, preparing students and candidates for
Master’s degree on annual basis, in the institutions of Moscow and Saint Petersburg.
From Article 9 – Judicial authorities:
- Paragraph 1. The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in
which the number of residents using the regional or minority languages justifies
the measures specified below, according to the situation of each of these
languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the present
paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of
justice:

190

Subparagraph a) (ii) to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional
or minority language;
Subparagraph a) (iii) to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or
oral, shall not be considered inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a
regional or minority language;
Subparagraph b) (ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person
before a court, that he or she may use his or her regional or minority language
without thereby incurring additional expense;
Subparagraph b) (iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the
regional or minority languages if necessary by the use of interpreters and
translations;
Subparagraph c) (ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person
before a court, that he or she may use his or her regional or minority language
without thereby incurring additional expense;
Subparagraph c) (iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the
regional or minority languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and
translations;
Subparagraph d) to take steps to ensure that the application of subparagraphs i and iii of paragraphs b and c above and any necessary use of
interpreters and translations does not involve extra expense for the persons
concerned.
- Paragraph 2. The Parties undertake:
Subparagraph a) not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within
the State solely because they are drafted in a regional or minority language;
- Paragraph 3. The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or
minority languages the most important national statutory texts and those
relating particularly to users of these languages, unless they are otherwise
provided
–were selected
We do not have data concerning the use of Russian mother tongue in justice.
From Article 10 - Administrative authorities and public services:
- Paragraph 1. Within the administrative districts of the State in which the
number of residents who are users of regional or minority languages justifies the
measures specified below and according to the situation of each language, the
Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
Subparagraph a) (ii) to ensure that such of their officers as are in contact with
the public use the regional or minority languages in their relations with persons
applying to them in these languages; or
Subparagraph a) (iii) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages
may submit oral or written applications and receive a reply in these languages;
Subparagraph a) (iv) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may
submit oral or written applications in these languages;
Subparagraph a) (v) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages
may validly submit a document in these languages;
- Paragraph 2. In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose
territory the number of residents who are users of regional or minority

191

languages is such as to justify the measures specified below, the Parties
undertake to allow and/or encourage:
Subparagraph b) the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to
submit oral or written applications in these languages;
Subparagraph d) the publication by local authorities of their official
documents also in the relevant regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph f) the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages
in debates in their assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official
language(s) of the State;
Subparagraph g) the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the
name in the official language(s), of traditional and correct forms of place-names
in regional or minority languages.
- Paragraph 3. With regard to public services provided by the administrative
authorities or other persons acting on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within
the territory in which regional or minority languages are used, in accordance
with the situation of each language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
Subparagraph a) to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in
the provision of the service; or
Subparagraph b) to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a
request and receive a reply in these languages; or
- Paragraph 4. With a view to putting into effect those provisions of
paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the Parties undertake to take one or
more of the following measures:
Subparagraph b) recruitment and, where necessary, training of the officials
and other public service employees required;
Subparagraph c) compliance as far as possible with requests from public
service employees having a knowledge of a regional or minority language to be
appointed in the territory in which that language is used.
- Paragraph 5. The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family
names in the regional or minority languages, at the request of those concerned.
Within some authorities of the local public administration in Constanţa and Tulcea
counties, individuals knowing Russian language also carry out activities. In Tulcea
county, the local public administration authorities replied to the petitions in Russian
language, these were addressed by citizens belonging to Lippovan Russian minority.
Referring to la paragraph 3 in Article 10 of the Charter, the Border Police represents
the only institution of public safety and order of the Ministry of Administration and
Internal Affairs where individuals knowing Russian language carry out their activities.
Specialised translators in Russian language carry out their activities especially within
the compartment dealing with the public as well as with international institutions.
During 2008 a number of 8 Police agents within Suceava county Border Police
Inspectorate (I.J.P.F.) and Botoşani county Border Police Inspectorate (I.J.P.F.)
attended Russian language courses and during 2009 other 8 Police agents will attend
courses with the same profile. These measures adopted by the territorial structures of

192

the Border Police are included in the life-long education process and initiation
programme of the police agents. This is necessary so that they would be able to apply
the legal provisions referring to the use of mother tongue in the relations between the
citizens and state authorities.
43 among the I.J.P.F. Iaşi agents know Russian language. Even if this is the case,
translations of the replies to the request and applications into Russian for those who
request the response on this language are carried out in cooperation with authorised
translators.
At the border points existing on the territory of Iaşi county, printed forms are
distributed on both Romanian and Russian languages.
Within I.J.P.F. Galaţi 94 individuals knowing Russian language are employed. (1
individual has certificate of translator for this language). At the border points in Galaţi
county, information of interest, for the individuals transiting the border, are displayed
in Romanian and in Russian languages. Moreover, the printed forms of „denial of the
entry permit on Romanian territory” are printed out in Romanian and Russian
languages, according to the provisions of E.C. Regulation no. 562/2006.178
Russian language in relation between citizens and the structures of public safety and
order in Prahova county, can be provided by the 23 employees knowing this language
within the County Police Inspectorate.
From Article 11 - Media:
- Paragraph 1. The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority
languages within the territories in which those languages are spoken, according
to the situation of each language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly
or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this field, and
respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
a) to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:
Subparagraph a) (iii) to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer
programmes in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph b) (ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio
programmes in the regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
Subparagraph c) (ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of
television programmes in the regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
Subparagraph d) to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution
of audio and audiovisual works in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph e)(i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or
maintenance of at least one newspaper in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph g) to support the training of journalists and other staff for media
using regional or minority languages.

178

l Regulation (EC) no. 562/2007 of the European Parliamentand of the Council of 15 March 2006)
establishing a Community Code on the rules governing the movement of persons across borders
(Schengen Borders Code), published in the Offical Journal of the European Union no. L
105/13.04.2006.

193

In the programmes of the Romanian Broadcasting Society are found broadcastings
on national minority languages, among which in Russian language also. The
broadcasting on Russian language is transmitted on Radio Constanţa. Radio Constanţa
was set up in 1990, and in 1991 started to transmit broadcastings on minority
languages. Radio Constanţa broadcasts every Wednesday on Russian language, during
30 minutes per week. Within the Romanian Broadcasting Society, a project was
elaborated that targets the extension of the broadcasting time of the Minorities Editor
Office in Bucharest, with 2 more hours per day. Thus, each Monday, between 23.15 –
24.00 news, reportages about events, interviews etc. in Russian language are
transmitted.
The Romanian Television plays an important role in informing the public about the
identity, history and traditions of national minorities recognized in our country. The
TVR programmes about and with minorities have tried, under different contents,
according to the programme strategy of TVR, to express the multitude of forms of
expressions on different languages. All these programmes are achieved in Romanian
language or are translated and subtitled in Romanian, so that all TV spectators are
able to see and understand them, irrespective of nationality.
According to Law no. 41/1994, the Romanian Television Society has as scope to
create TV programmes in Romanian language, in the national minority languages or
in other languages, with informative, cultural, educational and entertainment
purposes. The Department of TV Programmes for Other Minorities produces seven
weekly programmes, amounting to 4 hours and 30 minutes on the channels TVR 1,
TVR 2 and TVR Cultural.
A new TV channel was set up, the TVR 3. Within the grid of the new channel we will
find all the programmes for minorities created within the Department of TV
Programmes for Other Minorities. By moving them to TVR 3 channel, the
opportunity was created for these programmes to be watched all over the country, not
just in the coverage areas of the regional studio that produced the respective TV
programmes. To the above-mentioned TV programmes were added 3 other new
weekly programmes in the national minority languages, among them the Russian
language also. TVR Bucharest produced these programmes.
The Community of Lippovan - Russians in Romania has allocated transmission time
in the programmes: „Living together” on TVR1, “Welcome in our house!” on Radio
Constanţa, “Lippovan- Russians in Romania. History and Present” on Radio Romania
International, in 2008, “All together” on TVR3, broadcastings where the minority
members can present their customs, traditions, language or cultural events etc.
Since 1990, the Community of Lippovan - Russians publishes on a monthly basis the
social-cultural newspaper “Dawn” with the editor office in Bucharest, and since
1998, the cultural magazine “Kitej-grad”, with editor office in Iaşi, both being able
to be accessed in electronic format. Their editing and publishing were financed from
the state budget.
At the same time, a website providing information and promotion are operated:
www.crlr.ro, www.zorile.ro and www.sarichioi.ro.

194

Thanks to the assiduous preoccupations and valorisation of minority culture by
national minorities, their presence grew on TV programmes produced by television
channels such as TVR or PRO TV (in 2007 the “Landâş” vocal group of Sarichioi was
the present in “Once in life”programme on TVR, in thematic programmes produced
by PRO TV in the community of Lippovan - Russians in Slava Cercheză – See
yourself on PRO TV news; 2008 – presence in “Last of the Rhapsodists” on TVR
Cultural of “Landâş” vocal group of Sarichioi, thematic programmes produced by
TVR International in the community of Lippovan - Russians in Slava Rusă.).
- Paragraph 2; The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct
reception of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a
language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language,
and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from
neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure
that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and free
circulation of information in the written press in a language used in identical or
similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of the abovementioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be
subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed
by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national
security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or
crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation
or rights of others, for preventing disclosure of information received in
confidence, or for maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
The localities with compact communities of Lippovan - Russians have access to TV
programmes produced by the televisions of the Russian Federation by cable networks.
To the school units of these localities access to teaching programmes are offered by
satellite antennas, received within „TV Shkolnik” projects. This project was achieved
by the Community of Lippovan - Russians of Romania in partnership with the
Embassy of the Russian Federation in Romania.
- Paragraph 3. The Parties undertake to ensure that the interests of the
users of regional or minority languages are represented or taken into account
within such bodies as may be established in accordance with the law with
responsibility for guaranteeing the freedom and pluralism of the media.
As concerns the measures referring to the liberty of reception of the radio and TV
broadcastings from neighbouring countries, these have to comply first of all with the
community regulatory framework on the field, that is, the Audiovisual Media Services
Directive, 2007/65/EC, of the European Parliament and Council of Europe of 11
December 2007, that applies in the case of Member States, as in the case of Romania,
Bulgaria and Hungary.
According to point 4, art.2* “(1) Member States shall ensure freedom of reception and
shall not restrict retransmissions on their territory of audiovisual media services from
other Member States for reasons which fall within the fields coordinated by this
Directive”. According to the provisions of Article 75(1), (2) of the Audiovisual Law
nr.504/2002, the following provisions shall be applied: “(1) Retransmission of any
service of programmes, transmitted legally by broadcasters being under the

195

jurisdiction of Romania or under the jurisdiction of a state with which Romania
concluded an international agreement of free retransmission on the field of
audiovisual, shall be free, under the conditions of law.
From Article 12 - Cultural activities and facilities–were selected:
- Paragraph 1. With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially
libraries, video libraries, cultural centres, museums, archives, academies,
theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production, vernacular
forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries, including inter
alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are
competent, have power or play a role in this field:
Subparagraph a) to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to
regional or minority languages and foster the different means of access to works
produced in these languages;
Subparagraph b) to foster the different means of access in other languages to
works produced in regional or minority languages by aiding and developing
translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;
Subparagraph c) to foster access in regional or minority languages to works
produced in other languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing,
post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;
Subparagraph d) to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or
supporting cultural activities of various kinds make appropriate allowance for
incorporating the knowledge and use of regional or minority languages and
cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for which they provide
backing;
Subparagraph e) to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible
for organising or supporting cultural activities have at their disposal staff who
have a full command of the regional or minority language concerned, as well as
of the language(s) of the rest of the population;
Subparagraph f) to encourage direct participation by representatives of the
users of a given regional or minority language in providing facilities and
planning cultural activities;
Subparagraph g) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or
bodies responsible for collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing
works produced in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph h) if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance
translation and terminological research services, particularly with a view to
maintaining and developing appropriate administrative, commercial, economic,
social, technical or legal terminology in each regional or minority language.
The activities carried out by the Community of Lippovan - Russians of Romania,
combined the actions organized on national level with the actions having impact on
local level. These programs were either carried out by the organization, or throughout
strategic partnerships organised at the level of school units, libraries, culture houses.
The analysis of the activities of the local communities would emphasized a diversity
of expression forms of the cultural values: specific traditions and customs („Horovod
Masleniţî” – round dance dedicated to Masleniţa feast that is taking place in the last
Sunday before entering the Eastern Fast, Christmas Carol and New Year good wishes
etc); performances in Russian mother tongue shown during the school feasts within

196

the programme of extra school activities (New Year, Saint Nicholas and old Style
Christmas, March 1 and 8 Feast, Children’s Day); anniversary of dates with special
significance for the history and culture of the Russian minority; watching of Russian
movies; paintings and photo exhibitions; performance within partnership projects with
the Local Communities/Culture houses of other localities; exhibition day of the work
of renowned authors in local libraries; continuous connection with CRLR branches,
and with the school units where Russian mother tongue is taught etc.
CRLR Publishing House published works that may be considered as reference
documentation for the study of the history, culture, language, and religion of the
Lippovan - Russians: Ivan Evseev – “Thoughts and Sadness of a Lippovan”,
Alexandra Fenoghen - ,, Diary of a Pilgrim” ( 2005); Feodor Chirilă – “Culture and
Traditions of the Lippovan - Russians”, Svetlana Moldovan - ,,Culture of the Lipovan
- Russians in National and International Context”, Palaghia Radion – “Romanian
Principalities in the Foreign Policy of Russia”, “Pray Book - Molitvennic”, “Angara
Niyri – Russian Writers. Biographic Essays”, “Life of Archpriest Avvakum (2006);
“A Sunray over Carcaliu - To Andrei Ivanov- in memoriam”, Andrei Ivanov –
“Russian Language with and without Teacher” (republished), coordinator Marin Bucă
– “A man a Symbol– in memoriam Ivan Evseev”, Agripina Anfimov – “Bâvalşina.
Customs and Popular Stories of the Lippovan - Russians in Bukovina” (2007)
The evolution of the performance of the study of Russian mother tongue allowed the
development of cultural actions, such as:
- Interethnic Festival for children and youth
- Opening laboratories for the study of Russian mother tongue
- Camp of life-long education of the Slav language teachers
-“Unity in Faith” International Conference
-Day of the Russian Federation– International Conference
- Masleniţa (Feast of spring announcing the entry to Eastern Fast. It is also called
“Forgiveness Day” because on this day are ransomed the sins before entering the
fast, according to the faith of Russians)
- Old style Winter feasts
- 15 years anniversary of the establishment of the CRLR
- Culture of Lippovan – Russians in the national and international context
- Olympics of Russian mother tongue
- Interethnic Festival of song, dance and garb of national minorities
- Interethnic Festival of Documentary film and Anthropology
- “Starover” Youth Conference
- Ethnic Minority Day in Bukovina
- Festival of Russian Poetry
- Days of May on the Danube
- Child Day- 1 June
- Participation of the Olympics medal winners to the camp in Moscow
- Interethnic Festival of national minorities children and young peoples
- International Sport festival
- Minority Youth Sport Festival
-“Effects of the integration of young minority peoples into the European Union”
(organized in cooperation with the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage and
Religious Affairs) Seminar)
- Day of the Fishers

197

- Olympics of youth belonging to Russian Diaspora
- Days of Russian culture
-“Challenges of the mother tongue educators in European context”-Seminar
Publications:
- „Dawn”, CRLR newspaper published in a number of 3000 copies, on monthly
basis, in Russian and Romanian languages;
- „Kitej – Grad”, cultural magazine, published in 1.500 copies on monthly basis,
in Russian and Romanian languages;
The Ministry of Culture and National Heritage and Religious Affairs, by its
programmes, took into consideration the provisions of Article 12 on activities and
cultural facilities. A good example in this direction is the fact that a large part of the
projects that received financial support within the 2008 Programme - European Year
of Intercultural Dialogue encouraged the forms of expression and the initiatives
specific to regional or minority languages. Within this programme, the Ministry of
Culture and National Heritage and Religious Affairs, supported the achievement of
the Seminar „Effects of integration in the national minority life”, initiated by the
Community of Lippovan - Russians of Romania.
Throughout the legislation, that regulates the cinematographic domain, Emergency
Government Ordinance no.7/2008, on amending and completing the Government
Ordinance no.39/2005, was taken into consideration the promotion of regional or
minority languages. Thus, the definition of the Romanian film or of the film created
with Romanian participation, gives the possibility for the creation of films in any
language and thus the access to the Cinematographic Fund is free for any kind of
creator, who can make the standard copy in any language and benefit of the
reimbursable credit from the Fund.
- Paragraph 2 In respect of territories other than those in which the regional
or minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the
number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow,
encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in
accordance with the preceding paragraph.
- Paragraph 3 The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in
pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for regional or minority languages and the
cultures they reflect.
The school attached to the Embassy of the Russian Federation in Romania offered
life-long teaching models, by the special institutional programme, organizing each
year Russian language courses presented during the entire academic year by
professors such as Pavel Nicolaevici Siminovschi, Pavel Valerievici Crihmaliov, open
lessons, master-classes, assistance and also included in their extra school activities
such as performance, movie watching, exhibitions, anniversaries of reference dates for
the Russian history and culture etc.
From Article 13 – Economic and social life:
- Paragraph 1. With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties
undertake, within the whole country:
198

Subparagraph a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting
or limiting without justifiable reasons the use of regional or minority languages
in documents relating to economic or social life, particularly contracts of
employment, and in technical documents such as instructions for the use of
products or installations;
- Subparagraph b) to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of
companies and private documents of any clauses excluding or restricting the use
of regional or minority languages, at least between users of the same language;”
We do not have data concerning the forbidding or limitation of the use of Russian
language in the social and economic life. At the contrary, due to the development of
the Romanian –Russian joint companies, specialists knowing Russian language are
more and more looked for.
From Article 14 - Transfrontier exchanges:
- Paragraph a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which
bind them with the States in which the same language is used in identical or
similar form, or if necessary to seek to conclude such agreements, in such a way
as to foster contacts between the users of the same language in the States
concerned in the fields of culture, education, information, vocational training
and permanent education;
–was selected.
More than ever, the relations between the Community of the Lippovan - Russians of
Romania and the Russian Federation strengthened are more emphasized and have
visible results. This is due, first of all to CRLR joining the „Международный Совет
Российских Соотечественников” („International Council of the Russian
Compatriots”) and of the Association the Young Lippovan - Russians of Romania
(ATRLR) joimning „Международная Ассоциация Молодежных Организации
Российских Соотечественников” („International Association of Youth
Organizations of the Russian Compatriots”). The President of CRLR, Miron Ignat was
also elected as member of the “World Bureau of Russian Diaspora”. The election in
this function took place on the “2nd Congress of the MCPC” carried out on Saint
Petersburg during the 24-25 October 2006, where over 600 representatives from 109
countries were present. The opening of the Congress was made by the President of the
Russian Federation himself.
At the level of the youth organization, ATRLR attended both Congresses on 13 - 14
July 2006 and 26-27 April 2007, where discussion were centred precisely on
strengthening the relations between Russian organizations of the diapsora and the
development of the Russian language study at the level of youth. The relations are
kept via Internet and solutions are searched for the achievement of common,
interregional projects.
Paragraph b) for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/
or promote co-operation across borders, in particular between regional or local
authorities in whose territory the same language is used in identical or similar
form.”

199

The Community of Lippovan Russians of Romania holds partnership relations with
the Embassy of the Russian Federation in Bucharest, with the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of the Russian Federation, being member of the international organizations as
the International Council of the Russian Diaspora, The International Association of
the Russian Language and Literature Professors, the Association of Youth within the
Organization of the Russian Diaspora. The President and the deputy of CRLR, Miron
Ignat, is member of the Council for Coordinating the International Council of the
Russian Diaspora, in 2008 obtaining the “Friendship” order by the President of the
Russian Federation.
In partnership with these institutions international activities with cultural and
education profile have been carried out, such as:
- International Olympics of Russian Mother tongue organized in Moscow – June
2008, where the participants who study in mother tongue were awarded the following
prizes: a: 2nd prize: Mitri Daniel; 3rd prize: Achim Ana Maria, Mitri Nadia, Filipov
Olimpia, Echimov Mihail, Parfon Ana, Trifanov Irina, under the conditions of an
evaluation achieved based on the State Curriculum of the Russian Federation, a higher
level than the one of the subjects practiced at the International Olympics in Moscow
in 2004. In 2004, the curriculum knew differentiations per levels and then 2 golden
medals were obtained at grades 7 and 8.
-International Olympics of the Russian Diaspora, organized in Moscow, during 3-9
November 2008, where the delegation of Romania was awarded the following prizes:
- 3rd prize at grade 9 – Militei Nadia (Diploma for the best presentation ethnic-cultural
"Portrait of my country”- delegation of Romania),
- Prize for the best interpreting of a lyric text– Militei Nadia,
- Prize for special results in the first tour of the Russian language Olympics – Ivan
Iulia,
- Prize for special results in the first tour of the Russian language Olympics – Mitri
Daniel. The Olympics had a modern system of evaluation promoted in the European
education, reuniting creation items, linguistic and literary approach of a text at first
sight and gathered in contest participants of all states of the Russian Diaspora, hence
students of the Independent States Community region also.
- Festival of Russian Poetry, May 2008, Brăila, that presume a reciting contest and a
creation contest, the performance of the children being evaluated by a jury consisting
of famous personalities in the domain, chaired by the Russian language teacher of the
School attached to the Embassy of the Russian Federation in Romania;
- Calendar of feasts, that occasioned cultural activities related to traditions and
customs thematically carried out by the above-mentioned institutions or by the local
communities in Sarichioi, Slava Cercheză, Carcaliu (Old Style New Year, Masleniţa);
- Camps and schools/summer courses staged by the International Council of Russian
Diaspora in cooperation with the Department for Education in Moscow;
International Sport Festival of the Russian Diaspora Youth, 5-13 July 2008,
Moscow, where the delegation of Romania won golden medal at badminton for teams,
and golden medal for wrestle- women
-Summer courses, Moscow, 2006, 2007 and 2008;
- Thematic trip in historical places of the Russian Federation, 13-15 July 2008, SaintPetersburg;
- Creation camp in “Komanda” complex, 13 July – 8 August 2008, Moscow area;
- “Slaveansk-na-Kubani ” International Festival, 3-14 August 2008;

200

- Annual life-long education courses of the Russian mother tongue teachers organized
in Moscow and Saint-Petersburg;
- Pilgrimage of the participants to the Festival of Lippovan - Russians of Romania
traditions and customs (Climăuţi, 2006) at Belaia Kriniţa (White Fountain) – the
Ukraine, former metropolitan residence of the Old Style believers;
- Pilgrimage of the presidents of the Local Communities from Moldova area at Belaia
Kriniţa (White Fountain) - the Ukraine, 21-23 July 2008;
- Attending International Conference of the Russian Diaspora in Moscow, Kazani and
Saint-Petersburg;
- Attending International Congress of the Russian Diaspora at Saint-Petersburg in
2006 and Moscow in 2008;
- Publishing books;
- Participation at the meeting of the Coordinating Council of the International
Organization of the Russian Diaspora;
- Obtaining visas free of charge and in emergency cases, for the active members of the
Community;
- Congresses at the level of the international Youth Organization ( MAMORS );
- Publishing the book „Policy of Russia in Romanian Principalities” – author
Palaghia Radion;
- Organizing the Children and Youth Festival, sponsored by “Lukoil” and “Petrotel”;
- Week of the Russian Science and Literature, during 26 February – 04 March 2007
carried out by cultural actions in several local communities, attended also by teachers
from the Russian School;
- Anniversary of the Day of 8 March, by a common event carried out in the schools
from the localities with individuals belonging to Lippovan - Russian ethnic group:
Slava Rusă, Slava Cercheză, Brăila, and Sarichioi;
- Launching the book „Сказание о культуре и традициях русских-липован”
(“Sayings about Lippovan - Russian culture and traditions”) of the Professor Feodor
Chirilă on the occasion of the winter feasts, events carried out with the support of the
Embassy of the Russian Federation;
- Annual Anniversary of the Day of Russia: in 2008, this anniversary took place in
Bucharest, at the Parliament Palace; in 2007 – in Sarichioi; in 2006 - at Constantan,
event that enjoyed of the presence of the representatives of various institutions of the
state such as: Department for Interethnic Relations, Ministry of the Defence, Ministry
of Culture and National Heritage and Religious Affairs, local Mayor’s Halls etc.
- Book launching in the presence of the representatives of the Embassy of the Russian
Federation in Romania (“The diary of a pilgrim” - author Alexandra Fenoghen;
“Lippovan-Russian Culture and Traditions” author Feodor Chirilă, „Lippovan
Russian Culture in National and International Context”);
- Anniversary of the Year of Russian Language;
- Participation of CRLR and of Bucharest Local Community to the cultural events:
„Russian modernism in European context” and 100 years Commemoration from the
birth of Mihail Şolohov, carried out with the support of the Faculty of Foreign
Language and Literature within the University of Bucharest and Russian School.
- Organizing joint actions with the Russian School such as:
-Exhibitions of drawings and photos;
- Master-class actions;
- Various cultural-artistic events;
- Meetings of the members of the Community and of the Board of Directors with
various delegations from the Russian Federation such as: Serghei Lavrov, Russian

201

foreign Minister; Alexandr Vasilievici Cepurin, director of the Department of
Relations with Conationals etc;
- Attending specialty conferences by the representatives of the “Dawn” publication,
within the 9th edition of the International Congress of the Press in Russian Language.
They were awarded with the Diploma of the International Association of the Russian
Press to promote and preserve the Russian mother tongue.
The Community of the Lippovan - Russians of Romania had in view the strengthening
of the cooperation with the Russian party, represented by the Embassy of the Russian
Federation in Romania, the Russian School, Russian businessmen, authorities of
Russia as well as the Russian Diaspora. In this aim, numerous meetings and events
(cultural, social, business, etc.), bilateral partnerships, delegations, trips and actions
organized in cooperation with CRLR and the Russia representatives, took place.
We mention a few of them:
- On 4 December 2004 the “Meeting of the Lippovan - Russian businessmen with the
delegation of Saint-Petersburg” took place that led to a good economic relation
between the two parties.
- On 6 – 18 December 2004 the Symposium “Fellow Citizen of 2005” took place in
Moscow, reuniting representatives of the Russian Diaspora of 48 countries. As a
tradition, the event was organised by the Mayor’s Hall of Moscow city. At this event
Russian conationals of all countries in the world are award with different prizes.
Several recommendations were made for the awarding of a prize to the representatives
of Romania, on behalf of the Embassy of the Russian Federation in Bucharest. As
consequence, Miron Ignat was proposed for the high distinction “Friendship
Distinction”.
- On 16 – 20 December 2004, at the invitation of Starover Organization of Chişinău,
CRLR attended the Symposium “The Problem of Starover Youth in the International
Context”.
- Participation of some ATRLR representatives, on 24- 27 April 2005 in Moscow at
the Work Meeting of the representatives of the youth associations from several
countries, organiser being
«Международный Дом Соотечественника»
(International House of the Compatriots). The meeting had as objective the
enlargement of the members of the above-mentioned international organizations,
work related programmes of activity on 2005 and distribution of the funds, working
commissions were formed depending on the needs of the organizations and
representatives. CRLR proposed the organising of an international Russian song
festival with participation of the countries of Europe.
- Celebration of the day of 9 May 2005 and of 60 years from the Victory against
fascism, by the commemoration of the heroes of World War II, event that enjoyed a
special attention from CRLR, being celebrated by a large series of events.
g) The Serb Language
According to the data of 2002 national census, the population belonging to the Serb
ethnic group of Romania is of 22 561 individuals of whom 19 948 declared the
Serbian language as mother tongue. The remaining of 2 613 individuals declared
having other mother tongue than Serbian, as follows: 2.427 individuals – Romanian;
72 individuals – Hungarian; 28 individuals – Romani; 13 individuals – Ukrainian; 31

202

individuals – German; 10 individuals – Turkish; 3 individuals –Tartar; 4 individuals –
Slovak; 2 individuals –Bulgarian; 5 individuals – Croat; 3 individuals – Greek; 2
individuals – Czech; 1 individuals Italian language; 10 individuals – other mother
tongue; 2 individuals – non declared mother tongue. The individuals belonging to the
Serb minority of Romania live with prevalence in the following counties: Arad,
Timiş, Caraş-Severin, and Mehedinţi. The citiyens belonging to the Serb minority of
Romania have political representation (in Parliament and locally) by the Union of
Serbs of Romania (USR). USR has branches in Timiş, Caraş-Severin, and Arad,
Mehedinţi counties and in Craiova and Bucharest Municipalities. These branches
organizes cultural and education activities.179
From Article 8 – Education – Romania selected the following points:
- Paragraph 1. With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the
territory in which such languages are used, according to the situation of each of
these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s)
of the State:
Subparagraph a)(ii) “to make available a substantial part of pre-school
education in the relevant regional or minority languages;”
Subparagraph b)(i) “to make available primary education in the relevant
regional or minority languages;”
Subparagraph c)(i) to make available secondary education in the relevant
regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph d)(iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii
above at least to those pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish
in a number considered sufficient;
Subparagraph e)(ii) to provide facilities for the study of these languages as
university and higher education subjects;
Subparagraph g) to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history
and the culture, which is reflected by the regional or minority language;
Subparagraph h) to provide the basic and further training of the teachers
required to implement those of paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;
Subparagraph i) to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for
monitoring the measures taken and progress achieved in establishing or
developing the teaching of regional or minority languages and for drawing up
periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.
Students belonging to Serb minority attend two types of education: kindergartens,
grades and schools with teaching in Serbian, (type A schools) and school units with
teaching in Romanian, but with the study of Serbian as mother tongue within these
units (type B schools). Besides the Serb language the students study The History and
Traditions of the Serb Minority (in grades 6-7), as well as Religion in the Serbian
language.180 At present (2008-2009 academic year), the situation with the type A and
type B education is as follows:

179

Accordiong to the document sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Union of
Serbs of Romania.
180
According to the document sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of
Education, Research and Innovation – Directorate General for Education in Minority Languages
concerning the education in the Serbian language.

203

Schools type A181
No.

County

1
2
3

Caraş
Severin
Timiş
Arad
TOTAL

School Network
Kinder Schools
gartens grades
1-8

18

10

6

Schoo
ls
Grade
s 5-8
2

16
1
35

5
15

10
1
17

1*
2

Total

High
Schoo
ls

Preschool

-

163

1*
1

104
267

Period of instruction
Pupils Pupils
Grade grades
s
5-8
1-4
53
30
76
5
134

59
89

Pupils
grades
9-12

Tota
l

-

246

107
107

346
5
597

* Dositei Obradovici High School in Timişoara also includes the secondary
school level.
** Teachers teaching Serb language in schools type A.

Teaching staff:
- Educators: 19
- School masters: 17
- Teachers teaching Serbian: 5
- Teachers teaching in Serbian: 32

TOTAL: 73

Schools type B 182
No.

County

School network
Total

1

Caraş
Severin

6

Schools
with
grades
1-8
6*

Instruction period
High
Pupils Pupils
School grades grades
s
1-4
5-8

Pupils
grades
9-12

Tota
l

1*

30

395

181

163

202

The information included in the tables were made available to the Department for Interethnic
Relations by the Ministry of Education, Research and Innovation –Directorate General for Education
in Minority Languages
182
The information included in the tables were made available to the Department for Interethnic
Relations by the Ministry of Education, Research and Innovation – Directorate General for Education
in Minority Languages.

204

2
3

Timiş
8
56
178
8
Mehedinţi
1
33
39
1
1
1
252
419
Total
15
* School group in Moldova Nouă includes also gymnasium cycle.
**Teachers who teach Serb language in all education cycles.
Total teachers who teach Serb language in schools with teaching
language: 14

30

234
72
701

in Romanian

School network of Serb language
No.
1.
2.

County
ARAD
CARAŞ

Education unit
Teaching language
School with grades 1-8 Fenlac
Serbian
School
with
grades
1-8
Serbian
Belobreşca
School with grades 1-8 Zlatiţa
Kindergarten Serbian
1-4, 5-8 Romanian
School with grades 1-8 Câmpia
Kindergarten, 5-8 Serbian
1-4
Romanian
School with grades 1-8 Socol
KindergartenSerbian
1-4, 5-8
Romanian
School with grades 1-4 Măceşti
Kindergarten, 1-4
Serbian
School with grades 1-4 Radimna
Kindergarten PN Moldova Veche
School with grades 1-8 Liubcova
School with grades 1-4 Divici
School with grades 1-8 Pojejena

3

4

MEHEDINŢI

TIMIŞ

School Group Moldova Nouă
School with grades 1-8 Sviniţa

Kindergarten, 1-4 Serbian
Serb
KindergartenSerbian
1-4, 5-8
Romanian
Kindergarten, I-IV Serbian
Kindergarten Serb
1-4, 5-8
Romanian
5-8 , 9-12 Romanian

1-4, 5-8 Romanian
School with grades 1-8 Divici
Serbian
Kindergarten PP nr. 14 Timişoara Serbian
Kindergarten PP nr.9 Timişoara
Serbian
D.Obradovici
Highschool Kindergarten, I-IV, V-VIII,
IX-XII
Timişoara
Serbian
School with grades 1-8 Dinias
Teaching
in
Romanian
language
Schools
with
grades
1-8 Kindergarten 1-4 Serbian
Sânmartinul Sârbesc
5-8 Romanian
Schools with grades 1-8 nr. 1 1-4 Serbian
Sânicolau Mare
Schools with grades 1-8 Cenei
Kindergarten, 1-4 Serbian
5-8 Romanian
Schools
with
grades
1-4 1-4
Beregsăul Mic
Schools with grades 1-8 Gelu
5-8 Romanian

205

Schools with grades 1-8 Saravale
Schools with grades 1-8 Variaş
Schools with grades 1-8 Sânpetru
Mare
Peciul Nou General Education
High School
Schools with grades 1-8 Crai Nou
Schools with grades 1-8 Foeni

1-4 Serbian
5-8 Romanian
Kindergarten, 1-4 Serbian
5-8 Romanian
1-8 Romanian
1- 8 Romanian
1 –8 Romanian

The Serb language study takes place at the higher education level, as follows:
I. Within the University of Bucharest – the Faculty of Foreign Languages and
Literatures, there is the Slavic Languages Chair – Serbian Language Department.
Within this department most of the courses are taught in Serbian, but a few courses
with general character that are taught in Romanian also exist. Moreover, there is also
the possibility that students continue their education at master and doctorate levels
within this curriculum, the dissertations of the candidates for the doctor’s degree
being elaborated in the Romanian language. Besides the teaching staff who teach
within this department there are also foreign lecturers teaching in it (their contract
being concluded for a period of one year, with possibility to extend it for several
years). Based on the Treaty of Friendship, Good Neighbourhood and Cooperation
between Romania and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Republic of Serbia being
the successor stat of FRY) – signed in May 1996 entered in force one year later – in a
view of establishing cultural-scientific relations, lecturers of Romanian and Serb,
respectively, language and literature exchanges take place between the two countries.
During the 2008-2009 academic year, there is a lecturer teaching in the Department of
Serbian of the University of Bucharest (a second lecturer teaching within the West
University of Timişoara). The admission in the first year of studies has been made
until the present time once every 2 years and the minimum number of students needed
to form a group is 15 (seats assured from the budget). Five of these seats are provided
to the students belonging to the Serb minority in Romania, other two seats may be to
be occupied with tuition fee.
The teaching staff teaching in the Serb language department of the University of
Bucharest, attend continuing education programmes on their own account, such
programmes being not organised in a periodical manner within the University of
Bucharest aiming at continuing education of the teaching staff that teach within this
department.
II. Within the West University of Timişoara – Faculty of Philology, History and
Theology there is the Slavic Languages Chair – one of the double academic
specializations available being Serb and Croat Language and Literature –
Romanian Language and Literature or a foreign language and literature. As in the
case of the University of Bucharest, based on the Treaty of Friendship, Good
Neighbourhood and Cooperation between Romania and Serbia, a lecturer from Serbia
is employed within the chair of Slavic languages during one academic year, with the
possibility of extending the contract for a higher period.
As concerns the organisation of the admission process, this takes place annually for
the above-mentioned specialization, the total number of seats being 15 (10 budget

206

paid seats and 5 seats that require students to pay their tuition fees). As in the case of
the University of Bucharest, the courses within the aforementioned specialities are
taught in Serbian and Croat for the most part, but there are also a few general courses
taught in Romanian.
The professors within the Serb and Croat specialty participate as formation teachers of
curricula dedicated to teaching staff continuing education courses, teaching staff who
teach Serbian and Croat at gymnasium or high school level (for example: Prof. Mihai
Radan - who is at the same time the President of the Union of Croatians of Romania
– attended recently two continuous education courses: in Baziaş –October 2007 and in
Reşiţa – December 2008). Moreover, the professors that teach within the academic
specialty Serbian and Croat language and literature also attend scientific symposiums
organised within the West University Timişoara that took place in the last few years,
reuniting teaching staff specialized in teaching Slav languages and literature from
several countries of Europe. The debates finalized with the publishing of a collective
volume, published under the coordination of the members of the Slavic Languages
Chair. The Chair also organised scientific symposiums for the students within four
academic centres (entitled Serbian-Romanian relations and interferences - 2003):
Timişoara, Bucureşti, Novi Sad and Belgrad, action finalised with publishing a
volume containing with the papers presented by the attending students. The volume
was published in 2005, in Serbian, being edited from the funds existing at the disposal
of the Union of Serbs of Romania (the largest amount being provided by the
Government of Romania, buy means of the Department for Interethnic Relations).
Within the Timişoara West University there is also the specialization of applied
languages, where the students have the right to choose three languages of
specialization, one of these being also a Slavic language.
Continuing education of the teaching staff is achieved also within the teaching
methods activities organised on annual basis by the Union of Serbs of Romania for
the teaching staff of the schools with teaching in Serb language.183
Additional information:
Each year for grades 7 to 12, the Serbian language and literature interschool
contests are organised at all levels: school, county and national. The Ministry of
Education, Research and Youth, the Union of Serbs of Romania and the Department
for Interethnic Relations reward the students awarded with prizes at the interschool
contests.
Within the Timiş county School Inspectorate an inspector for Serbian is employed,
covering also Caraş-Severin, Arad and Mehedinţi counties.
According to the information offered by the Ministry of Education, Research and
Innovation, during the last years the problem referring to providing school handbooks
in Serbian is partially solved. Thus, besides the original manuals in Serbian for grades
1-8 republished manuals for grades 1 - 4 were translated in Serbian. The Union of
183

According to the written material sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Union of
Serbs from Romania.

207

Serbs of Romania financed the publishing of the volume 4 of the series Collection of
Literary Texts in Serbian.
From Article 9 – Judicial authorities
- Paragraph 1. The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in
which the number of residents using the regional or minority languages justifies
the measures specified below, according to the situation of each of these
languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the present
paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of
justice:
Subparagraph a) (ii) to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional
or minority language;
Subparagraph a) (iii) to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or
oral, shall not be considered inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a
regional or minority language;
Subparagraph b) (ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person
before a court, that he or she may use his or her regional or minority language
without thereby incurring additional expense;
Subparagraph b) (iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the
regional or minority languages if necessary by the use of interpreters and
translations;
Subparagraph c) (ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person
before a court, that he or she may use his or her regional or minority language
without thereby incurring additional expense;
Subparagraph c) (iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the
regional or minority languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and
translations;
Subparagraph d) to take steps to ensure that the application of subparagraphs i and iii of paragraphs b and c above and any necessary use of
interpreters and translations does not involve extra expense for the persons
concerned.
- Paragraph 2. The Parties undertake:
Subparagraph a) not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within
the State solely because they are drafted in a regional or minority language;
- Paragraph 3. The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or
minority languages the most important national statutory texts and those
relating particularly to users of these languages, unless they are otherwise
provided
–were selected
We are not in the possession of data referring to the use of Serbian in justice.
From Article 10 - Administrative authorities and public services:
- Paragraph 1. Within the administrative districts of the State in which the
number of residents who are users of regional or minority languages justifies the
measures specified below and according to the situation of each language, the
Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:

208

Subparagraph a) (ii) to ensure that such of their officers as are in contact with
the public use the regional or minority languages in their relations with persons
applying to them in these languages; or
Subparagraph a) (iii) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages
may submit oral or written applications and receive a reply in these languages;
Subparagraph a) (iv) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may
submit oral or written applications in these languages;
Subparagraph a) (v) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages
may validly submit a document in these languages;
Paragraph 2. In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory
the number of residents who are users of regional or minority languages is such
as to justify the measures specified below, the Parties undertake to allow and/or
encourage:
Subparagraph b) the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to
submit oral or written applications in these languages;
Subparagraph d) the publication by local authorities of their official
documents also in the relevant regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph f) the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages
in debates in their assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official
language(s) of the State;
Subparagraph g) the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the
name in the official language(s), of traditional and correct forms of place-names
in regional or minority languages.
- Paragraph 3. With regard to public services provided by the administrative
authorities or other persons acting on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within
the territory in which regional or minority languages are used, in accordance
with the situation of each language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
Subparagraph a) to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in
the provision of the service; or
Subparagraph b) to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a
request and receive a reply in these languages; or
Subparagraph c) to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a
request in these languages.
Paragraph 4. With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs
1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the Parties undertake to take one or more of the
following measures:
Subparagraph b) recruitment and, where necessary, training of the officials
and other public service employees required;
Subparagraph c) compliance as far as possible with requests from public
service employees having a knowledge of a regional or minority language to be
appointed in the territory in which that language is used.
Paragraph 5. The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family
names in the regional or minority languages, at the request of those concerned.
Within some authorities of the local public administration in Caraş-Severin and
Mehedinţi counties there are individuals who know Serbian. In Caraş-Severin and

209

Timiş counties, the authorities of the local public administration reply to the petitions
submitted by citizens belonging to Serb minority in their mother tongue. Within the
territorial structures of the Border Police in the areas where citizens belonging to the
Serb national minority (as well as to Slovak or Turkish) are under the weight of at
least 20% of the total population of the administrative-territorial units where these
communities are concentrated, individuals knowing these languages are employed.
From Article 11 - Media:
- Paragraph 1. The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority
languages within the territories in which those languages are spoken, according
to the situation of each language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly
or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this field, and
respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
a) to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:
Subparagraph a) (iii) to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer
programmes in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph b) (ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio
programmes in the regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
Subparagraph c) (ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of
television programmes in the regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
Subparagraph d) to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution
of audio and audiovisual works in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph e)(i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or
maintenance of at least one newspaper in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph g) to support the training of journalists and other staff for media
using regional or minority languages.
Radio programmes in Serbian: The Romanian Broadcasting Society broadcasts
programmes in the Serbian language produced in the regional studios Radio
Timişoara and Radio Reşiţa. Radio Reşiţa replied to the requests of the minorities
representatives of that region, and currently there are programmes broadcast in eight
languages of the national minorities of Romania, among which the Serbian (30
minutes per week, once a week)184. Within the regional studio Radio Timişoara,
programmes in Serbian are broadcast daily, being allocated approximately 840
minutes per week.185
The documentation sent by the Romanian Broadcasting Society to the Department for
Interethnic Relations specifies that in accordance with the provisions of Law on
ratifying the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages applicable to the
respective domain, a project was elaborated “targeting the extension of the
broadcasting time”186. Serb language would benefit by an increased broadcasting time
184

According the documentation sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Romanian
Broadcasting Society (Radio Romania Regional – Department Editorial Production, Regional Studios –
Minorities Editor Office).
185
According the documentation sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Romanian
Broadcasting Society (Radio Romania Regional – Department Editorial Production, Regional Studios –
Minorities Editor Office).
186
According to the documentation sent to the Deprtament for Interethnic Relations by the Romanian
Broadcasting Society (Radio Romania Regional – Department Editorial Production, Regional Studios
–Minorities Editor Office).

210

(within time interval 22.30-23.15, one day peer week), a news bulletin, reportages
about events, interviews etc.
There are also cross border programmes which are broadcast by Radio Timişoara for
the last 10 years, which are produced twice per month, in three languages (Serb,
Romanian and Hungarian), with the participation of the cities of Subotiţa, Seghedin
and Timişoara.
TV programmes in Serb language: The Romanian Television Society ensures the
transmission of the programmes in the national minority languages on four of the
national TV channels: TVR1, TVR2, TVR Cultural, and TVR3.
The Department for Other Minorities within the Romanian Television Society
produces seven weekly programmes, amounting to 4 hours and 30 minutes on the
channels TVR 1, TVR 2 and TVR Cultural. The programmes transmitted on these
channels do not include programmes in Serbian, but there are programmes dedicated
to the interethnic and intercultural subject that promote cultural values of the various
national minorities of Romania that catches and express the feature packed social field
in Romania. Examples of such programmes, transmitted each week on one of the
three above-mentioned TV channels are the following: Luggage for Europe / Living
together (TVR 1, duration 50 minutes, on Wednesday, starting with 16.00), Together
in Europe (TVR 2, duration 52 minutes, on Friday, starting with 15.00), Identities
(TVR Cultural, on Tuesday and Wednesday, starting with 19.00 and starting with
16.00).
It must be mentioned that before setting up TVR3 channel (October 2008), the
programmes about the communities of the national minorities created by the
Department for Other Minorities were in Romanian language only, but the territorial
studio of Timişoara produced and broadcasted on the regional frequency weekly
programmes in Serb language.
All together with creating TVR 3 channel, the above-described programmes entered
the programme grid of this channel, the programmes that were only regionally
transmitted before, being at present accessible to the public all over the territory of
Romania. Moreover, in the TVR 3 programmes entered in October 2008 programmes
in more languages of the national minorities of Romania, including in Croat language
(produces at TVR Timişoara). The number of programmes about the national
minorities was supplemented by creating new ones (nine of them), broadcast on a
weekly basis, increasing thus the allocated time span.187
Developing partnerships with the Department for Interethnic Relations, as well as
with the national minorities organisations, the Romanian Television also promotes the
actions organised by these. An example as concerns the Serb minority of Romania is
the promotion by the Romanian television of the traditional concert of 27 January, on
the day of Saint Sava, organised on annual basis at the Romanian Opera House in
Timişoara by the Union of Serbs of Romania.

187

According to the document sent to the Departament for Interethnic Relations by the Romanian
Television Society.

211

According to the information sent, the Television Romanian Society has planned to
apply the following types of actions:
- Organizing during 2009 continuous education courses for the collaborators
who create new programmes in national minority languages at TVR 3;
- Initiating (within the limits of the budget allotted) a project of producing 19
documentaries about outstanding personalities from the ranks of national
minorities as well as a series of news reports about monuments, buildings and
museums representative for the national minorities of Romania;
- Reserving a transmission time on TVR 3 channel for broadcasting, on weekly
basis, an art film from the states of origin of the national minorities, with
subtitling in Romanian. In this direction, TVR initiated actions in order to sign
or renew cooperation agreements between the public television of Romania
and televisions of different states, among them Serbia. These agreements have
as purpose exchanges of movies, reports etc., their broadcasting being made
for the purpose of promoting national minority languages.
There are two press bodies published in Serbian, whose publishing is ensured with
state budget funds: NAŞA RECI (newspaper) is published ohm weekly basis and
KNIJEVNI JIVOT (literary magazine), with quarterly publication. The two
publications are published by the Union of Serbs of Romania, with the financial
support of the Department for Interethnic Relations.
As concerns the qualifications of the journalists who use regional or minority
languages, a self evident example is one of the programmes organised by the
Department for Interethnic Relations in March 2008: seminar entitled We reflect
diversity - mass media and the approach of intercultural dialogue. The event reunited
representatives of the national minorities' media, those of the central media, as well as
the representatives of the civil society, and had as main objectives raising awareness
and increasing public involvement in what concerns the promotion of cultural
diversity as well as the identification of the role of the media in this process.
- Paragraph 2. The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception
of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language
used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language, and not to
oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring
countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure that no
restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of
information in the written press in a language used in identical or similar form to
a regional or minority language. The exercise of the above-mentioned freedoms,
since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such
formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are
necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial
integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of
others, for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for
maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
In accordance with the provisions in paragraph 2, as concerns the states neighbours of
Romania, but which are not member States of the European Union, these may
transmit programmes dedicated to national minority in Romania, based on an

212

agreement of retransmission issued by t6he national Audiovisual Council, for the
audiovisual programmes that are not submitted to an international agreement of
retransmission. In this situation might be the programmes transmitted by the Ukraine,
Serbia, and the Republic of Moldova for the national minorities in Romania 188
Thus, within RCS-RDS TV cable network in Romania, there are three television
channels that are taken over by this operator and are broadcast in the region of the
counties where the large majority of the Serbs in Romania live. These three TV
channels are TVR Serbia, RTSAT and Pink+. As concerns the radio programmes
from Serbia, these are received with prevalence in Caraş-Severin county and in Timiş
county (Radio Belgrad).
- Paragraph 3. The Parties undertake to ensure that the interests of the users
of regional or minority languages are represented or taken into account within
such bodies as may be established in accordance with the law with responsibility
for guaranteeing the freedom and pluralism of the media.
According to the provisions in Article 75(1), (2) in Law nr.504/2002 on Audiovisual,
the following provisions shall be applied: "(1) Retransmission of any service of
programmes, transmitted legally by broadcasters being under the jurisdiction of
Romania or under the jurisdiction of a state Romania concluded an international
agreement of free retransmission in the field of audiovisual, shall be free, under the
conditions of the law. (2) Retransmission on the territory of Romania of the services
of programmes, broadcast by the broadcasters being under the jurisdiction of the
Member States of the European Union, shall be free and does not need any previous
authorization.”189
In accordance with the provisions of Law on audiovisual, provided in Article 82(1),
the distributors of services shall have the obligation to include in their offer the
programmes of the Romanian television Society, that lead to the extension of the
possibility of reception of the public stations programmes dedicated to national
minorities. Moreover, according to the provisions in Article. 82, paragraph 4, for the
localities where the national minorities represent a weight exceeding 20% of the total
population, it shall be had in view to enhance their access to programmes, also
entering the obligation of the transmission of programmes with free retransmission, in
the language of the respective minority.190
From Article 12 - Cultural activities and facilities–were selected:
- Paragraph 1. With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially
libraries, video libraries, cultural centres, museums, archives, academies,
theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production, vernacular
forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries, including inter
alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are
competent, have power or play a role in this field:
188

According to document sent to the Department for Interethnic Relatiomns by the National
Audiovisual Council.
189
According to the document sent to the Departament for Interethnic Relations by the National
Audiovisual Council (CNA).
190
Idem.

213

Subparagraph a) to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to
regional or minority languages and foster the different means of access to works
produced in these languages;
Subparagraph b) to foster the different means of access in other languages to
works produced in regional or minority languages by aiding and developing
translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;
Subparagraph c) to foster access in regional or minority languages to works
produced in other languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing,
post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;
Subparagraph d) to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or
supporting cultural activities of various kinds make appropriate allowance for
incorporating the knowledge and use of regional or minority languages and
cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for which they provide
backing;
Subparagraph e) to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible
for organising or supporting cultural activities have at their disposal staff who
have a full command of the regional or minority language concerned, as well as
of the language(s) of the rest of the population;
Subparagraph f) to encourage direct participation by representatives of the
users of a given regional or minority language in providing facilities and
planning cultural activities;
Subparagraph g) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or
bodies responsible for collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing
works produced in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph h) if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance
translation and terminological research services, particularly with a view to
maintaining and developing appropriate administrative, commercial, economic,
social, technical or legal terminology in each regional or minority language.
Each year the Union of Serbs of Romania, carries out cultural-linguistic programmes,
benefiting of a significant financial support from the Romanian state, by means of the
Department for Interethnic Relations. A few examples from the last 4 years (20052008) are showed below:
2005 – Anthology of Serb literature “Zbornik - III”; Friendship without frontiers –
cultural-artistic meeting, Cultural Symposium –literary creations in the Serb speak of
Banat, Festival of the Danube villages, Culture days of the Serbs in Bucharest etc.
2006 – Traditional Festival of the Serb popular songs and dances, the 15th edition,
Anthology of Serb literature, Cultural Symposium – literary creations in the Serb
speak of Banat, Youth, culture, tradition, Round table – Let’s preserve our traditions,
Folklore Festival – Marathon of Serb popular songs and dances, Romanian- Serb
Relations and interference in cultural plan, Theatre festival for children, Folklore
European Festival of Serbs from the Diaspora, Folklore Festival – cultural summer
etc.
2007 – Festival “Marathon of song and dance – 2007”, “Dustier Ordovician” cultural
literary-meeting, “Boric – Addenda” Anthology of Serb literature, International
Festival „Europe sings and dances”, Romanian- Serb Relations and interference in
cultural plan, European Folklore festival of the Serbs from, Cultural Spiritual Days of

214

the Serbs around the world Serb culture days in Reşiţa, Serb Culture days in
Timişoara etc.
2008 – Historical and cultural monuments of the Serbs in Banat, “Marathon of song
and dance – 2008”, Literary meeting of the national minorities of Romania; Cultural
Diversity, Culture Day – Belobreşca in Timişoara, Festival of chorus, Days of Serb
Culture in Arad, Future belongs to the youth – meeting of the young intellectuals etc.
Besides these programmes the Union of Serbs in Romania published on annual basis,
a considerable number of books in Serb language, most of the funds needed to
publishing became also from the state budget (by means of the Department for
Interethnic Relations). Thus in 2005, 12 volumes, in 2006 – 18 volumes, in 2007 – 12
volumes, and in 2008 – 8 volumes in Serb language were published.
The editorial activity, beside the cultural one occupies an important role in the
preoccupations of the Union of the Serbs of Romania (USR). USR and the
Department for Interethnic Relations financed the publication of the Anthology of
Serb Literature Zbornik (in 8 volumes and 6 000 pages). The merits of this project
were recognised by receiving the golden medal at the International Book Fair in
Belgrade.191 Other titles of important books for the Serb culture in Romania,
published with the financial support of the Romanian State are the following:
Historical and Cultural Monuments of Serbs in Banat - Romania, Serbian - Romanian
Dictionary, Literature of Serbs of Romania between the two World Wars
The cultural activities of the Serbs in Romania were assisted by the Union of Serbs of
Romania by supporting also the actions undertaken within the cultural artistic
societies that carried on theatrical, musical, choral, choreographic and instrumental
activities. Under the guidance of the Union, 22 amateurs, cultural-artistic or musical
ensembles and two theatre companies activate, some of these ensembles receiving
prizes within festivals in the country and abroad.192 However, there is no state
professional cultural institution or folkloric ensemble at present.193
It is also important to specify the fact that the Union of Serbs of Romania established
relations of cooperation with the National Council of the Romanian National Minority
of Serbia, with the ministries and culture institutions in Belgrade, Novi Sad, Vârşeţ,
Kikinda and Seceani in Serbia, having also relations of cooperation with the
representatives of the Serbs in Hungary, with the National Council of the Serbs in
Croatia, with the Council of Lujic Serbs in Germany.194
The Ministry of Culture plays also an important role in promoting the cultural
activities and facilities. The Decision of the Government no. 78/2005 on the
organisation and functioning of the Ministry of Culture and Religious Affairs,
republished, stipulates the fact that the activity of the Ministry of Culture and
Religious Affairs “ensures the observance and promotion of the fundamental rights
191

According to the documents sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Union of Serbs
of Romania.
192
According to the document sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Union of Serbs
in Romania.
193
Idem.
194
Idem.

215

and liberties, sanctioned by the Constitution of Romania and by the international
treaties and conventions Romania is part”, the following aspects being included:
liberty of expression and creation; equal chances and free access to culture;
participation at the cultural life, including in wording cultural policies; liberty of
conscience and of religious believes (art. 2).195 In the area of the general objectives
pursued by the Ministry of Culture, of Religious Affairs and National Patrimony the
promotion of the diversity and the preservation of the cultural identity, the promotion
of multiculturalism and the protection of the minorities culture, supporting the
circulations of productions and creations, promotion of intercultural dialogue and of
the cultural creation, etc, are found. (Article 4).196
In view to fulfil these objectives, the Ministry of Culture, Religious Affairs and
National Patrimony have initiated and financed partially projects carried on in
cooperation with other governmental institutions and/or non-governmental
organizations. These activities are aiming at assuring the transmission of information
about the culture of national minorities, preserving and capitalizing the representative
patrimony for the national minorities in Romania and the promotion of respect toward
these through mass-media both in Romania and abroad.197 It was found that based on
the cultural projects meant to promote ethnic cultural and linguistic identity of the
minorities in Romania, the cooperation between the Ministry of Culture and the nongovernmental organizations representative for the national minorities was intensified.
Examples of such programmes where citizens belonging to the Serb minority in
Romania were involved are the following:
- ProEtnica Festival (the eighth edition took place in 2008) – organised by the
Interethnic Education Centre for Young People – reunites on an annual basis hundreds
of representatives of the 20 national minorities of Romania within the medieval
environment of the Sighişoara fortified city. The events include exhibits,
handicraftsmen stands, exhibition stands of the communities organizations, movies
watching, artistic programmes, programmes for children, interethnic balls, academic
programmes (debates, conference, round tables, session for information, book
launching).
- Days of the Serb Culture in Timişoara – organised by the Union of Serbs of
Romania – includes cultural-artistic events (folklore and sacred and laic music
performance, symposiums, various exhibits, book fair), aiming at promoting and
capitalizing language, traditions, folklore and implicitly the Serb cultural patrimony in
Romania, as well as their transmission from a generation to the other. The events
attended by individuals belonging to other national minorities, as well as to the
majority, also targets to enhance intercultural dialogue between the different
communities.
By elaborating the Strategy for decentralization in the cultural field (October 2006),
The Ministry of Culture intended to trace guiding lines of cultural policies and
195

According to the documentation sent to the Grade for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of
Culturei, Reliogious Affairs and National Patrimony.
196
According to the documentation sent to the Grade for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of
Culturei, Reliogious Affairs and National Patrimony.
197
According to the document sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of
Culture, religious Affiars and National Patrimony.

216

strategies implementation at the level local authorities, favouring to put at their
disposal individuals that speak and understand regional or minority languages. This
represented an attempt to meet the social-linguistic needs expressed by the local
communities members.198
The objective of the legislation regulating the cinematography domain was the one to
promote regional or minority languages (Emergency Ordinance of the Government
no. 7/2008, of modifying and completing the Order of the Government no. 396/2005).
Thus the possibility is given to produce a movie in any language spoken in the
communities of Romania, the access to the Cinematography Fund being allowed to
any creator.199
By the chapters referring to culture within the intergovernmental agreements of
Romania with other countries, it is possible to promote the good relations of
cooperation between the national minorities of Romania and the states where that
nationality is majority, as well as between the national minorities of Romania and the
similar communities of the Diaspora. Thus, the initiatives targeting to express in or
the free access to the literary creations in the regional or minority languages is
facilitated and encouraged.
Other examples of initiatives of the public authorities in a view to promote the
Serbian language are the following: Mehedinţi County Council published folding
leaflets drawn up in Serb language concerning „ Mehedinţi Plateau Geo-Park –
Traditions and customs”, „Natural values in Mehedinţi Plateau Geo-Park”, and „
Mehedinţi Plateau Geo-Park – Flora and Fauna”.200
- Paragraph 2 In respect of territories other than those in which the regional
or minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the
number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow,
encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in
accordance with the preceding paragraph.
- Paragraph 3 The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in
pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for regional or minority languages and the
cultures they reflect.
We are not in the possession of relevant data on this topic.
From Article 13 – Economic and social life
- Paragraph 1. With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties
undertake, within the whole country:
Subparagraph a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting
or limiting without justifiable reasons the use of regional or minority languages
in documents relating to economic or social life, particularly contracts of
employment, and in technical documents such as instructions for the use of
products or installations;

198

Idem.
Idem.
200
According to the written material sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of
Development, Public Works and Housing.
199

217

Subparagraph b) to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of companies
and private documents of any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional
or minority languages, at least between users of the same language;”
–were selected
We are not in the possession of relevant data regarding the limitation of Serb language
use in social and economic life.
From Article 14 - Transfrontier exchanges - were selected:
- Paragraph a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which
bind them with the States in which the same language is used in identical or
similar form, or if necessary to seek to conclude such agreements, in such a way
as to foster contacts between the users of the same language in the States
concerned in the fields of culture, education, information, vocational training
and permanent education;
- Paragraph b) for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate
and/ or promote co-operation across borders, in particular between regional or
local authorities in whose territory the same language is used in identical or
similar form.”
Romania and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY) signed the Treaty of
Friendship, Good Neighbourhood and Cooperation on 16 May 1996, this entered in
force one year later. The Republic of Serbia being the direct successor of FRY, this
treaty represents the general framework for the development of the bilateral Romanian
– Serb relations.201
Romania and the Republic of Serbia are part of Danube 21 Euroregion. Together
with Bulgaria, the two states have signed the documents of setting up the Danube 21
Association for transfrontier cooperation in January 2002. The Association represents
a partnership between Romania (Calafat city, Poiana Mare, Desa, Cetate and
Ciupercenii Noi communes), Bulgaria (Vidin city and Rujniti, Macriş, Belogradcic,
Lom, Kula, Dimovo and Novo Selo localities) and Serbia (Zaicear city and
Sokobania, Kladovo, Bolivat, Kniajevat, Bor, Negotin and Madanpec localities). The
objectives of this association of regional cooperation are the following: development
of the cross-border cooperation between Olt county and Plevna region, enhancing the
effectiveness of the local authorities in Plevna region and Olt county, cooperation in
the field of infrastructure, achieving and administrating cross border project.202
Romania and the Republic of Serbia are part of Euroregion Middle Danube – Iron
Gates, initiative of the Romania, Bulgaria, Serbia and Montenegro states, the
agreement of association and the statute were signed in October 2005. As
consequence of this common initiative of the respective county councils of Romania,
Bulgaria and Serbia and Montenegro, on 6 October 2005, the Agreement of
Association and the Statute of the “Middle Danube – Iron Gates” Euro region were

201

Bilateral relations Romania - Serbia, http://www.mae.ro/index.php?unde=doc&id=36683, accessed
on 26 March 2009.
202
According to the document sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs.

218

signed at Vidin. The Association represents a partnership between Romania
(Mehedinţi county), Bulgaria (Vidin city) and Serbia (Kladovo city – Bor District).203
Romania and the Republic of Serbia are part of IPA Programme of Cross-Border
Cooperation, which is a programme financed from then Instrument of Assistance for
Pre-Accession. This programme is aiming at the economic and social development,
environment protection and preparing for emergency situations, by creating solid
partnerships. The budget of the programme for 2007-2009 is EUR 23 million.204

h) The Slovak Language
Slovaks settled down in Romania approximately two century ago, the areas where
relatively compact communities are met being Arad and Bihor counties. From the
beginning the Slovak colonists had contacts with other ethnic groups in the respective
areas. Preservation of the language, religion, customs and traditions at the level of
these communities was possible only by joining the efforts of the family, church and
school. Conscious of the need of an education in mother tongue, the Slovaks built, in
parallel with the churches building of the confessional schools. In the region of Banat
and of Arad the Evangelical Lutheran religion Slovaks settled down. A good example
is represented Nãdlac, Arad county. Here the Slovak population settled down in 1803
came from the beginning with a schoolmaster, and the primary education starts in a
rented house since the year of colonisation (according to the collective volume
History of national minorities in Romania, EDP, 2008).
According to the official data of 2002 census, 0.1% of the population of Romania,
more specifically 17 199 individuals declared to belong to the Slovak ethnic group, of
whom 16 108 individuals declared Slovak language their mother tongue. The Slovak
minority is concentrated in Arad, Bihor, Sălaj and Timiş counties.
From Article 8 – Education – the points ratified by Romania are:
- Paragraph 1. With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the
territory in which such languages are used, according to the situation of each of
these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s)
of the State:
Subparagraph a)(i) “to make available pre-school education in the relevant
regional or minority languages;”
Subparagraph b)(i) “to make available primary education in the relevant
regional or minority languages;”
Subparagraph c)(i) to make available secondary education in the relevant
regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph d)(iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii
above at least to those pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish
in a number considered sufficient;
Subparagraph e)(ii) to provide facilities for the study of these languages as
university and higher education subjects;
203

Idem.
Document sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of Regional
Development and Housing .
204

219

Subparagraph g) to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history
and the culture, which is reflected by the regional or minority language;
Subparagraph h) to provide the basic and further training of the teachers
required to implement those of paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;
Subparagraph i) to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for
monitoring the measures taken and progress achieved in establishing or
developing the teaching of regional or minority languages and for drawing up
periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.
Over the two centuries of existing on the territory of Romania, the Slovaks preserved
their linguistic, ethnic, cultural and spiritual identity due to the education. Integral part
of the national education system, the education with teaching in Slovak language has
a stable network formed of kindergartens, primary schools, gymnasium schools and 2
high schools: Jozef Gregor Tajovský School Group in Nădlac, Arad county and Jozef
Kozáček General Education High School in Budoi locality, Bihor county.
The two types of education form fro the Slovak minority are:
- Education units with teaching in Slovak language
- Education units with teaching in the Romanian language where the Slovak ethnic
students study the Slovak language as a discipline.
A. Education units with teaching in the Slovak language
Statistical report for 2008/2009 academic years:

Coun
-ty

AR

TM
SJ

SJ

SJ

BH

Education unit

Total
childre
n and
student
s
Jozef Gregor 344
Tajovský
School group
and
School
with grades 1-8
Viile
Vechi,
Nădlac
Kindergarten
14
PN, Butin
School
with 90
grades
1-8,
no.1 Făget,
School
with 28
grades
1-4,
no.2 Făget,
School
with 8
grades
1-4,
no.3 Făget,
Jozef Kozáček, 219
General
Education High

Kindergarten
childre
n

Gr
1

Gr
2

Gr.
3

Gr
4

Gr
5

Gr
6

Gr
7

Gr
8

Gr.
9

Gr
10

Gr
11

Gr
12

104

22

19

17

23

24

14

21

32

14

19

19

16

14

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

24

6

8

5

4

11

13

8

11

-

-

-

-

13

3

5

4

3

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

3

1

2

2

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

11

10

10

10

10

15

11

11

32

30

26
32*

16
32*

27

Primary cycle

220

Gymnasium cycle

High school cycle

BH

BH

BH

BH

BH

BH

BH

BH

BH
BH

BH

BH

School, Budoi
School
with
grades
1-4,
Vărzari
School
with
grades
1-8,
no.1 șerani
School
with
grades 1-4, no.
2 șerani
School
with
grades
18,șinteu
School
with
grades
1-8,
HutaVoivozi
School
with
grades
1-4,
Chrapșîn
School
with
grades
1-4,
Sacalasău
School
with
grades
1-4,
Valea Cerului
Kindergarten
PN Varasău
School
with
grades
18,Aleșd
School
with
grades
1-4,
Râturi
School
with
grades
1-4,
Valea Lupului
TOTAL
GENERAL

21

11

4

-

4

4

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

75

12

2

7

6

8

9

11

10

10

-

-

-

-

4

-

2

1

1

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

71

12

4

4

7

7

10

10

9

8

-

-

-

-

31

11

-

2

3

-

2

8

2

3

-

-

-

-

4

-

1

-

2

1

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

7

-

2

1

3

1

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

34

16

6

2

6

4

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

10

10

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

19

12

3

-

3

1

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

1

-

1

2

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

4

4

-

1

1

-

2

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

1031

266

71

61

72

72

66

71

61

75

46

49

77*

48*

NUMBER OF STUDENTS
2007/2008 ACADEMIC YEARS
EDUCATION UNITS WITH TEACHING IN THE SLOVAK LANGUAGE
GRAND TOTAL CHILDREN AND STUDENTS: 1 031of which:
Pre-school children: 266
Pupil’s primary schools: 272
Gymnasium students: 273
High school pupils: 220 * here are included the students from the reduced frequency
studies

221

ARAD COUNTY: 344 children and students- 2 units
TIMIS COUNTY: 14preschool students– 1 unit
SĂLAJ COUNTY: 126children and students– 3 units
BIHOR COUNTY: 547chikdren and students– 13 units
TOTAL UNITS: 19
TOTAL TEACHING STAFF: 113 of which educators: 16, school masters 29,
teachers 68, of which 3 teachers of Slovak language from Slovakia

EDUCATION UNITS WITH TEACHING IN THE SLOVAK LANGUAGE,
2007/2008 ACADEMIC YEAR

222

No.

School unit

1

J.G.Tajovsky
School group
Nădlac/Arad
J.Kozacek
Gen.Ed. High
School
Budoi/Bihor
School grades
1-4 Vărzari
School grades
5-8
No.1
Făgetu/Sălaj
School grades
5-8
No.2
Făgetu/Sălaj

No.
of
kinder
garten

Gr
1

Gr
2

Gr
3

Gr
4

Gr
5

Gr
6

Gr
7

Gr
8

Gr
9

Gr
10

Gr
11

Gr
12

Total

109

17

19

21

24

14

23

34

16

19

25

16

33

279

30

10

10

11

10

16

13

11

11

32

28

18

17

217

-

-

4

4

3

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

11

22

8

4

4

8

13

10

12

16

-

-

-

-

97

17

5

6

4

5

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

37

-

2

2

3

3

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

10

12

7

6

8

3

11

10

10

13

-

-

-

-

80

-

1

1

-

2

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

4

12

4

7

7

3

12

9

10

10

-

-

-

-

74

10

2

3

-

2

8

2

4

6

-

-

-

-

37

-

-

2

1

2

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

5

-

-

2

1

1

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

4

-

3

2

2

2

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

9

12

6

4

3

4

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

29

-

1

2

-

1

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

4

10

2

2

2

2

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

18

14

4

1

4

1

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

22

13

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

13

1

2

2

6

11

4

2

3

6

15

children

2

3
4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16
17

18
19
20

School grades
5-8
No.3
Făgetu/Sălaj
School grades
1-8
No.1
Făgetu/Sălaj
Şerani /Bihor
School grades
1-4 No.2
Şerani /Bihor
School grades
1-8
Şinteu/Bihor
School grades
1-8
Huta
Voivozi/Bihor
School grades
1-4
Valea
Târnei/Bihor
School grades
1-4 Chrapţîn/
Bihor
School grades
1-4 Sacalasău/
Bihor
School grades
1-4
Valea
Cerului/Bihor
School grades
1-4
Valea
Lupului/Bihor
School gr. 14,arasău/Bihor
Şc.
cl.I-VIII
Aleşd,Bihor
Grădiniţa
Butin/Timiş
SO4 Râturi
Com. Auseu
SO8 Derna

223

B. Education units with teaching in Romanian language where students
study Slovak language
1. Arad county: Jozef Gregor Tajovský School Group Nădlac - grade 5-12 – 92
students, 4 teachers who teach Slovak language.
2. Bihor county: 6schools, grades 1-11 – 73 students, 6 teachers who teach Slovak
language
3. Timis county: 2 schools, with 31 students, grades 1-8, 2 teachers who teach the
Slovak language
Gymnasium and High school graduates take final examinations in Slovak at all the
disciplines (except Romanian language and History of Romanians), the subjects for
the examination discipline being translated in Slovak.
In most school units activate qualified teaching staff. The School Group Jozef Gregor
Tajovský in Nădlac, Arad county, provided the qualification of the educators and of
the schoolmasters for these school units. For the other specialties (mathematics,
physics etc) are employed teachers from the ranks of the Slovak ethnic group,
graduates of higher education in the country and in the Slovak Republic. Within the
Faculty of Foreign Languages and Literatures of the University of Bucharest the Chair
of Slovak language and literature functions, qualifying teachers of Slovak language.
Continuing education of the teaching staff from the school with teaching in Slovak
language is carried out both within the activities organised by the county school
inspectorates as well as by the continuing education courses organised at the Teaching
method Centre assigned to the Matej Bel University in Banská Bystrica, Slovakia.
Based on the Inter-Ministerial Cooperation programme in the domain of education
concluded between the Minsitry of Education, Research and Innovation and the
Ministry of Education in Slovakia, on annual basis, 25 teaching staff from all
education cycles, all specialties, from the school with teaching in Slovak language in
the country, benefit of these continuing education courses. The credits obtained by
those who attended the courses as consequence of finalising these courses are
recognised by the Ministry of Education Research and Innovation.
Moreover, according to the Cooperation programme in the domain of education, 10
graduates of the two high schools with teaching in Slovak language benefit of
governmental scholarships from the Ministry of Education of the Slovak Republic,
and 50 students and 4 accompanying teaching staff participate to the school in nature,
organised also by the Ministry of Education of the Slovak Republic.
Based on the same Programme, at Jozef Kozáček General Education High School in
Budoi, School with grades 1-8 Şinteu in Bihor county and at the General School Făget
in Sălaj County activate three teaching staff – specialty Slovak language and literature
– from the Republic of Slovakia. The last form updated of this Programme was signed
on February 2008, in Bucharest.
The Democratic Union of Slovaks and Czechs of Romania organizes and finances on
annual basis meeting of the teaching staff, all specialties, from the education units
with teaching in Slovak language from Arad, Bihor, Sălaj and Timiş counties.
Usually, at these meeting are invited specialists in various fields, from the Teaching

224

Methods Centre assigned to Matej Bel University of Banská Bystrica, Slovak
Republic, providing thus beside an information concerning the novelties occurred a
continuing education also in the filed of teaching method of various disciplines.
Each year, students in grades 7-12, from the above-mentioned schools, who obtained
the best results at the county phase of the inter-school contest of Slovak language and
literature attend the national phase of the same contest. In the last 4 academic years
this activity is carried on together with students of belonging to other ethnic groups
(Serbs, Czechs) in various counties. Thus the national phase of the Slav mother
tongues Olympics is a good experience exchange both between students and the
teaching staff. Besides the prizes awarded by the Ministry of Education, Research and
Youth, the prize winners are rewarded by the Democratic Union of Slovaks and
Czechs of Romania, the Embassy in Bucharest of the Slovak Republic and by the
Department for Interethnic Relations, that organizes and finances which year trips in
the country and abroad for the students who obtained prizes. Moreover from the
initiative of the Democratic Union of Slovaks and Czechs of Romania (UDSCR) the
Itinerary Contest of general culture of the high school students from the high school
with teaching in Slovak language from Romania, Hungary and Serbia is organised on
annual basis. This year, arrived at the 5th edition, the contest will be carried out in
Nădlac, Arad county.
In order to monitor the quality of teaching the Slovak mother tongue and the other
disciplines taught in Slovak. Based on the Order of the Minister of Education and in
accordance with the regulations concerning the activity of the method teaching
specialist for the education dedicated to national minorities, teaching method
specialists on various curricula were appointed in Arad, Bihor and Sălaj counties and
in Bihor county. Within the School Inspectorate in Bihor county activates an inspector
from the ranks of the Slovak ethnic group.
During the last years the problem concerning the school handbooks in the Slovak
language was partially resolved. Beside the original Slovak language handboks for
grades 1-8 republished, the manuals for grades 1-4 were translated in Slovak. The
Democratic Union of Slovaks and Czechs of Romania financed editing and publishing
of the manuals for the discipline History and traditions of Slovak minority, for grades
6-7.
The curricula for Slovak language and literature grades 1-12 were elaborated by a
work group, formed by specialists and approved by order of Minister, as well as the
curricula for Slovak language and literature needed to obtain academic degrees as
well as to occupy vacancies (educators, school masters, teachers are approved by
Order of the Minister). All the curricula are on the web page of the Ministry of
Education and are accessible on the address www.edu.ro. Most of the schools in Bihor
county were renovated. 205
Measures taken on a yearly basis by the Democratic Union of the Slovaks and Czechs
of Romania (UDSCR) in order to support the education:

205

According to the reports sent by The Ministry of Education and the Democratic Union of Slovaks
and Czechs in Romania.

225

- Based on the grants of the Government of the Slovak Republic acquires
schools manuals, workbooks and notebooks of Slovak language and that are
distributed to all schools with grades 1-4 with teaching in Slovak language.
- Provides a few copies of manuals for all the school, disciplines for grades 5-12
that guide the teachers about the new trends of the mother tongue or of the
respective science.
- Acquires for the school libraries literature for children and young peoples in
Slovak language, dictionaries and encyclopaedias
- Equips school with teaching ion Slovak language with technical school
supplies: CD players, TV set, notebooks, electronic teaching supports etc
- Organizes Meetings of the teaching staff in the schools with teaching in
Slovak language where it invites lecturers from Slovak Republic– in 2008 the meeting
of the teaching staff who teach in the school with teaching in Slovak languages took
place at Matej Bel University, Banska Bystrica – Slovakia
- Organizes contests for students studying in their mother tongue
- Consulting the students of the two high schools in a view of academic study
in Slovak Republic.206
- Paragraph 2. “With regard to education and in respect of territories other
than those in which the regional or minority languages are traditionally used,
the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language
justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the regional or
minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.”
Besides the area above-mentioned the Slovak minority is not represented by a
sufficient number of speakers of Slovak language to justify teaching in Slovak at the
education levels.
From Article 9 – Judicial authorities
- Paragraph 1. The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in
which the number of residents using the regional or minority languages justifies
the measures specified below, according to the situation of each of these
languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the present
paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of
justice:
Subparagraph a) (ii) to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional
or minority language;
Subparagraph a) (iii) to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or
oral, shall not be considered inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a
regional or minority language;
Subparagraph b) (ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person
before a court, that he or she may use his or her regional or minority language
without thereby incurring additional expense;
Subparagraph b) (iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the
regional or minority languages if necessary by the use of interpreters and
translations;
206

Report sent by UDSCR to the Department for Interethnic Relations.

226

Subparagraph c) (ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person
before a court, that he or she may use his or her regional or minority language
without thereby incurring additional expense;
Subparagraph c) (iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the
regional or minority languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and
translations;
Subparagraph d) to take steps to ensure that the application of subparagraphs i and iii of paragraphs b and c above and any necessary use of
interpreters and translations does not involve extra expense for the persons
concerned.
- Paragraph 2. The Parties undertake:
Subparagraph a) not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within
the State solely because they are drafted in a regional or minority language;
- Paragraph 3. The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or
minority languages the most important national statutory texts and those
relating particularly to users of these languages, unless they are otherwise
provided
–were selected
We are not in the possession of data that attest the use of Slovak language in justice.
From Article 10 - Administrative authorities and public services:
- Paragraph 1. Within the administrative districts of the State in which the
number of residents who are users of regional or minority languages justifies the
measures specified below and according to the situation of each language, the
Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
Subparagraph a) (ii) to ensure that such of their officers as are in contact with
the public use the regional or minority languages in their relations with persons
applying to them in these languages; or
Subparagraph a) (iii) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages
may submit oral or written applications and receive a reply in these languages;
Subparagraph a) (iv) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may
submit oral or written applications in these languages;
Subparagraph a) (v) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages
may validly submit a document in these languages;
Paragraph 2. In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory
the number of residents who are users of regional or minority languages is such
as to justify the measures specified below, the Parties undertake to allow and/or
encourage:
Subparagraph b) the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to
submit oral or written applications in these languages;
Subparagraph c) the publication by regional authorities of their official
documents also in the relevant regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph d) the publication by local authorities of their official
documents also in the relevant regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph f) the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages
in debates in their assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official
language(s) of the State;

227

Subparagraph g) the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the
name in the official language(s), of traditional and correct forms of place-names
in regional or minority languages.
- Paragraph 3. With regard to public services provided by the administrative
authorities or other persons acting on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within
the territory in which regional or minority languages are used, in accordance
with the situation of each language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
Subparagraph a) to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in
the provision of the service; or
Subparagraph b) to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a
request and receive a reply in these languages; or
- Paragraph 4. With a view to putting into effect those provisions of
paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the Parties undertake to take one or
more of the following measures:
Subparagraph b) recruitment and, where necessary, training of the officials
and other public service employees required;
Subparagraph c) compliance as far as possible with requests from public
service employees having a knowledge of a regional or minority language to be
appointed in the territory in which that language is used.
Paragraph 5. The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family
names in the regional or minority languages, at the request of those concerned.
The local public administration authorities in Arad and Bihor county worded in
Slovak language replies to the petitions lodged by the citizens belonging to Slovak
minority in their mother tongue.
Within the territorial structures of the Border Police in the areas where the citizens
belonging to Slovak ethnic group do not have a weigh of at least 20% of the total
number of the administrative-territorial units, are also employed individuals who
knows Slovak.

From Article 11 - Media:
- Paragraph 1. The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority
languages within the territories in which those languages are spoken, according
to the situation of each language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly
or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this field, and
respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
a) to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:
Subparagraph a) (iii) to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer
programmes in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph b) (ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio
programmes in the regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
Subparagraph c) (ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of
television programmes in the regional or minority languages on a regular basis;

228

Subparagraph d) to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution
of audio and audiovisual works in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph e)(i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or
maintenance of at least one newspaper in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph g) to support the training of journalists and other staff for media
using regional or minority languages.
Romanian Broadcasting Society produces and broadcasts programmes in the
national minority language as programmes of the regional stations. Programmes
Slovak language are found as programmes of the following radio stations:
RADIO REŞIŢA was set up in 1996, replied in 2000 to the request lodged by the
representatives of the minorities in the area. Thus, here programmes are broadcasted
in Ukrainian, Serb, Hungarian, German, Croat, Slovak, Czech and Romani 30
minutes per week for each language. The weight of the programmes for minorities of
the total programmes is 28.57%. Programmes produced in Slovak are broadcast each
Saturday.
RADIO TIMIŞOARA: The weigh of the programmes for minorities, in the total of
programmes is 21.43%. The programme in Slovak language has the same start date
with the programme in the Czech language - April 1990. It became a self-standing
programme as of September 1998. It has duration of 60 minutes per week and is
broadcast each Sunday between 17.00 and 18.00. The target public is especially the
SLOVAK COMMUNITY in ARAD, BIHOR, TIMIŞ, CARAŞ -SEVERIN, SĂLAJ,
SATU MARE counties and it not the only one. Echoes of the programme are heard in
other countries (Hungary, Slovakia, the Czech Republic).207
Measures to be applied in the future: taking into consideration the provisions of the
Charter applicable to the domain and coordinated within the Romanian Broadcasting
Society by the Minorities Editor Office in Bucharest, a project was elaborated
targeting the extension of the broadcasting time of the Editor office with 2 hours/day,
proposing also a programme in Slovak language that would contain a news bulletin,
reportages about events, interviews, etc., broadcast Tuesday between 22.30-23.15.
The Project is in phase of analysis in view of elaborating the feasibility study. 208
Romanian Television Society
To the TV programmes in Hungarian, German, Serb and Romani languages
transmitted on weekly basis the programmes 9 (nine) other TV programmes
transmitted on weekly basis in: Bulgarian, Croat (produced by TVR Timişoara),
Russian, Turkish, Tartar, Greek (produced by TVR Bucharest), Czech, Slovak and
Ukrainian (produced alternately by TVR Cluj and TVR Timişoara.) are added on
TVR 3 channel. 209
The duration of the programmes in Slovak is 9 minutes. TVR CLUJ alternately
with TVR TIMISOARA transmits these on a bimonthly basis, each Friday.
207

www.radiotimisoara.ro
SRR (Romanian Broadcasting Society) Report
209
According to SRTv Report
208

229

Annualy, UDSCR (the Democratic Union of the Slovaks and Czechs of Romania)
finances 2 journalists to attend a course organized by the Faculty of Journalism in
Bratislava offered to Slovaks in Diaspora for their training.
- Paragraph 2. The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception
of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language
used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language, and not to
oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring
countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure that no
restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of
information in the written press in a language used in identical or similar form to
a regional or minority language. The exercise of the above-mentioned freedoms,
since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such
formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are
necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial
integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of
others, for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for
maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
At the proposal of Raico Cornea, member of the Board of Administrators of SRTv,
TVR reserved a programme time to broadcast on weekly basis on TVR 3 an art film
from the state of origin of the national minorities, naturally with subtitling in
Romanian language. In this direction, TVR started actions in a view to sign or renew
cooperation agreements (programmes, art films, documentaries, reportages etc.)
between the public television of Romania and those of Albania, Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Croatia, Germany, Greece, Israel, Macedonia, Russia, Serbia, Slovakia,
Turkey, the Ukraine and Hungary. This project will certainly contribute to the
promotion of national minorities languages and of the European cinematography in
Romania, by transmitting productions of the above-mentioned States, but also of the
Romanian art films in these states.210
In the programmes of the communications service providers in the area where most of
the Slovak minority lives are included few channels transmitting TV programmes of
the neighbouring countries produced in Slovak language, the Slovak minority having
access to the Slovak language on private way, by satellite. Lately, UDSCR makes the
steps to contract service providers in Slovakia.
- Paragraph 3. The Parties undertake to ensure that the interests of the users
of regional or minority languages are represented or taken into account within
such bodies as may be established in accordance with the law with responsibility
for guaranteeing the freedom and pluralism of the media.
The national minorities are generally represented in such structures, at the proposal of
the Parliament groups of the national minorities.
From Article 12 - Cultural activities and facilities–were selected:
210

According to the report sent by the Romanian Television Broadcast Society to the Department for
Interethnic Relations.

230

- Paragraph 1. With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially
libraries, video libraries, cultural centres, museums, archives, academies,
theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production, vernacular
forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries, including inter
alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are
competent, have power or play a role in this field:
Subparagraph a) to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to
regional or minority languages and foster the different means of access to works
produced in these languages;
Subparagraph b) to foster the different means of access in other languages to
works produced in regional or minority languages by aiding and developing
translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;
Subparagraph c) to foster access in regional or minority languages to works
produced in other languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing,
post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;
Subparagraph d) to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or
supporting cultural activities of various kinds make appropriate allowance for
incorporating the knowledge and use of regional or minority languages and
cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for which they provide
backing;
Subparagraph e) to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible
for organising or supporting cultural activities have at their disposal staff who
have a full command of the regional or minority language concerned, as well as
of the language(s) of the rest of the population;
Subparagraph f) to encourage direct participation by representatives of the
users of a given regional or minority language in providing facilities and
planning cultural activities;
Subparagraph g) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or
bodies responsible for collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing
works produced in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph h) if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance
translation and terminological research services, particularly with a view to
maintaining and developing appropriate administrative, commercial, economic,
social, technical or legal terminology in each regional or minority language.
The Democratic Union of the Slovaks and Czechs of Romania was set up in 1990 as
the higher body of the Czech and Slovak minority in Romania. Even of on 31
December 1992 Czechoslovakia divided, the Union continued to exist as such, having
zone autonomy both for Slovak and for the Czech minority. UDSCR is defining as
being, first of all, a cultural-social organization. However one of the basic activities of
the Union is to assure the political representation.
The Democratic Union of Slovaks and Czechs of Romania (UDSCR) is member of
the Council of National Minorities, that has a statute of consultative body of the
Government and that is constituted of 19 organizations of the citizens belonging to
national minorities, all with representation in the Parliament.
UDSCR received 2 280 thousand Lei from the State Budget in 2008 and 2 429.22
thousand Lei in 2009 to partially cover the expenses necessary to carry on their

231

activity. All cultural, scientific, folklore, school or of any other nature activity
organized and financed by UDSCR is carried on in Slovak as mother tongue.
The main publication of the Democratic Union of Slovaks and Czechs in Romania is
“Naše Snahy” (“Our endeavour”), a publication that resumed its activity 1990, after
an interruption of 50 years. “Naše Snahy” is a monthly cultural magazine, it is
bilingual (in Slovak and Czech languages), having a summary in Romanian language.
The magazine includes a column dedicated to the representative in the Parliament,
articles of general interest, as well as short stories, poems and studies.
The magazine has also a supplement, “Naše snahy plus”, that has a quarterly based
publication and is a literary and culture magazine in Slovak and part of it is in Czech
language. “Pramen” the school magazine is published on monthly basis in Budoi in
Slovak language.
On annual basis books belonging to Slovak authors of Romania and books translated
in Romanian are published. In 2008 the following books were published from State
budget:
- Adam Suchanky – Basnicke dielo
- Pavel Rozkos – Nahody
- Pavel Husarik – Basne
- Ivan Miroslav Ambrus – Basne z tmavej kokory
- Pavel Mucai – Poslal som slovo
As concerns the writers of Slovak langue, there are 10 active writers, who belong to
the Slovak literary Circle in Nădlac, of whom 8 are members of the Writers’ Union of
Romania. Volumes of fiction, poetry and scientific studies belonging to these writers
are published on annual basis.
“Ivan Krasko” Cultural Scientific Society of Nădlac carries on a research activity
also. The Society published the “Cultural Atlas of Slovaks in Romania”, ethnographic
and cultural album having over 1 000 pages and 600 maps. The works was catalogues
by the Institute of ethnography of Romania as being the first Atlas of that kind
published in Romania. Within “Ivan Krasko” Society translation activities are carried
out, from Slovak literature in Romanian language and from Romanian literature in
Slovak language. In this context, the bilingual Romanian-Slovak magazine “Parallel
mirrors” published until 2007four times a year, presented texts from the contemporary
Slovak and Romanian literature. At the same time the society publish also a magazine,
published on quarterly basis, common for Slovaks from the Lower lands - Serbia,
Romania, Hungary - Dolnozemsky Slovak (“The Slovak of Lower Lands”), with
UDSCR contribution.
In Nădlac one may speake about a theatrical season in Slovak language. The amateur
Theatre has a tradition of 110 years, the first play was performed by own sources in
1889, during the world war the performances were interrupted and in the last 5 years
it has at least one premiere each year from the Slovak, Romanian and universal
dramaturgy. The plays are performed on the occasion of legal holidays or of some
special events. The amateur theatre has two teams without constant members, with the
participation of the individuals from the community. They have also tours in Slovakia
- in 2008 it took place at Nove Sady, in 2009 – at Bratislava.

232

In Nădlac there is also a Slovak ethnographic museum, here being employed a
museum specialist and ethnologist. The Library of Nădlac and the school libraries
have books in Slovak language also.
On a national level, UDSCR organizes the “Slovak Folklore festival” each year, in the
localities where individuals belonging to the Slovak ethnic group live. The Union
organizes or participates to different events and programmes such as “Slovaks’ day”
(in 2008: Aleşd, Vâlcelele, Foglaş, Aştileu, Zalău, Oradea, Sacalasău Nou, in the
Banat), “School Day”, “Children’ Day”, “Women’s Day”, “Mother’s Day” in certain
localities. In 2008 UDSCR participated at different festivals in Slovakia (for example:
Trebisov Festival, “V Pivnickom poli” Festival, Kosice Festival, Slovaci-Slovacom
Festival, “Pod Polanou Detva” Folklore Festival, etc.) and in Romania (for example
Pro Etnica Festival in Sighişoara, Interethnic Festival), at Intercultural Week Seminar
etc. It organised trips for students ( “Knowing the origin of Slovaks” in Slovakia) and
supported the participation of the pupils in the multiethnic camp of Băile Herculane,
the trip to Greece, organized by the Department for Interethnic Relations (DRI) for
the prize-awarded pupils at the mother tongue inter-school contests etc. Other actions
organised by UDSCR and UDSCR participations to common actions in the country
and abroad are the following: “Poezia-moja laska” Contest of reciting in Nădlac,
“Dobre slovo” Contest of reciting in Komarno, “Bozena Nemcova” Literary Evening
in Timişoara, Painting exhibition - Maria Stefanco in Selenca, Particiption to the
action “Popular Handicrafts” in Serbia, Participation to the action “Na jarmoku” in
Bekescsaba (Hungary) etc.211
In 2008, within the Programme European Year of Intercultural Dialogue, the
Department for Cultural Diversity within the Ministry of Culture intermediated
the implementation of 21 cultural projects that supported folklore, festivals and other
form of expression and the initiatives concerning regional or minority languages,
projects proposed and carried on mostly by the non governmental organizations of the
national minorities in Romania. These benefited from the support of partners, guests
and participants from other countries, representatives of the similar organisations from
European states signatories of the Framework Convention for the Protection of
National Minorities, representatives of the international organizations capacitated in
the field.
The department for Cultural Diversity financed the following two cultural projects
organized by UDSCR:
- „International Folklore Festival of Slovak Youth”, 16 -18 May 2008
The International Folklore Festival of Slovak Youth is meant to preserve the authentic
values of the popular song and garb. At its fourth edition, the Festival reunites
attendants from France, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Poland, Hungary and Romania
in a view of preserving the national and cultural identity of the Slovak Youth of the
Diaspora and of Romania, being at the same time an occasion of identification of the
similitude and differences, but also of learning and continuing new elements, customs
and traditions from the traditional culture of the Slovak minority.
- “Contest Slovak Festival of popular music soloists”, 24 – 28 September

211

UDSCR Report

233

The Contest Slovak Festival of popular music soloist „Cez Nadlak je...2008” is
meant to preserve the authentic values of the Slovak popular song and garb from
Diaspora and from Romania in the multicultural European context. Then Festival
includes two main components: popular garb parade and the contest of Slovak popular
music soloists performed by the attendants from Hungary, Serbia, Croatia, and
Romania. At its 10th edition, the Festival is dedicated to the preservation of the
authentic values of the Slovak popular song in the culture of the Slovak minority of
Romania.212
- Paragraph 2 In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or
minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number
of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or
provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in accordance with the
preceding paragraph.
Slovak language is not used in other areas than those already mentioned.
- Paragraph 3 The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in
pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for regional or minority languages and the
cultures they reflect.
Based on the intergovernmental Programmes signed by Romania with different
countries, documents that includes provisions in the field of culture, the development
of good relations of cooperation between the national minorities of Romania and the
country where this represents the majority population as well as between the ethnic
communities of our countries and similar communities of other countries (existing in
the Diaspora).
As concerns the Slovak language, the Cultural Cooperation programme between the
Ministry of Culture and Religious Affairs of Romania and the Ministry of Culture
from Slovak Republic, concluded for 2006 – 2008, provides the following mentions:
"- Each Party shall organise once, during the period of validity of this programme the
“Cultural Week” of the partner country.
- The Parties shall carry out the projects of the chosen cultural programmes,
concerning the cultural heritage of the Romanian minority in Slovakia and the Slovak
minority in Romania, by the exchange of experts in the field of minorities’ issues.
- The Parties shall support the development of the cooperation between the publishing
houses of books and the editor offices of the culture magazine aiming at mutually
publish the translations of the important works of classical authors and of the
contemporary authors of the partner Party.
- The Parties shall receive on an annual basis, based on reciprocity, translators at
colloquiums, national and international seminars, and stages of studies.
-The Romanian Party shall invite 2 (two) poets at the international action organized
by the Romanian Writers’ Union.
-The Slovak Party shall invite in 2006 at the “Ján Smrek International Festival” in
Bratislava two Romanian poets.

212

According to the report sent by the Ministry of Culture to the Department for Interethnic Relations.

234

-The contracting parties shall support the direct cooperation between libraries
(national and others) by exchange of specialists as attending symposiums, work
meetings and exchange of documents, including electronic support.
- The parties shall support the cooperation in the filed of scientific research of the
archives documents of the rare historical book stock in relation with the history or the
territory of the other contracting party. They shall facilitate the access of the
researchers of the partner country to these documents as well as possibly to carry out
microfilms, photocopies, facsimiles, stored on electronic support, in accordance with
the internal legislative provisions.
-The Romanian party shall facilitate the Slovak party the electronic transposition of
facsimiles of the medieval Slovak codex, very old books and printings from the
Battyaneum Library in Alba Iulia, on electronic support.
- The Parties shall support the observance of the international engagements and of the
internal legal provisions in the copyright field”213
The Ministry of Culture of Slovakia assists from financial viewpoint the publication of
the works of poets and writers, awards grant for cultural projects, especially if these
target regional topics that include areas inhabited by Slovaks in Yugoslavia, Romania
and Hungary.
From Article 13 – Economic and social life
- Paragraph 1. With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties
undertake, within the whole country:
Subparagraph a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting
or limiting without justifiable reasons the use of regional or minority languages
in documents relating to economic or social life, particularly contracts of
employment, and in technical documents such as instructions for the use of
products or installations;
Subparagraph b) to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of companies
and private documents of any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional
or minority languages, at least between users of the same language;”
–were selected
We are not in the possession of data forbidding or limiting the use of Slovak language
economic and social life.
From Article 14 - Transfrontier exchanges - were selected:
- Paragraph a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which
bind them with the States in which the same language is used in identical or
similar form, or if necessary to seek to conclude such agreements, in such a way
as to foster contacts between the users of the same language in the States
concerned in the fields of culture, education, information, vocational training
and permanent education;
- Paragraph b) for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate
and/ or promote co-operation across borders, in particular between regional or
local authorities in whose territory the same language is used in identical or
similar form.”

213

MCC Report

235

There is cross border cooperation between the Slovaks of the Lower Lands – from
Serbia, Romania, and Hungary - that cooperate intensively and on regular basis
between each other:
- They have a common magazine- Dolnozemský Slovák
- They carry on scientific conferences: Ondrej Štefanko-life and work (19. –
22.03.2009,
Nădlac),
- they carry on conferences on school matters as mother tongue: Education with
teaching in mother tongue and its relation with the Slovak Republic (Oct. 2009,
Nădlac),
- organize workshops for young leaders of the community Naši mladí (Mai 2007, and
May 2009, in Nădlac),
- Organize folklore common festivals with tradition etc.
There is cooperation with the country of origin by different projects, programmes
(cultural, school, youth, research), exchange of experience etc.214
Cooperation within the Euroregion „Carpatica”:
The Euroregion includes frontier areas of five countries: Poland, Slovakia, Hungary,
the Ukraine, Romania and has a population exceeding 16 million inhabitants and a
surface of 161 000 km2. It works based on the Agreement on setting up of an interregional Association “Carpatica Euroregion” and of a Statute of the inter-regional
Association “Carpatica Euroregion”. The purpose of the Carpatica Euroregion is to
organise and coordinate activities, to promote cooperation between economic,
scientific, ecologic, cultural, sports and education actions, to facilitate contacts with
the international bodies, organizations and institutions. This activity is in compliance
with the principles of the European Outline Convention on Transfrontier Cooperation between Territorial Communities or Authorities, nr. 106, of the Council of
Europe (Madrid 1981).
The basic role of the Euroregion is to facilitate contacts and to facilitate establishing
cooperation among citizens, institutions, local and regional authorities. In its practical
form, this activity depends of concrete needs. Another important role of the Euro
region is to prepare and inspire preparing of the documents needed for the
development of the regions in this part of Europe. This strategy is very important for
the members of the region.
Objectives of Carpatica Eurioregion are:
- Promoting local interests of the regions involved, by strengthening the economic,
cultural, and scientific and tourist relations with the regions of the neighbouring
countries;
- Influencing tensions reducing and building good neighbour relations;
- Carrying out a lobby near the national authorities, in order to fluidise the crossborder traffic by opening new cross-border points.
- The priorities of Romania the Euroregion targets modernizing and development of
the cross-border point from Halmeu and Tarna Mare.
Parteners:
Romania (Satu Mare, Sălaj, Maramureş Botoşani and Harghita counties), Hungary,
Poland, Ukraine, Slovakia.
214

UDSCR Report

236

Maramureş County Council holds the Chairmanship of the Romanian Party of the
Euroregion.
Bodies of cooperation:
Council of Carpatica Euroregion (CE Council) formed from representatives of the
member countries ruled by a Chairman. The Council decides the strategy of the
Euroregion, as well as upon the problems of interest fro the entire Euroregion.
Working Commissions: Commission for Regional Development – Hungary
Commission for u Tourism and Environment - Poland
Commission for Trade Development - Romania
Commission for Social Infrastructure - the Ukraine
Commission for Preventing Natural Disasters - Slovakia
Actions carried out:
In March 2008 Carpatica Euroregion and the anniversary of 15 years existence, on
which occasion the partners of the Euroregion organised several events to mark the
event: symposiums, conference, seminars, fairs and exhibits. Carpatica Euroregion
benefited of financing together with Main-Rhine Euroregion (NL/B/D), for a project
of development of the cross-border cooperation that carried on during 1998 and had as
result the elaboration of a Strategy of development of the cross-border relations within
Carpatica Euroregion.
Based on this Strategy, during 2000 the project of cooperation with Main-Rhine
Euroregin was continued, developing a series of bi- and trilateral projects between the
regions member. In the same year a common project EC and EMR was implemented
on tourism themes, as consequence of which a Romanian delegation participated to an
exchange of experience the Netherlands and in Belgium. The Carpatica Euroregion,
especially the Working Commission of the Economic and Regional Development
Cooperation, played an important role in coordinating a system of information as
concerns the commercial laws between regions, as well as setting up „Carpathian
Euroregion Barter Centre”. 215
Operational Trans-national Co-operation Programme South-East Europe, targets
creating trans-national partnerships in fields of strategic importance the eligible
geographic area represented by the territory of Austria, Greece, Bulgaria, Hungary,
Romania, Slovenia, Slovakia, Croatia, Former Yugoslav Republics of Macedonia,
Albania, Bosnia, Montenegro, Serbia, Moldova and regions of Italy and the Ukraine
the priority axes targets the support of innovation and entrepreneurship, protection
and improvement of the environment, improvement of accessibility and the
development of the trans-national synergies of the areas with potential (within these
axes are also eligible projects that promote the use of the cultural patrimony for
development). 216
The projects that may be financed as a “people to people” type of cooperation
include organizing common events for promoting culture, sports, cooperation between
education institutions by means of programmes of exchange of experience for
teachers and students between the schools and universities of both parties of the
border, mutual promoting of the tourist attractions of the area etc.
215

According to the report sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs.
216
According to the report sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry for
Development, Public Works and Housing.

237

Programme of Transborder Cooperation between Hungary-Slovakia-Romaniathe Ukraine benefit of a total budget for 2007-2013 of EUR 74.81 million. Priorities
of the Programme refer to the economic and social development, improvement of the
environment quality, common challenges and increase of the effectiveness of the
border, including the cooperation type”.217

i). The Turkish Language
According to 2002 census, 32 098 individuals declared to belong to the Turkish ethnic
group, among whom 27 668 speakers of Turkish language. The remaining 4 430
individuals declared their mother tongue as: 4 307 individuals – Romanian language;
12 individuals – Hungarian language; 27 individuals –Romani language; 2
individuals –Ukrainian language; 17 individuals – German language; 25 individuals
– Tatar language; 11 individuals – Serb language; 1 individual – Croat language; 5
individuals – Yiddish language; 8 individuals – Polish language; 1 individual –
Italian language; 10 individuals – other mother tongue; 4 individuals – did not
declare the language.218 Most of the individuals belonging to the Turkish ethnic group
in Romania are concentrated in Dobrogea region (Constanţa and Tulcea counties).
They are represented at parliamentary level by the Turkish Democratic Union in
Romania, which has currently approximately 40 branch offices, most of them in
Constanţa and Tulcea counties, but also in Bucharest, Călăraşi, Brăila, Galaţi etc.219
From Article 8 – Education – Romania selected the following issues:
- Paragraph 1. With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the
territory in which such languages are used, according to the situation of each of
these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s)
of the State:
Subparagraph a)(i) “to provide pre-school education in the relevant regional
or minority languages;”
Subparagraph b)(i) “to provide primary education in the relevant regional or
minority languages;”
Subparagraph c)(i) “to provide secondary education in the relevant regional or
minority languages;”
Subparagraph d)(iv) “to apply one of the provisions from the above
subparagraphs i to iii at least where there is a sufficient number of pupils’
families that wish their children to study in the respective language;”
Subparagraph e)(ii) to provide facilities for the study of these languages as
university and higher education subjects;
Subparagraph f) (iii) to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching
of the relevant regional or minority languages integrated into the curriculum;
217

According to the report sent to the Department for Interethnic Relations by the Ministry for
Development, Public Works and Housing.
218
According to the official statistics of the 2002 census.
219
Data provided by the Turkish Democratic Union of Romania

238

Subparagraph g) to undertake the necessary legal steps in order to provide the
teaching of the history and the culture, which is reflected by the regional or
minority language;
Subparagraph h) to provide the basic and further training of the teachers
required to implement the provisions of paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;
Subparagraph i) to set up a supervisory body/bodies responsible for
monitoring the undertaken measures and the progress achieved in establishing
or developing the teaching of regional or minority languages and for elaborating
on regular basis, based on their findings, public report.
According with the provisions of the Education Law no. 84/1995, republished and
amended, the students belonging to the Turkish ethnic group, who attend school units
with teaching in Romanian, at request are provided courses of Turkish language as
discipline. The proper education process in Turkish language is ensured through
cooperation between the Department for Education in Minorities’ Languages and the
Relation with the Parliament of the Ministry of Education, the School Inspectorates
of Constanţa and Tulcea counties, and the Tatar and Turkish minorities’
organizations.
Since 2006 the number of requests to study mother tongue in primary school has
slightly increased (correlated with the population growth). The provisions for studying
the Turkish language as mother tongue in schools with Romanian teaching language
is according to the domestic law and international regulations. There are approved
curricula, syllabus and manuals and the teachers are native Turkish speakers.
There is a school inspector at the school inspectorate of Constanta county, who
supervises and monitors the application of the legislation concerning the mother
tongue study, monitors the interschool contests’ results, proposes a strategy on
intercultural and multicultural education development, assesses the need of training
the teaching staff, and coordinates the specialized teaching staff in the territory.
Undergraduate education with partial teaching in Turkish language within the
Romanian national education system includes education units from the pre-school and
to the high school level. Since 1990, at the request of the Turkish and Tatar
communities, in the Romanian schools in Constanta and Tulcea counties and in
Bucharest, there have been established Turkish language study groups and grades.
The policies and the strategies for promoting the Turkish language are carried out
according to the legal guidelines, orders and methodologies issued by the Ministry of
Education.
Education units – Turkish language:
1) At kindergarten level:
Kindergarten no. 58 with regular program, bilingual in Constanţa
Kindergarten no. 1, with regular program, bilingual, in Medgidia
2) At primary and secondary level – in school units with teaching in
Romanian
School no.12 “B.P. Haşdeu” – 4 grades with partial teaching in Turkish
(Annex 1)
3) At high school level - in school units with teaching in Romanian
Kemal Atatürk National College, Medgidia (Annex 1)

239

- 3 grades with partial teaching
- 1 grade with intensive English-Turkish teaching.
The School Inspectorate of Constanta County organizes the interschool Turkish
language and literature contest and the Islamic religion contest, as follows:
- Turkish language and literature interschool contests 2007 - 2008
- School phase – December / January
- Local phase – February
- County phase– March
- National phase – April
- Islamic Religion interschool contests 2007 – 2008
- School phase – February
- County phase – May
Each year a significant number of students qualified for the national phase of the
interschool contests.220
The Turkish language academic education is provided in two universities: Ovidius
University in Constanţa and the Bucharest University (as foreign language), the
Departments of Turkish language – Romanian language and Turkish language –
English language.
The private education system includes several schools where the Turkish language is
studied as the second foreign language (1 - 2 hours/week). The International
Computer Science High School in Constanţa and the one of Bucharest are considered
as positive examples. In these high schools are studying not only Turkish nationality
students but also Romanian ones and students belonging to other ethnic groups too.
The necessary qualified teaching staff for Turkish language is provided by:
1) „K. Atatürk” Muslim Theological and Pedagogical High School in Medgidia,
which thereafter became Kemal Ataturk National College Medgidia;
2) The departments of Turkish - Romanian language and Turkish - English
language of the Bucharest and Constanţa universities;
3) „KEMAL ATATÜRK” College of the Ovidius University Constanţa, set up in
2000 – 2001,
4) The Pedagogical College within the Ovidius University Constanţa
The training of the Turkish language teaching staff is provided by the education units
where they teach. Moreover, the teaching staff attends different meetings, experience
exchanges, seminars, in the country and abroad. Last year the Turkish Democratic
Union in Romania (UDTR) offered the possibility of attending such sessions to the
Turkish language teaching staff. UDTR organised programs or accepted the invitation
of other organisers for programs such as: „Consfătuirea cadrelor didactice” (Teaching Staff
Meeting) - Medgidia and Constanţa, „Schimb de experienţă între cadrele didactice”
(Experience exchange between the teaching staffs)– Izmir and Istanbul, Turkey,
„Problemele cadrelor didactice din Balcani” (Problems of the teaching staff in the Balkan) –
Istanbul, Turkey, „Întâlnirea cadrelor didactice din Eur-Asia” (Meeting of the teaching staff
of European-Asian region) – Istanbul, Turkey, etc.221
220
221

Information sent by the Ministry of Education
Data sent to DRI by the Turkish Democratic Union of Romania

240

As part of the Intergovernmental Exchange Program on science, culture and
education, and as part of the agreement between the conterpart Ministries of Romania
and Turkey, the teaching of vocational disciplines within „K. Atatürk” National
College Medgidia is carried out by teachers from the Republic of Turkey.222
The manuals used for the study of Turkish Language and Literature in schools with
teaching in Romanian and at K. Ataturk National College in Medgidia are issued by
the Ministry of Education. The educational system uses also auxiliary manuals and
anthologies provided by the Ministry of Education of the Republic of Turkey.
Moreover, for studying the Turkish language as mother tongue there are revised and
republished manuals by the Didactic and Pedagogical Publishing House, with recently
elaborated manuals (Primers, communication, Turkish Language and Literature
manuls for the 8th grade) and with manuals brought from the Republic of Turkey. As
additional lecture, for pre-school children and high school students were published the
following: Fairy tales collection in Turkish-Romanian bilingual edition and the
Collection of literary texts for gymnasium and high school. There is a curriculum and
manuals for the History and traditions of the minority. 223
Paragraph 2. “With regard to education and in respect of territories other than
those in which the regional or minority languages are traditionally used, the
Parties undertake to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the regional
or minority language at all the appropriate levels of education. if the number of
speakers of a regional or minority language justifies it,”

UDTR is preoccupied by the increase of the Turkish language speakers within the
Turkish communities and also in territories where Turkish communities have fewer
members and is supported in its undertaking by the Ministry of Education. At present,
the Turkish language is studied from kindergarten to the university level. One of the
most important objectives of UDTR is to increase the number of grades or groups
studying the Turkish language according to the increase of the requests’ number of
community’s members. The Turkish language and Islamic religion are also studied
within the branch offices of UDTR in Tulcea, Babadag, and Galaţi.224 Until now, the
need to take additional measures of promoting the Turkish language has not been
signalled.
From Article 9 – Judicial authorities:
- Paragraph 1. The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in
which the number of residents using the regional or minority languages justifies
the measures specified below, according to the situation of each of these
languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the present
paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of
justice:
Subparagraph a) (ii) to guarantee the defendant the right to use his/her
regional or minority language;
222

Information sent to DRI by the School Inspectorate of Constanţa County
Information sent to DRI by the School Inspectorate of Constanţa County
224
Information sent to DRI by the Turkish Democratic Union of Romania
223

241

Subparagraph a) (iii) to provide the written or spoken evidence, at request, and
not to reject such evidence based on the fact that it is formulated in a regional or
minority language;
Subparagraph b) (ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person in
court that he/she may use his/her regional or minority language without
incurring additional expense;
Subparagraph b) (iii) to allow documents and evidence to be submitted in the
regional or minority languages and to provide, if necessary, interpreters and
translations;
Subparagraph c) (ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person in
court, that he/she may use his/her regional or minority language without thereby
incurring additional expense;
Subparagraph c) (iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the
regional or minority languages, and to provide, if necessary, interpreters and
translations;
Subparagraph d) to take the necessary measures in order to ensure that the
application of sub-paragraphs i and iii of the above paragraphs b and c and the
use of interpreters and translations does not involve extra expense for the
persons concerned.
- Paragraph 2. The Parties undertake:
Subparagraph a) not to deny lawfulness of documents solely because they are
drafted in a regional or minority language;
- Paragraph 3. The Parties undertake to provide the most important national
legal statutory texts and those regarding the speakers of regional or minority
languages, unless they are otherwise provided
There is no record concerning the use of the Turkish language in justice.
From Article 10 - Administrative authorities and public services:
- Paragraph 1. Within the state’s administrative units where the number of
residents who are speakers of regional or minority languages justifies the
measures specified below and according to the situation of each language, the
Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
Subparagraph a) (ii) to ensure that their officers who work with the public,
use the regional or minority languages in the relation with the public speaking
these languages; or
Subparagraph a) (iii) to ensure that the speakers of regional or minority
languages may submit spoken or written petitions and receive the answers in
these languages;
Subparagraph a) (iv) to ensure that the speakers of regional or minority
languages may submit spoken or written petitions in these languages;
Subparagraph a) (v) to ensure that the speakers of regional or minority
languages may submit legal document in these languages;
- Paragraph 2. In respect of the local and regional authorities administrating
territories where the number of residents who are speakers of regional or
minority languages justifies the measures specified below, the Parties undertake
to allow and/or encourage:
Subparagraph b) the possibility for speakers of regional or minority languages
to submit spoken or written petitions in these languages;

242

Subparagraph d) the local authorities’ official documents’ publication in the
relevant regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph e) the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages
during local councils’ meetings, without excluding, however, the use of the
official language(s) of the State;
Subparagraph f) the use or adoption, if necessary, in conjunction with the
name in the official language(s), of traditional and correct forms of place-names
in regional or minority languages.
- Paragraph 3. With regard to public services provided by the administrative
authorities or other persons acting on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within
the territory in which regional or minority languages are used, in accordance
with the situation of each language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
Subparagraph a) to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in
the provision of the service; or
Subparagraph b) to allow speakers of regional or minority languages to
submit a petition and receive an answer in these languages; or
Subparagraph c) to allow speakers of regional or minority languages to submit
a petition in these languages.
- Paragraph 4. In order to put into practice the provisions of paragraphs 1, 2
and 3 accepted by them, the Parties undertake to take one or more of the
following measures:
Subparagraph b) recruitment and, where necessary, training of the official
representatives and other public service employees required;
Subparagraph c) compliance as far as possible with requests from public
service employees having knowledge of a regional or minority language to be
appointed in the administrative unit where that language is spoken.
- Paragraph 5. The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family
names in the regional or minority languages, at the request of those concerned.
In the territorial structures of the Border Police within the areas where citizens
belonging to the Turkish ethnic group represents less than 20% of the total number of
the population of the administrative-territorial units, individuals knowing the Turkish
language are also employed.
From Article 11 - Media:
- Paragraph 1. The Parties undertake, for the speakers of the regional or
minority languages within the territories in which those languages are spoken,
according to the situation of each language, to the extent to which the public
authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have the power or play a role in
this field, and respecting the principle of media independence and autonomy:
a) to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:
Subparagraph a) (iii) to set up the necessary framework for the broadcasters
to broadcast programs in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph b) (ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio
programs in the regional or minority languages on a regular basis;

243

Subparagraph c) (ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of
television programs in the regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
Subparagraph d) to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution
of audio and audiovisual works in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph e)(i) to encourage and/or facilitate the publication and/or
maintenance of at least one newspaper in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph g) to support journalists’ and other media staff training in
regional or minority languages.
Since 1991, in their capacity of public services, the Romanian National Radio and the
Romanian National Television have been constantly preoccupied in allocating
transmission time for broadcasts in minorities’ languages. The Turkish community
received 60 minutes/week transmission time at Radio Constanţa. The programs
include news, reportages, and traditional music and are broadcasted each Tuesday,
starting with 19.00. Moreover, by the concern of UDTR Radio T station was set up,
broadcasting on daily basis in Constanţa county, on 104,40 Mhz frequency, between
5.00 –14.00, in Turkish and Romanian 225.
The national TV channel (TVR 1) provides on weekly basis an hour for each national
minority, within the programme called ‘Convieţuiri’ (Living together). The program
‘Autostrada TVR’ (TVR High way) is structured on time slots with common
thematic: info, ethnic minorities, sports, culture, music, social, health, reportage,
documentary etc. Together with the other national minorities, the Turkish people in
Romania have the possibility to present themselves within these programs.
‚Telejurnalul Regional’ (The Regional news) on TVR 3 covers, at national level,
the need for local information and for reflecting the local realities. The local
community, the national minorities and the events in their lives have here allocated
space for expression.226
UDTR publishes on monthly basis the Romanian-Turkish bilingual publication
Hakses (Authentic Voice). Each month there are 1000 copies printed and distributed
free of charge in the branch offices: Constanţa, Megidia, Tulcea, Mangalia, Tuzla,
Techirghiol, Eforie, Cumpăna, Cobadin, Fântâna Mare, Băneasa, Dobromir, Babadag,
Măcin, Isaccea. UDTR has its own web page www.udtr.ro where data related to
history, traditions and community’s life can be found and the Hakses publication is
provided online. Regarding the production and distribution of audio and audio-video
products in Turkish are concerned, UDTR produced a CD with the most cherished
Turkish melodies interpreted by the Mehtap chorus.
The editors of Hakses attended professional trainings organised by the Department for
Interethnic Relations and the Turkish Radio and Television Corporation. During the
last years UDTR supported the editors of Turkish programs to attend different
meetings and experience exchanges in the country and abroad, for example the
“Meeting of Turkish Journalists from the Balkans” – in Edirne, Turkey.
- Paragraph 2. The Parties undertake to guarantee the freedom of direct
reception of radio and television broadcasts from the neighbouring countries in
225
226

Information offered by the Turkish Democratic Union of Romania
http://www.tvr.ro/emisiune.php?ed=60132

244

languages used in identical or similar form as regional or minority languages,
and not to interdict the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from
the neighbouring countries in such languages. They further undertake to ensure
that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and free
circulation of information in the written press in a language used in identical or
similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of the abovementioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be
subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed
by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national
security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or
crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of other people
reputation or rights, for preventing disclosure of information received in
confidence, or for maintaining judiciary system’s authority and impartiality.
The cable transmission private companies, under the conditions imposed by the
legislation in force, provided the reception of broadcasts from Turkish TV stations,
according to their program schedule, as for example: Kanal D, Star, Show, TRT
International.227
- Paragraph 3. The Parties undertake to ensure that speakers’ of regional or
minority languages interests are represented or taken into account by
appropriate bodies as may be established in accordance with the law,
guaranteeing the freedom and pluralism of the media.
The Turkish community in Romania doesn’t have representatives at the National
Council of Audio-Visual Broadcasts, but its interests are brought into the authorities’
notice through various forms of communication and are considered according to the
information sent by UDTR. In these structures all national minorities have
representatives appointed by the Parliament.
From Article 12 - Cultural activities and facilities–were selected:
- Paragraph 1. Regarding cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries,
video libraries, cultural centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and
cinemas, as well as literary work and film production, various forms of cultural
expressing in mother tongue, festivals and the culture industries, including inter
alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are spoken and to the extent that the public authorities are
competent, have power or play a role in this field:
Subparagraph a) to encourage forms of manifestation and initiatives specific
to the regional or minority languages and foster the different means of access to
works produced in these languages;
Subparagraph b) to provide various access means in other languages to works
in regional or minority languages, through translation, dubbing, postsynchronisation and subtitling;
Subparagraph c) to provide access in regional or minority languages to works
produced in other languages, through translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation
and subtitling ;

227

Information sent to DRI by the Turkish Democratic Union of Romania

245

Subparagraph d) to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or
supporting different cultural activities, allow to incorporate the knowledge and
use of regional or minority languages and cultures, in their undertakings or for
those they provide support;
Subparagraph e) to take the necessary legal measures to ensure that the bodies
responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities have at their disposal
staff with the full command of regional or minority language and of the
language(s) of the rest of the population;
Subparagraph f) to encourage the direct participation of the given regional or
minority language speakers’ representatives in providing facilities and planning
cultural activities;
Subparagraph g) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or
bodies responsible for collecting, presenting, publishing and achieving works
produced in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph h) if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance
translation and terminological research services, with the main goal to maintain
and develop appropriate administrative, commercial, economic, social, technical
or legal terminology in each regional or minority language.
The Turkish community can access the library at the UDTR office in Constanta,
where they may find volumes published by the Union’s or other writers belonging to
the Turkish ethnic group. From I. N. Roman County Library in Constanţa may be
borrowed volumes in the Turkish language published by UDTR.
UDTR organizes cultural events on regular basis, with Romanian government’s
financial support: Festivals „Primăvara Comunitară - Nevruz” (Community Spring –
Nevruz), “Diversitate culturală”, (Cultural Diversity); seminars as “Mărturii ale culturii turce”
(Testimonies of the Turkish culture). These are a few examples among the numerous
cultural evevents organised by UDTR during the last years.
UDTR is represented in the competent central and local public administration
institutions by three representatives:, one at the Ministry of Education; one at the
Ministry of Cultura ; and one at Constanţa county’s Prefect’s Office.
Translation services in Turkish are provided by the Notary Offices in Constanţa, and
may be also provided by private offices certified by the Ministry of Justice.
The cultural life of the Turkish community is well outlined by the variety of cultural
events at local, national and international levels and by publications. In the last few
years the publications of UDTR included various themes and typologies, from history,
fairy tales for children, culture, religion, monographs, anthologies, fiction,
approximately 30 publications in the last four years.228
- Paragraph 2 In respect of territories other than those in which the regional
or minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the
number of speakers of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow,
encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities according
to the preceding paragraph.
228

Information sent to DRI by the Turkish Democratic Union of Romania

246

The cultural events organized by UDTR offer the possibility to the members of
smaller communities to participate in cultural activities that are dedicated to them,
organised in the localities where they live: “Concurs intenaţional de muzică populară”
(International popular music contest), in Hârşova, Brăila, “Cultura mea, cultura ta, cultura
noastră” (My Culture, Your Culture, Our Culture) in Ghindăreşti, “Zilele culturii turce în
cadrul Euroregiunii” (The days of the Turkish culture within the Euroregion), in Galaţi,
“Asure Gunu”, in all 14 branches, etc.229
- Paragraph 3 The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in
pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for regional or minority languages and the
cultures they reflect.
The Romanian state by its participation in common foreign policies, grants a special
importance to the support and promotion of all minority languages spoken in Romania
and the cultures they express. There is a very strong Romanian-Turkish cooperation
in this regard.
From Article 13 – Economic and social life–was selected
- Paragraph 1. Regarding the economic and social activities, the Parties
undertake, on national level:
Subparagraph b) to interdict the insertion in companies’ internal regulations
and documents of any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or
minority languages, at least between speakers of the same language;”
There are no limitations or restrictions, moreover, specialists knowing the Turkish
language are sought for working at private or international companies. Many of the
young people belonging to the Turkish ethnic group who attend university, master and
doctoral studies in Turkey return to Romania and work in banks and companies, in big
urban centres, where there is a need of specialists with Turkish language knowledge.
From Article 14 – Transfrontier exchanges
The Parties undertake:
- Paragraph a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which
bind them with states where the same language is used in identical or similar
form, or if necessary to try to negotiate agreements, in order to foster contacts
between the speakers of the same language in the respective states, in the fields of
culture, education, information, vocational training and ongoing education;
–was selected.
- Paragraph b) for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate
and/ or promote cross border co-operation, in particular between regional or
local authorities administrating territories where the same language is used in
identical or similar form.”
Both the Romanian State, through its ministries and departments, and UDTR
cooperate with various official institutions, prestigious NGOs active in fields such as
culture, education and religion from other countries, especially with those of the
Republic of Turkey. Between Romania and the Republic of Turkey there are several
229

Information sent to DRI by the Turkish Democratic Union of Romania

247

agreements, bilateral treaties, with positive impact upon the Turkish community in
Romania. UDTR represents, in this line, a friendship bridge between Romania and the
Republic of Turkey. In the framework of the cooperation partnership in the field of
education with Turkish institutions we can exemplify with provisions regarding the
teaching staff for certain schools (ex. Kemal Ataturk National College in Medgidia).
There are also a series of mutual agreements that were implemented or will be
implemented, between Romania and the neighbouring countries. The “Low Danube
Euro Regions” agreement operates based on the Convention signed on August 14,
1998. Partners in carrying on this project are: Romania (Tulcea, Brăila and Galaţi
Counties), Republic of Moldova (Cahul and Cantemir Counties) and Ukraine
(Odessa). Considering that in Constanţa and Tulcea counties live most of the citizens
belonging to the Turkish ethnic group and the project is centred on the development
of commercial exchanges, transportation facilities, on organising joint economic
forums, seminars and exhibitions but also on the implementation of cultural programs,
the cooperation agreement led to collaboration between the other involved Turkish
partner communities.
Another example is the „Lower Danube” Euro-region Agreement, signed on
November 15, 2001 in Călăraşi, between Romania (Călăraşi, Ialomiţa and Constanţa
counties) and Bulgaria (Silistra and Dobric).230
UDTR folkloric ensembles attend on yearly basis the International Folklore Festival
of Yalova, Turkey. In partnership with the Popular Culture Research Society in
Ankara a symposium on the Turkish civilisation and culture is organised every year
231
Within the same cooperation field, extra curricular projects in partnerships with
similar schools in the Republic of Turkey were and are carried on by: School no.1 Ctin Brâncuşi from Medgidia, School no. 12 B.P.Haşdeu, School Castelu, School
Nisipari, School no. 1 Valu lui Traian, Schools no. 2, 4, 6, 7 in Medgidia, School no.
5 in Mangalia,”Emil Racoviţă” General Education High School in Techirghiol, Palace
of Children Constantan, School Cumpăna, Special School no.1 in Constanţa. One of
the best examples of cooperation with the mother country is offered by K. Atatürk
National College in Medgidia.232
Among the projects carried on in Turkey during the last years with the participation of
UDTR, are: „Întâlnirea ziariştilor turci din Balcani” (Meeting of the Turkish
Journalists in the Balkans), in Edirne, „Festivalul folclorului turc” (Turkish Folklore
Festival) in Yalova, “Curs de perfecţionare pentru redactorii emisiunilor radio”
(Training for editor of radio programmes) in Ankara, „Schimb de experienţă între
cadre didactice” (Exchange of experience between the teaching staffs) in Izmir,

230

Information sent to DRI by the Ministry of Forreign Affairs of Romania.
Information sent to DRI by the Turkish Democratic Union of Romania
232
Information sent to DRI by School Inspectortate of Constanţa County
231

248

„Festival folcloric Zeytinburnu III” (Zeytinburnu III Folklore Festival) in Istanbul and
many others.233

233

Information sent to DRI by the Turkish Democratic Union of Romania

249

TURKISH LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE SPECIALIZATION
ACADEMIC YEAR 2008 -2009

Uni
ts

STATISTICS
Students belonging to national minorities from schools
with Romanian language teaching and studying the Turkish language as mother
tongue
Academic year 2008 – 2009
Number of:
Total Of whom students no. per grades/years of study
Ki Sc Gr Gr* K
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
nd ho
d Stude
er ol
g nts
ga
r 3674
rte
t Preschoo
n
2
66
2
9 l
445 555 431 439 432 402 320 275 108
childr
with
en
4/ 3
240
parti
al
grad
es
Primary and secondary education (grades with partial teaching 2, 4, 5, 6)
Turkish
Total no. of Units
Departments Total no.
minority
units
and
of
departments
students
Total
1
1
56
School
12
B.P.Haşdeu
High school education (grades with partial teaching – theology)
Turkish
Total no. of Units
Departments Total
minority
units
and
students
departments
Total
1
1
143
K. Ataturk
Pedagogical,
College
theology,
Medgidia
bilingual

j) The Ukrainian Language

10

11

79

61

Total no. of
school
masters
4

Total
teachers
3

Archaeological and linguistic evidence show that an Eastern Slav population settled
down in the northern part of nowadays Romania, living together with the Romanian
native population, while most of the villages inhabited today by Ukrainians are
mentioned in historical documents in the 14th and 15th centuries. The settling down of
the Ukrainians in Dobrogea and the Danube Delta dates back to the end of the 18th
century - beginning of the 19th century when part of the Zaporozhian Cossacks
persecuted by Catherine II of Russia fled here, with the agreement of the Turks. In
order to distinguish them from the Lipovan Russian neighbours the natives called
them haholi. The Ukrainian community in Banat was set up by colonisation of some
domains sold out by their German or Hungarian owners. The colonists’ origins were
especially from the mountain areas, poor Trans Carpathian areas and Bukovina. At
present most of the Ukrainians live in Maramureş, Suceava, Caraş-Severin, Timiş,
Tulcea, Arad, Botoşani, Satu Mare, etc. According to the official census, the
community counts 61 098 individuals, of whom 56 116 declared the Ukrainian
language as their mother tongue. As percentage from the overall population, it is the
third national minority in Romania, after the Hungarian and the Roma minorities. It is
represented in the Parliament by the Union of Ukrainians in Romania (UUR), which
counts over 100 branches (according to the collective volume History of the national
minorities in Romania, EDP, 2008).
From Article 8 – Education – the following paragraphs and subparagraphs were
selected for the Ukrainian language:
- Paragraph 1. With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the
territory in which such languages are used, according to the situation of each of
these languages, and without affecting the state’s official language(s) teaching :
Subparagraph a)(i) “to provide pre-school education in the relevant regional
or minority languages;”
Subparagraph b)(i) “to provide primary education in the relevant regional or
minority languages;”
Subparagraph c)(i) to provide secondary education in the relevant regional or
minority languages;
Subparagraph d)(iv) to apply one of the provisions of the above subparagraphs i
to iii where there is a sufficient number of pupils whose parents choose
education in mother tongue for their children;
Subparagraph e)(iii) if, by reason of the role of the State in relation to higher
education institutions, sub-paragraphs i and ii cannot be applied, to encourage
and/or allow the provision of university or other forms of higher education in
regional or minority languages or of facilities for the study of these languages as
university or higher education subjects;
Subparagraph f) (iii) if the public authorities have no direct competence in the
field of adult education, to favour and/or encourage the offering of such
languages as subjects of adult and continuing education;
Subparagraph g) to provide the legal framework in order to ensure history and
culture teaching, reflected by the regional or minority language;
Subparagraph h) to provide teachers’ basic and further training, required to
implement paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;
Subparagraph i) to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for
monitoring the measures and the progress achieved in establishing or developing

251

the teaching of regional or minority languages and for elaborating regular public
reports on their findings.
Now, the public education system for children belonging to the Ukrainian minority in
Romania is organised as follows:
1. Education units with teaching in Romanian, where the Ukrainian language
is studied as discipline;
2. Education units with teaching in Ukrainian language;
3. Education units with basic teaching in Romanian and partial teaching of
the disciplines in Ukrainian language.
In the education system for national minorities most of the ethnic Ukrainian students
apply for the first category of units, respectively the mother tongue study as school
discipline.
During 2008 – 2009 school year, at pre-university level, the public education system
for the Ukrainian mother tongue study included:
- 150 schools with primary, secondary grades and kindergartens, where the
Ukrainian language is taught as discipline;
- 1 high school where all the disciplines are thought in Ukrainian –Taras
Şevcenko The Ukrainian General Education High School in Sighetu Marmaţiei,
Maramureş county;
- 2 high schools where the disciplines are partially taught in Ukrainian, in
grades 9 and 10 –Laţcu Vodă Technical College in Siret, Suceava County and Iulia
Hasdeu High School in Lugoj, Timiş County.
The pre-university education system in Ukrainian language consists of 172 groups
and 334 grades, the number of students being of 6 649. In the 58 kindergartens with
teaching in Ukrainian 1 986 children learn. During 2009 the total number of children
and students belonging to the Ukrainian ethnic group learning in Ukrainian reached 8
635.
The total number of teaching staff– educators, schoolmasters, and teachers – is of 493
(410 in Maramureş County, 51 in Suceava, 15 in Timiş County, 7 in Caraş-Severin
County, 6 in Botoşani County, 2 in Satu Mare, 1 in Arad County and 1 in Tulcea
County)234.
The mother tongue study for the ethnic Ukrainian students is organised by the County
School Inspectorates in localities of Maramureş, Suceava, Caraş-Severin, Timiş,
Arad, Tulcea, Botoşani and Satu Mare counties, where there is a significant number of
ethnic Ukrainian citizens.
•

In Maramureş County, in Sighetu Marmaţiei, Rona de Sus, and Valea
Vişeului, Poienile de sub Munte, Ruscova, Crăciuneşti, Remeţi etc., localities
with a significant ethnic Ukrainian population, 58 schools and kindergartens
function, where 5 400 children and students learn. Among these, around 240
learn in „Taras Şevcenko“ High School in Sighetu Marmaţiei, the only high

234

Data sent to DRI by the Ministry of Education –General Directorate for Education In minority
Languages and Relations with the Parliament

252

school with teaching in Ukrainian from Romania. The number of teaching
staff - educators, schoolmasters and teachers – in this county is of 410.
The reopening „Taras Şevcenko“ High School in Sighet, at the beginning of
the 1997-1998 school year, as a consequence of Ukrainian and Romanian
presidents’ cooperation initiative, marked an important moment for the entire
Ukrainian community. It revived a local tradition and in a few years the high
school became a respected educational body, the nucleus that attracts towards
study intelligent and gifted Ukrainian students from the Maramureş County
villages. Besides the school’s specializations (mathematics-computer science,
science), there is a pedagogical vocational department, preparing educators,
school masters and elementary teachers. They usually practise their profession
in villages in Maramureş and Suceava Counties, in the kindergartens and
schools where the Ukrainian language is used.
The „Taras Şevcenko“ high school developed, the grades’ number was
extended, the teaching staff received permanent jobs and the classrooms of
different specializations were equipped. Each year high school students who
are awarded at the national interschool contests in the Ukrainian language and
literature, are invited to trips and camps in Romania and Ukraine, and they
organise national and international scientific and cultural events. Among these
events, the international seminar "Taras Sevcenko in Romania", carried on in
May 2008 can be mentioned. The religion is taught in the Ukrainian language.
The talented students attend the Ukrainian literature circle, the chorus and
musical activities etc.
In the last years, The Ministry of Education provided the funds for renovating
the „Taras Şevcenko“ High School in Sighetu Marmaţiei and other 11 schools
and kindergartens in Maramureş County, the amount was of 322 500 lei.
•

In Suceava County, in Negostina, Şerbăuţi, Văşcăuţi and in other localities are
around 50 schools and kindergartens where over 2 000 children and students
learn, of whom 44 students in grades 9 and 10 at „Laţcu Vodă“ Technical
College in Siret, with partial teaching in the Ukrainian language. The number
of the teaching staff is around 50.
As example, see below the data about the teaching of the Ukrainian language
in Suceava County, sent by the County School Inspectorate, where there is an
inspector for this discipline:
The interest to study the Ukrainian language and literature increased year after
year in Suceava County, especially after 2007, when an expert inspector was
appointed in the County. Thus, if during 2006-2007 school year the Ukrainian
language was studied in 36 schools by 1 657 students and 125 pre-school
children, and the number of the teachers was of 36, during 2007-2008 school
year the system have expanded by setting up grade 9 with partial teaching in
Ukrainian at „Laţcu Vodă” High School in Siret. The number of students and
pre-school children who studied Ukrainian language significantly increased to
2 219. New groups and grades were set up in 5 schools in the county and the
number of the teachers increased to 42.

253

During 2008-2009 school year the following data is recorded: the Ukrainian
language and literature was studied in 41 schools and 12 kindergartens by 336
preschool aged children and 2 237 students. The teachers, who taught this
disciplines, counted 52, of whom 10 educators, 17 schoolmasters and 25
teachers. The education was organised per grades and groups of students. At
„Laţcu Vodă” technical College in Siret was set up a new grade with philology
specialization with partial teaching in Ukrainian, having 22 students. As of this
academic year, the two grades with philology specialization study also the
Religion in Ukrainian.
Besides the two grades, there are also 4 groups of students specially taught for
school contests, in grades 9-12, a total of 107 students.
Based on the cooperation protocol in the field of education signed by the
Romanian and Ukrainian Ministries of Education for the 2008-2011 school
years, the teaching staff in Suceava County asked their counterparts from
Ukraine to teach certain school subjects.
As separate discipline, the Ukrainian language and literature is studied in
schools with teaching in Romanian, upon request, per grades. During 2008 –
2009 there were a number of 90 grades of this type, in 25 schools in the
following localities: Bălcăuţi, Negostina, Gropeni, Ulma, Lupcina, Nisipitu,
Izvoarele Sucevei, Brodina de Sus, Brodina de Jos, Paltinu, Călineşti
Cuparencu, Călineşti Enache, Şerbăuţi, Văşcăuţi, Călineşti Vasilache etc.
The Ukrainian language is also taught in groups of students, set up either at
the level of a grade, or at the level of different grades, per years of study. Thus,
during the 2008 – 2009 academic year 42 groups were set up. Among these, 4
groups of students study the Religion in Ukrainian in the schools in Clit,
Cacica, Soloneţul Nou şi Rădăuţi, and 38 groups are spread in schools of the
following localities: Siret, Brodina, Moldova Suliţa, Rădăuţi, Milişăuţi, Argel,
Paltinu-Spărturi, Măriţei, Slobozia and in Suceava Municipality.
In the county there are several requests to study the Ukrainian language
starting with kindergarten, but so far there are not enough teachers who know
the language.
The children and students from Suceava, belonging to the Ukrainian ethnic
groups are involved in various projects; participate in trips, festivals and
contests that motivate the mother tongue study. Among the most important
events where they were present during 2008 are: educational projects Neighbours in the United Europe; Bukovina – model of interethnic
cohabitation; Interethnic unity by traditions and culture; Intercultural
dialogue in Bukovina; The school – intercultural centre; poetry contest - The
Verse of Şevcenko; regional contest - Oul închistrit; county contest - Mother
Tongue International day; international symposium - Multicultural
development in a European space; folklore festivals -Living together,
Meetings in Bukovina, Let’s take our hands, contest - Apple Flowers; festival Ukrainian carols festival; Summer School - Multiculturalism celebration and

254

learning by projects in the benefit of the community; commemoration of
Holodomor (death by starvation) in Ukraine in years 1932-1933, event called
The never blow out Candle; commemoration of the Ukraine writer Olga
Kobileanska, native from Romania.
•

In Timiş County, in localities such as Ştiuca, Barna Pogăneşti, Darova,
Pietroasa Mare, 17 schools and kindergarten function, where learn over 450
children and students belonging to the Ukrainian ethnic group, of which 30
within „Iulia Hasdeu“ High School in Lugoj (grade 9, 10 with partial teaching
in Ukrainian); 15 teachers teach the Ukrainian language in the County.

•

In Botoşani County: 11 school units, with about 375 children and students and
6 teachers.

•

In Caraş-Severin County: 7 school units, with over 200 children and students
and 6 teachers.

•

In Satu Mare County: 1 school unit, about 140 children and students, 2
teachers.

•

In Arad County: 3 school units, about 60c children and students, 1 teacher.

•

In Tulcea County, in Murighiol and Dunavăţul de Jos: 2 school units, 48
students, 1 teacher.

We mention that in kindergarten groups in all the above-mentioned Counties,
approaches may be also bilingual, in Ukrainian-Romanian, due to the fact that the
parents do not request the teaching of all disciplines in the Ukrainian language. In
schools, including in the primary education, with all the attempts of the activists of the
Union of Ukrainians of Romania to persuade the parents, these are still reserved
towards teaching of disciplines in Ukrainian, English and the computer science or
other disciplines being more requested.
One should stress that in kindergarten groups in the above-mentioned counties,
teaching may also be bilingual, in Ukrainian and Romanian, as parents do not request
the teaching of all disciplines in the Ukrainian language. In schools, including in
primary education, despite encouragement from representatives of the Union of
Ukrainians of Romania, Ukrainian language courses are less popular than English and
computer sciences.
At present, the Ukrainian language is taught at all levels based on curricula, 3-4
classes per week, as is stipulated in the common core of disciplines. The students
belonging to the Ukrainian ethnic group learn using revised textbooks that are
published yearly, based on the requests of the county school inspectorates. In order to
alleviate the problem of textbooks, which the schools were confronted with in the
previous years, a first meeting of the members of the Romanian-Ukrainian Mixed
Commission for coordinating the elaboration of new textbooks in the Ukrainian
language for grades 1-12 was scheduled to take place at the „Taras Şevcenko“
Ukrainian High School in Sighetu Marmaţiei at the end of April 2009.

255

Until now Ukrainian parents have not requested technical and vocational education in
the Ukrainian language or teaching of the Ukrainian mother tongue within the
technical and vocational education.
At the level of higher education, there are three departments offering qualification and
specialization in the field of the Ukrainian language:
- one with an existence of over 50 years within the Foreign Languages Faculty
of the University of Bucharest, a department with a very respected study and
research tradition where students from all over the country come to study
Ukrainian;
- A Ukrainian language department close to communities with significant
number of Ukrainians in Maramureş and Banat within the „Babeş Bolyai“
University of Cluj-Napoca, known on European and international level as a
multicultural university, where there are parallel teaching lines in Romanian,
Hungarian and German, the Ukrainian department and a Centre of Jewish
Studies;
- A department set up a few years ago within the „Stefan cel Mare“ University
of Suceava, close to areas in the Bukovina region where most ethnic
Ukrainians live.
All three Ukrainian language departments cooperate with universities from the
Ukraine and other countries, carry out studies and surveys, and organize events
corresponding to their specializations. Students are offered the opportunity to
continue their education at master’s or doctorate level and participate in exchanges at
other universities in the world.
In addition to enrolment in higher education in Romania, students belonging to the
Ukrainian ethnic group also have the possibility to obtain scholarships for study in
different academic centres in the Ukraine. Scholarships are granted based on the
bilateral cooperation between the Ministry of Education of Romania and that of
Ukraine, through the National Centre for Foreign Studies Scholarships. For the 20072008 academic year, for instance, the Ukrainian state granted Romanian citizens
belonging to the Ukrainian ethnic group 15 scholarships for studies in professional
schools and higher education institutions, as well as 50 scholarships for studies in
higher education institutions with third and fourth degree of accreditation. The
application files to obtain these scholarships (in Romanian and Ukrainian) can be
submitted to the Ministry of Education of Romania. The present protocol of
cooperation in the field was concluded in 2008 and is valid until 31.08.2011.
Concerning adult education, in the 1950s courses for the „ eradication of illiteracy“
were organised in the counties where Ukrainians live. At present, Ukrainian language
and civilisation courses for adults are not being organised any longer, but there is the
possibility that they are organised during winter, considering that most of the
Ukrainian population live in rural areas.
In order to train the teachers of the Ukrainian language, the Ministry of Education and
the Union of Ukrainians in Romania organise and finance the transportation costs for
teaching staff from Romania to attend the courses in Ukraine dedicated to Ukrainian
teachers and inspectors.

256

The History and traditions of the Ukrainian minority is studied as a mother tongue
discipline in schools in the 6th and 7th grades. At present, working groups from four
regions of Romania inhabited by Ukrainians are elaborating a bilingual textbook and a
history of the Ukrainians, also bilingual.
The General Directorate for Education in Minority Languages and Relations with
Parliament of the Ministry of Education, through school inspectorates in the counties
with Ukrainian language schools, monitors and controls the functioning of education
for the Ukrainian minority. In the general reports of the Ministry data are included
about the results obtained at national semestrial test papers and examinations, as well
as at school contests for students studying Ukrainian. The Ministry monitors
proposals of improving the education framework, the curricula and textbooks for preacademic education in the minority languages, as well as the quality of the education
by preparing the thematic of specialised inspections.
The Union of the Ukrainians of Romania (UUR) supports constantly the Ministry of
Education in order to provide quality education, to supplement school education with
extra curricular activities in the mother tongue and to stimulate achieving students.
Within its branch offices, the Union of Ukrainians of Romania carry out periodical
reports about the education for Ukrainian children and students, which are usually
published in their own press.
- Paragraph 2. “With regard to education and in respect of territories
other than those in which the regional or minority languages are traditionally
used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority
language justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the
regional or minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.”
Such requests are usually settled promptly by the Ministry of Education. Until now,
official requests to set up school units, with teaching in Ukrainian, in other regions of
Romania than those inhabited traditionally by Ukrainians, have not been expressed
From Article 9 – Judicial authorities – the following provisions were selected:
- Paragraph 1. The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in
which the number of residents using the regional or minority languages justifies
the measures specified below, according to the situation of each of these
languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the present
paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of
justice:
Subparagraph a) (ii) to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional
or minority language;
Subparagraph a) (iii) to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or
oral, shall not be considered inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a
regional or minority language;
Subparagraph b) (ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person
before a court, that he or she may use his or her regional or minority language
without thereby incurring additional expense;

257

Subparagraph b) (iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the
regional or minority languages if necessary by the use of interpreters and
translations;
Subparagraph c) (ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person
before a court, that he or she may use his or her regional or minority language
without thereby incurring additional expense;
Subparagraph c) (iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the
regional or minority languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and
translations;
Subparagraph d) to take steps to ensure that the application of subparagraphs i and iii of paragraphs b and c above and any necessary use of
interpreters and translations does not involve extra expense for the persons
concerned.
- Paragraph 2. The Parties undertake:
Subparagraph a) not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within
the State solely because they are drafted in a regional or minority language;
- Paragraph 3. The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or
minority languages the most important national statutory texts and those
relating particularly to users of these languages, unless they are otherwise
provided
–were selected
We do not have data concerning the use of the Ukrainian language in justice.
From Article 10 - Administrative authorities and public services – the following
provisions were selected:
- Paragraph 1. Within the administrative districts of the State in which the
number of residents who are users of regional or minority languages justifies the
measures specified below and according to the situation of each language, the
Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
Subparagraph a) (ii) to ensure that such of their officers as are in contact with
the public use the regional or minority languages in their relations with persons
applying to them in these languages; or
Subparagraph a) (iii) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages
may submit oral or written applications and receive a reply in these languages;
Subparagraph a) (iv) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may
submit oral or written applications in these languages;
Subparagraph a) (v) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages
may validly submit a document in these languages;
- Paragraph 2. In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose
territory the number of residents who are users of regional or minority
languages is such as to justify the measures specified below, the Parties
undertake to allow and/or encourage:
Subparagraph b) the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to
submit oral or written applications in these languages;
Subparagraph d) the publication by local authorities of their official
documents also in the relevant regional or minority languages;

258

Subparagraph e) the use by regional authorities of regional or minority
languages in debates in their assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of
the official language(s) of the State;
Subparagraph f) the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages
in debates in their assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official
language(s) of the State;
Subparagraph g) the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the
name in the official language(s), of traditional and correct forms of place-names
in regional or minority languages.
Within some local public administration authorities in Botoşani, Caraş-Severin,
Maramureş, Suceava, and Tulcea counties individuals proficient in Ukrainian are
also employed.
In the Caraş-Severin, Maramureş and Tulcea counties the local public
administration authorities replied in Ukrainian to petitions lodged by citizens
belonging to the Ukrainian minority in their mother tongue.
- Paragraph 3. With regard to public services provided by the administrative
authorities or other persons acting on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within
the territory in which regional or minority languages are used, in accordance
with the situation of each language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
Subparagraph a) to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in
the provision of the service;
Subparagraph b) to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a
request and receive a reply in these languages; or
Subparagraph c) to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a
request in these languages.
- Paragraph 4. With a view to putting into effect those provisions of
paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the Parties undertake to take one or
more of the following measures:
Subparagraph b) recruitment and, where necessary, training of the officials
and other public service employees required;
Subparagraph c) compliance as far as possible with requests from public
service employees having a knowledge of a regional or minority language to be
appointed in the territory in which that language is used.
- Paragraph 5. The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family
names in the regional or minority languages, at the request of those concerned.
Citizens belonging to the Ukrainian ethnic group represent 6.7% of the population of
the Maramureş county. In this context, within the Police County Inspectorate there
are 80 employees who speak Ukrainian (1 individual in certified translator for this
language) carry on their activity, especially in the localities where members of the
Ukrainian minority are in a significant weigh. A similar situation is encountered also
in Botoşani, Suceava, and Tulcea counties. Within police units in the localities
inhabited by Ukrainian communities, persons speaking Ukrainian are also employed.

259

In all the regions where citizens belonging to the Ukrainian ethnic group live, the
Ukrainian traditional names are also used, but written according to the Romanian
spelling.
From Article 11 – Media – the following was selected:
- Paragraph 1. The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority
languages within the territories in which those languages are spoken, according
to the situation of each language, to the extent that the public authorities,
directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this field, and
respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
a) to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:
Subparagraph a) (iii) to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer
programmes in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph b) (ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio
programmes in the regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
Subparagraph c) (ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of
television programmes in the regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
Subparagraph d) to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution
of audio and audiovisual works in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph e)(i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or
maintenance of at least one newspaper in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph g) to support the training of journalists and other staff for media
using regional or minority languages.
Based on the regulations mentioned in the first chapter of the present report, members
of the Ukrainian minority benefit from the same right to freedom of expression as
members of all other minorities.
At present, radio programmes in Ukrainian are produced and broadcasted by the
Editorial Office for Minorities within Radio Romania Bucharest and by the regional
stations in Cluj, Iaşi, Reşiţa and Timişoara. Considering the recently ratified
Language Charter, within the Editorial Office for Minorities in Bucharest a project to
extend broadcasting time by 2 hours per day was elaborated. Moreover, following the
request of the representatives of the Union of Ukrainians of Romania, the Romanian
Broadcasting Society organised a contest for filling a vacant position as editor for the
Ukrainian language programme in the Cluj Regional Studio, which is broadcasted by
the regional studio in Sighetu Marmaţiei. It is hoped that thus the content of the
programmes will be improved.
The weekly proportion of programmes dedicated to the Ukrainian ethnic group within
the programmes of the Romanian Broadcasting Society is the following:
- Radio Cluj - 15 minutes;
- Radio Timişoara - 30 de minutes;
- Radio Reşiţa – 20 minutes;
- Radio Iaşi – 20 minutes.
Example: Radio Timişoara, the programme in the Ukrainian language. These
programmes may be listened every first Sunday of each month between 18.00 and
19.00 and it focuses on traditions and customs from the localities where the

260

Ukrainians live. There is a religious programme, children’s programme, interviews
with Ukrainian personalities from both Romanian and the Ukraine.
Concerning the use of the Ukrainian language in television, it is proportional to the
size of the Ukrainian community. The programmes about or dedicated to the members
of the Ukrainian minority are transmitted on the five channels of the national public
television (TVR1, TVR2, TVR3, TVR Cultural and TVR Internaţional) and on a few
territorial channels - TVR Cluj, TVR Iaşi, TVR Timişoara, TVR Craiova. At the TVR
Bucharest Editorial Office the programmes with and about Ukrainians are produced
by the “Department for programmes for other minorities” in Romanian.
The establishing of the TVR3 channel in October 2008, designed to take over a series
of programmes from all public territorial studios and to retransmit them nationally,
allowed an increase in the time allocated to programmes in minority languages and
allowed the creation of new programmes. Moreover, this new channel settled a part of
the Ukrainian minority’s requests related to their TV presence and to the use of the
language in audiovisual broadcasting. As a first in the history of the TVR, the TVR3
broadcasted programmes in several minority languages, including Ukrainian. Further
efforts are made to attract and qualify multilingual editors, who are so far very few. It
is worth mentioning, however, that the Department for Interethnic Relations has
organized journalism courses for editors belonging to national minorities, attended
also by Ukrainian editors.
At regional level, in the last years the performance of some local studios is remarkable as
concerns promoting the language and culture of minorities in audiovisual broadcasting
services. It is the case of TVR Timişoara, for instance, which in recent years has switched
successfully from broadcasting programmes for minorities in Romanian to programmes
in the minority languages. In addition to this, TVR Timişoara produced a series of
programmes, documentaries and news on intercultural issues and interethnic coexistence
in the Banat region. Advertising clips promoting the ‘National Minorities’ Day’ (18
December) and intercultural TV reports were also produced.
TVR has a reserved time for the transmission on weekly basis on TVR 3 channel of
an art film from the kin states of the national minorities, with Romanian subtitles. To
this end, TVR took action for signing or renewing cooperation agreements (exchanges
of programmes, art films, documentaries, reportages etc.) between the public
television of Romania and those of Albania, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Croatia,
Germany, and Ukraine.
As regards the type of programmes about the Ukrainian community, the productions of
the Department “Programmes for Other Minorities”235 are transmitted on TVR 1, TVR 2
and TVR Cultural channels. This produces seven editions weekly in Romanian, which are
all TVR productions, totalising 4 hours and 30 minutes, as follows:
“Bagaj pentru Europa / Convieţuiri” (Luggage for Europe / Living together)
(TVR 1, duration 50 min., Wednesday, from 4pm) – it includes representative
elements for all ethnic groups recognised officially in Romania;
235

The Department of programmes in Hungarian language and the Department of programmes in
German language (N.N)

261

“Împreună în Europa” (Together in Europe) (TVR 2, duration 52 mins., Friday,
from 3pm) – approaches intercultural issues, multiculturalism, and interethnic
relations;
“Identităţi” (Identities) (TVR Cultural, Tuesday from 7pm and Wednesday from
4pm) – promotes the values of different ethnic groups in Romania;
“Etnii danubiene” (Danube ethnicities) (TVR 2, programme for Wallachia and
Dobrogea regions, duration 26 min., Mondays from 5pm) – consists of three
broadcasted documentaries which are commented by a guest speaker.
On TVR 3 channel, the programmes in the Ukrainian language are taken over from
TVR Cluj and are transmitted every Thursday, lasting 20 minutes.
With regard to mass media, the Ukrainian minority stated: ‘Concerning means of
information, Ukrainians benefit from radio and television programmes in the mother
tongue at high intervals on extremely reduced transmission time. Our desire is to
increase the amount of time allocated to the programmes in the Ukrainian language,
and the national television, and to create a proper Editorial Office for the
Ukrainians.”236
Concerning their own publications, the Union of Ukrainians of Romania is one of the
most active organizations: with the financial support of the Government of Romania it
publishes three publications in the Ukrainian language (Vilne slovo - Free Word, Naş
holos - Our Voice, Ukrainskyi visnyk – the Ukrainian Messenger) and a publication
in the Romanian language – Curierul ucrainean (The Ukrainian Messenger). The
first three are published in bimonthly editions, and the fourth is published every two
months. The Union publishes also the magazine for children in Ukrainian Dzvonik
(The Hand Bell).
- Paragraph 2. The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception
of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language
used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language, and not to
oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring
countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure that no
restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of
information in the written press in a language used in identical or similar form to
a regional or minority language. The exercise of the above-mentioned freedoms,
since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such
formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are
necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial
integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of
others, for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for
maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
In the north, north-east and south-east regions of Romania, where the Ukrainian
community is mostly concentrated, radio and television broadcasts (by cable or
236

Quoted from the Report sent to DRI by The Union of Ukrainians of Romania, page 3

262

satellite) may be directly received from the neighbouring country – Ukraine, in the
respective language.
According to the regulations in the field of broadcasting, Romania allows the
retransmission of radio and television programmes from Ukraine, produced in the
Ukrainian language. The retransmission of the programmes in different languages
from the member States of the European Union is carried out on the basis of
Community legislation without previous authorization, while the retransmission of
such programmes from non-EU States is made based on notification of the regulatory
authority in the field: “For the other neighbouring states of Romania, but nonmembers of the European Union, these may transmit programmes dedicated to
national minorities in Romania, based on an agreement for retransmission issued by
the National Council for the Audiovisual for the broadcasting of programmes that
are not encompassed by any international agreement of free retransmission. The
programmes transmitted from Ukraine, Serbia and the Republic of Moldova are in
this situation.”237
- Paragraph 3. The Parties undertake to ensure that the interests of the users
of regional or minority languages are represented or taken into account within
such bodies as may be established in accordance with the law with responsibility
for guaranteeing the freedom and pluralism of the media.
Journalists belonging to different ethnic groups were appointed in the Boards of
Administration of the public Radio and Television Societies, at the proposal of the
minority MPs. Moreover, in the management of the National Council for the
Audiovisual specialists belonging to minorities were appointed to represent their
position.
From Article 12 - Cultural activities and facilities–were selected:
- Paragraph 1. With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially
libraries, video libraries, cultural centres, museums, archives, academies,
theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production, vernacular
forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries, including inter
alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are
competent, have power or play a role in this field:
Subparagraph a) to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to
regional or minority languages and foster the different means of access to works
produced in these languages;
Subparagraph b) to foster the different means of access in other languages to
works produced in regional or minority languages by aiding and developing
translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;
Subparagraph c) to foster access in regional or minority languages to works
produced in other languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing,
post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;
Subparagraph d) to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or
supporting cultural activities of various kinds make appropriate allowance for
237

Data sent to DRI by the National

Audiovisual Council.
263

incorporating the knowledge and use of regional or minority languages and
cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for which they provide
backing;
Subparagraph e) to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible
for organising or supporting cultural activities have at their disposal staff who
have a full command of the regional or minority language concerned, as well as
of the language(s) of the rest of the population;
Subparagraph f) to encourage direct participation by representatives of the
users of a given regional or minority language in providing facilities and
planning cultural activities;
Subparagraph g) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or
bodies responsible for collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing
works produced in the regional or minority languages;
Subparagraph h) if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance
translation and terminological research services, particularly with a view to
maintaining and developing appropriate administrative, commercial, economic,
social, technical or legal terminology in each regional or minority language.
In the field of culture and science, the Ukrainians have been carrying on sustained
activities, especially after 1990, due to the financial support given by the Government
of Romania. Each year UUR (the Union of Ukrainians in Romania) organizes a series
of festivals, some of which have became traditional; scientific symposia, roundtable
meetings, exhibitions of paintings and graphics, book presentations, and meetings of
the Ukrainian writers with their readers. For instance, the 2009 cultural calendar of
the Union included 41 entries. Most of them are celebrations of the main religious
festivals; aiming at the preservation of important local community traditions;
celebrations of the national poet Taras Şevcenko in all branch offices of the
organization; folklore and Ukrainian carol festivals, poetry contests etc.
As regards book publishing, the Ukrainian elite produces 10 - 15 publications
annually, in fiction, linguistics, folklore, history, music, etc. Numerous authors
belonging to this ethnic group are registered at the Writers’ Union of Romania. The
rich publishing activity of the Union generally includes printing volumes of poetry
and fiction in Ukrainian, publishing anthologies, performing numerous translations in
and from the Ukrainian language, especially of the poems by Taras Şevcenko, the
national poet.
In the last few years UUR requested and obtained financial support from the
Department for Interethnic Relations, from the funds allocated to interethnic
programmes and of combating intolerance for a series of projects; among these the
students’ summer school Bukovina Interethnic Dialogue, in 2008 at Predeal; the 15
edition of the interethnic festival Living together in 2008 in Măriţei, Suceava county.
Also, another student summer school and a painting workshop were proposed by the
Ukrainian Union and supported by DIR during 2009.
The Ministry of Culture and National Heritage, through its minority issues
department, offers every year financial support on to various projects proposed by the
Ukrainian minority. Such events are the „Slav Cultural Day” dedicated to the Cyril
and Methodius saints, the festival of the national minorities „Celebrations of the
Delta” in Sulina, and ethnographic researches.

264

On the other hand, various cultural activities are carried out by the National
Administration of the Cultural Reserve, which is a public institution subordinated to
the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage.
In the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage there is an adviser on Ukrainian
cultural issues, who cooperates with advisers of various Mayors’ Offices, of the
Institutions of the Prefect, with the county Directorates for Culture, museums,
libraries etc.
- Paragraph 2. In respect of territories other than those in which the regional
or minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the
number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow,
encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in
accordance with the preceding paragraph.
Folk music ensembles and craftsmen belonging to the Ukrainian minority attend the
most important fairs and festivals in the country and in Bucharest. Each year the
Ukrainians are present with valuable presentations at the following festivals:
ProEtnica in Sighişoara, Bukovina Meetings, Living Together in Suceava,
EtnoRustica - fair of traditions and craftsmen, and at the National Minorities’ Day. In
the last years with the support of the Ukrainian authorities, and through the budgetary
allocations from the Romanian state folk costumes, musical instruments and
equipment were purchased, in order for the Ukrainian ensembles to perform as well as
possible at events in the country and abroad.
- Paragraph 3. The Parties undertake to make appropriate provisions, in
pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for regional or minority languages and the
cultures they reflect.
Based on the Protocol of cooperation between the Ministry of Culture and National
Heritage of Romania and the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage and Arts of
the Ukraine, signed for 2003 – 2006 and continued to date, a series of annual joint
cultural activities are carried out. Moreover, a series of activities related to the
endowment of libraries and museums, building statues, special events on the occasion
of different festivals are carried out, based on the bilateral treaty of friendship and
cooperation.
Related to Article 13 – Economic and social life
- Paragraph 1. With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties
undertake, within the whole country:
Subparagraph b) to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of companies
and private documents of any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional
or minority languages, at least between users of the same language;”
–was selected
We do not have data concerning the use of the Ukrainian language in economic
activities, but Romanian –Ukrainian joint ventures offer employment to persons
speaking both languages.

265

There are no regulations forbidding or limiting the use of the Ukrainian language in
social activities. On the contrary, the authorities strive to take measures to provide
bilingual specialist assistance in hospitals, homes for elderly etc., in the regions where
members of the Ukrainian minority are in a relatively large number.
From Article 14 - Transfrontier exchanges
The Parties undertake:
- Paragraph a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which
bind them with the States in which the same language is used in identical or
similar form, or if necessary to seek to conclude such agreements, in such a way
as to foster contacts between the users of the same language in the States
concerned in the fields of culture, education, information, vocational training
and permanent education;
The bilateral treaty concluded between Romania and Ukraine in 1997 also includes a
chapter concerning the protection of the members belonging to the Romanian
minority in Ukraine, and to the Ukrainian minority in Romania, respectively. Based
on this document, frequent meetings of the joint committees or commissions for
cooperation took place at presidential level, at the level of the Ministries of Foreign
Affairs, Ministries of Education and Ministries of Culture. During 2006 and 2007
mutual monitoring was carried out in different regions of both countries, organised by
the Ministries of Foreign Affairs.
Since 1991 UUR has been member of the World Congress of Ukrainians, with the
headquarters in Toronto (Canada), and since 1994 it has been a founding member of
the European Congress of the Ukrainians; in 2001, UUR became member of the
World Ukrainian Coordination Council in Kiev. UUR maintains very good relations
with the Ukraine, as well as with the Ukrainian communities from Hungary, Republic
of Moldova, Poland, Slovakia, Germany, etc.
- Paragraph b) for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate
and/ or promote co-operation across borders, in particular between regional or
local authorities in whose territory the same language is used in identical or
similar form.”
The Hungary-Slovakia-Romania-Ukraine Cross–Border Cooperation Programme
2007-2013 and the Common Operational Programme Romania-Ukraine-the Republic
of Moldova 2007-2013 benefit of a total budget of EUR 74.81 million and of EUR
138.1 million, respectively for 2007-2013. The priorities of the first Programme refer
to economic and social development, improvement of the quality of the environment,
common challenges and the increase of the effectiveness of borders.
The Common Operational Cooperation Programme in the Black Sea basin 2007-2013
covers regions in Romania, Bulgaria, Greece, Russia, Turkey, Ukraine, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Georgia and Moldova. The global objective of the programme is the
development of solid regional partnerships and close cooperation in the Black Sea
basin regions. One of the priorities of the programmes refers to cultural and
educational initiatives for creating a common cultural climate in the region. The total
budget of the programme is EUR 17 million.

266

Concerning transfrontier cooperation, the Trans-national Operational Cooperation
Programme in South Eastern Europe targets the creation of trans-national partnerships
in strategic domains in the eligible geographical areas, represented by the territory of
Austria, Greece, Bulgaria, Hungary, Romania, Slovenia, Slovakia, Croatia, the
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Albania, Bosnia, Montenegro, Serbia,
Moldova and regions in Italy and Ukraine. Priority axes target the support of
innovation and entrepreneurship, environment protection and improvement, access
improvement and development of trans-national synergies of regions (within these
axes those projects are eligible that promote the use of the cultural patrimony for
development).
Among the most active transfrontier cooperation areas are:
‘Carpatica’ Euroregion - created in 1993 by the local public bodies in the border
regions of Ukraine, Hungary, Poland and Slovakia. Since 1997 the border counties of
Romania, where the Ukrainian minority is mostly concentrated, were included in the
structure of the ‘Carpatica’ Euroregion.
‘Higher Prut’ Euroregion - established in 2000 in Botoşani (Romania). Founders of
the „Higher Prut” Euroregion were the Cernăuţi region (Ukraine), Botoşani county
(Romania), Suceava county (Romania), Bălţi county (Republic of Moldova) and
Edineţ county (Republic of Moldova). As of 15 October 2003 the Cernăuţi and IvanoFrankivsk regions (Ukraine), Botoşani and Suceava counties (Romania), and Făleşti,
Edineţ, Glodeni, Ocniţa, Râşcani and Briceni counties (Republic of Moldova) were
included in the ‘Higher Prut’ Euroregion.

267

Resources

Reports submitted at the request of the Department for Interethnic
Relations by the following national minority organizations and
institutions:
- the Association of Albanians in Romania
- the Union of Armenians in Romania
- the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage and National Heritage in Romania
- the Greek Union in Romania
- the Association of Italians in Romania “RO.AS.IT.”
- the Federation of Jewish Communities in Romania
- the Association of Macedonians in Romania
- the Romanian Television
- the Union of Poles in Romania
- the Pro Europe Roma Faction
- the Ministry of Education, Research and Innovation
the Ministry of Administration and Interior
- the Romanian Broadcasting Society, Radio Romania Regional, Department for
Editorial production, Regional Studios and Minorities’ Redaction
-the Democratic Union of Turkish-Muslim Tartars in Romania
- the National Council of Audiovisual
the Bulgarian Union of the Banat – Romania
- the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
the Ministry of Regional Development and Housing
- the Democratic Union of the Slovaks and Czechs in Romania(UDSCR)
- the Union of Croatians of Romania
- the Communitas Foundation
- the Union of Serbs of Romania
- the Turkish Democratic Union of Romania
- the School Inspectorate of Constanţa County
- the Union of Ukrainians of Romania

Volumes/ Articles
“Study for linguistic communities in Romania in school years 2006-2007 and 20072008” – Project on Ethnic Relations, Bucharest, 2008.
„History of national minorities in Romania”, auxiliary document for history teachers,
Didactic and Pedagogic Printing House R.A., 2008.
„Roma in Romania”, elaborated by The Center for Documentation and Information
about Minorities from the South-East of Europe (CEDIMR-SE)

268

Gheorghe Sarau, “Romani Language. Linguistic planning in Romania between 1990
and 2008”, in An evaluation of policies of producing bilingual.

Legislation
Constitution of Romania, article 120, paragraph 2.
Government Decision HG 103/2008
Regulation (EC) no. 562/2007 of the European Parliamentand of the Council of 15
March 2006) establishing a Community Code on the rules governing the movement
of persons across borders (Schengen Borders Code), published in the Offical Journal
of the European Union no. L 105/13.04.2006.

Official Reports
Government of Romania, Report on the fulfillment of the 2005 – 2008 Governance
Programme provisions, 2008 (www.guv.ro)

Magazines
The magazine “Macedonian from Craiova”, issue no. 3, 2007, Association of
Macedonians in Romania

Websites
www.armeni.ro/ro/det/Armenopolis
http://www.asociatia-macedonenilor.ro/istoric.php
http://www.recensamant.ro/datepr/tbl5.html
http://www3.limbi-straine.ro/2008/05/catedra-de-limbi-si-literaturi-slave.html
www.divers.ro
www.romacenter.ro/publicatii/
http://www.Tartar.ro/articole/cine_sunt_Tartarii.php
http://www.e-primarii.ro/~dudestiivechi/info_generale.php
http://diversitate.cji.ro/categorie.php?id=2
http://www.cultura.ro/Documents.aspx?ID=365
www.radiotimisoara.ro
http://zagreb.mae.ro/index.php?lang=ro&id=25362
http://zagreb.mae.ro/index.php?lang=ro&id=25362
www.recensamant.ro
http://www.ubbcluj.ro/hu/index.html
www.bartok.ro/aboutus.php
www.radiotimisoara.ro
http://www.tvr.ro/emisiune.php?ed=60132
http://www.mae.ro/index.php?unde=doc&id=36683

269

