Strasbourg, 17 November 2010

MIN-LANG/PR (2010) 7
Addendum 1

EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES

Second periodical report
presented to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe
in accordance with Article 15 of the Charter

SERBIA

Comments/questions submitted to the
Government of Serbia
regarding its Second Periodical Report

COMMITTEE OF EXPERTS FOR THE EUROPEAN CHARTER
FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES
Comments/questions submitted to the Government of Serbia
regarding its second periodical report

The Committee of Experts of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages has made a
preliminary examination of the second periodical report of Serbia. The Committee has observed that a
number of elements in the report need to be clarified before it can be in a position to make its evaluation
as required by the Charter.
The Serbian authorities are kindly requested to reply to the questions contained in this document.

1.
In the first periodical report, the Serbian authorities stated that the application of the Charter can
result in the specification of further languages to which Part III will be applied. Have any steps been taken,
in co-operation with the speakers of Part II languages, to pursue these plans?
2.
What steps have been taken to apply stronger options of Part III inter alia to the Hungarian
language?
3.
Several languages covered by the Charter are not in official use at local level because the
respective national minorities do not reach the legal thresholds of 25% or 15% respectively. What steps
have until now been taken by the Serbian authorities to encourage those municipalities where the
respective minorities have their highest (absolute or relative) concentration to introduce such languages in
official use through an amendment to the municipality’s statute?
4.
As mentioned in the first evaluation report of the Committee of Experts (paragraphs 40-42),
representatives of the Bulgarian and Hungarian national minorities consider that existing administrative
divisions represent obstacles to the promotion of their languages. What steps have been taken to examine
these concerns in co-operation with the representatives of the said minorities?
5.
The Committee of Experts was informed of the letter sent by the Bosniak National Council to the
President of the Government of the Republic of Serbia on 5 February 2010 concerning possible negative
effects that the Decree on Nomenclature of Statistic Territory Units may have on the promotion of the
Bosnian language. What is the position of the Serbian authorities on the concern raised in this letter?
6.
Minority language classes can also be set up on the request of less than 15 pupils or parents if the
Minister of Education approves it. The Serbian authorities have informed the Committee of Experts of
numerous cases where classes have been set up with very few (e.g. two) pupils. What steps have been
taken by the Serbian authorities to actively inform pupils and parents of the possibility of setting up minority
language classes with less than 15 pupils?
7.
In light of the possibility of setting up minority language classes with less than 15 pupils, what
active steps have been taken by the Serbian authorities to introduce the teaching of Czech with elements
of national culture in Bela Crkva and possibly other places where Czech is used (e.g. in Gaj, municipality of
Kovin, and Veliko Središte, municipality of Vršac)?
8.
Has the application made by the National Council of the German National Minority for
broadcasting time in German on Radio Novi Sad and RTV Novi Sad been approved? What active steps
have been taken by the Serbian authorities to improve the presence of German in the print media (e.g.
through a more frequently published newsletter)?
9.
What steps have been taken by the Serbian authorities to allot broadcast time for a television
programme in Czech?

2

10.
What steps have been taken to adopt for each of the Part II languages a structured policy for the
promotion of appropriate types of transnational exchanges in the fields covered by the Charter, including
relations with neighbouring states?
11.
In their comments on the first evaluation report by the Committee of Experts, the Serbian authorities
announced that the Ministry of Education would request an expert team to carry out a revision of history
textbooks in which certain national minorities were presented in a stereotyped way. What has been the
outcome of this revision?
12.
What steps have been taken by the Serbian authorities to strengthen pre-school education for
Croatian and Romanian and to provide pre-school education in Ukrainian?
13.
What steps have been taken by the Serbian authorities to strengthen primary education for
Croatian and Romanian?
14.
Please provide more detailed information in regard to measures taken to promote Romani primary
education in Central Serbia.
15.
What steps have been taken by the Serbian authorities to strengthen secondary education for
Romanian?
16.
What steps have been taken by the Serbian authorities to strengthen technical and vocational
education for Romanian and Slovak?
17.
Please provide information about the application of Article 8 paragraph 1 d iv to Bosnian,
Bulgarian, Croatian, Romani, Ruthenian and Ukrainian.
18.
What steps have been taken by the Serbian authorities to ensure the teaching of the history and the
culture which is reflected by the regional or minority languages to all pupils in the respective languageareas?
19.
What steps have been taken by the Serbian authorities to ensure that citizens are actively
encouraged by judicial staff to use a regional or minority language in courts, for example through bi- or
multilingual notices and signs in/on court buildings, and information in public announcements or court
forms?
20.
Please provide information about the application of Article 9 paragraph 1 b ii to Albanian, Romani,
Ruthenian and Ukrainian.
21.
Please provide specific information about the application of Article 9 paragraph 2 a with respect to
all Part III languages.
22.
What measures have been taken by the Serbian authorities to ensure the application of Article 10
to Romani and Ukrainian?
23.
Please provide information about the application of Article 10 paragraph 2 b to Bosnian, Bulgarian,
Romani and Ukrainian.
24.
Please provide information about the application of Article 10 paragraph 2 c to Albanian, Bosnian,
Bulgarian and Romani (Central Serbia), and about its application outside Vojvodina.
25.
Please comment on statements by representatives of the Romanian-speakers that television
programmes in Romanian cannot be watched by almost two-thirds of the Romanian-speakers in southern
Banat.
26.
Please comment on statements by representatives of the Ruthenian-speakers that the television
and radio programmes in Ruthenian do not reach all areas in which Ruthenian is used.

3

27.
Are there private television channels broadcasting programmes in Bosnian, Bulgarian and
Ukrainian?
28.
Please provide more concrete information in regard to the application of Article 11 paragraph 1 a iii,
b ii and cii in Central Serbia.
29.

Please provide information about the application of Article 12 paragraph 1 b to all Part III languages.

30.

Please provide information about the application of Article 12 paragraph 1 c to all Part III languages.

31.
Please provide specific information about the application of Article 14 a to Albanian, Bosnian,
Bulgarian, Romani, Ruthenian, Slovak and Ukrainian.

4

