Strasbourg, 10 March 2011

MIN-LANG/PR (2010) 7
Addendum 2

EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES

Second periodical report
presented to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe
in accordance with Article 15 of the Charter

SERBIA

Replies to the comments/questions submitted to the
Government of Serbia
regarding its Second Periodical Report

REPLIES TO COMMITTEE OF EXPERTS’ ADDITIONAL QUESTIONS IN
RELATION TO SECOND PERIODICAL REPORT ON APPLICATION OF
EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES IN
SERBIA

1. In the first periodical report, the Serbian authorities stated that the
application of the Charter can result in the specification of further languages to
which Part III will be applied. Have any steps been taken, in co-operation with the
speakers of Part II languages, to pursue these plans?
In the First Periodical Report on the Application of the European Charter for
Regional or Minority Languages, the authorities of the Republic of Serbia indicated their
stance that the implementation of the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages was a process which should encompass and include all stakeholders,
particularly the representatives of persons speaking regional or minority languages, and
that, in this respect, the Republic of Serbia held the view that this process might result in,
amongst other things, the specification of new languages to which chosen paragraphs and
sub-paragraphs would be applied, and this might concern first and foremost Bunjevac,
Vlach, Macedonian, German and Czech languages. Given that the implementation of the
Charter is a process which should encompass and include the representatives of persons
speaking regional or minority languages, the authorities of the Republic of Serbia have
resorted firstly to the establishment of a wider legal basis for the inclusion of the
representatives of minority languages speakers in settling many issues pertaining to their
respective languages. The Law on National Minority Councils stipulates the powers of
national councils related to the issues important for development and promotion of the
mother tongue in various areas of social life, such as, for example, in the field of
education, the power of a national minority council to propose primary and secondary
education curricula for the language of the given national minority and the language, i.e.
the vernacular of the given national minority with elements of the national culture, or, the
right of a given national council to propose the introduction of a language and alphabet of
a given minority as official language and alphabet in a local self-government unit. Given
that the national councils in their capacity as legitimate and legal representatives of
speakers of designated languages have been constituted and that they have the said
powers, it is to be expected that they will start exercising them. The authorities of the
Republic of Serbia hold the view that the process of establishment of national councils
with considerably wider powers than those at the time when the First Periodical Report
was submitted has been one of the steps necessary to fulfil the opportunities which the
First Periodical Report highlighted. Of course, one should point out that the First
Periodical Report did not indicate the plans of the country’s authorities, but the
willingness of authorized organs to create conditions and accept possible positive
development in a partnership with the representatives of minority language speakers. In
this respect, the Republic of Serbia is following the current situation for all designated
languages, however, without the progress which would, in the social life reality, make
possible the undertaking of the same level of protection, i.e. the same paragraphs and
sub-paragraphs, there will not be specification of new languages to which Part III of the

2

Charter is related. Except for the new Law on National Minority Councils and the process
of their constitution, encompassing the election of national councils representing the
speakers of designated languages, thus far, for example, in he field of education, the
following measures have been taken: at schools, instruction in Bunjevac vernacular with
elements of national culture has been organised for an increased number of pupils
studying this subject; the curricula for the teaching of the Macedonian language with
elements of national culture in the first four years of primary education have been
submitted to the educational authorities for approval. As regards the introduction of
German and Czech languages in the teaching process, their respective curricula are yet to
be approved at the initiative and proposals of the respective national councils, whereas in
the case of the Vlach language it is necessary to meet at least the requirement of defining
one’s own alphabet, which is something the Vlach National Council has not done yet.
The examples stated above effectively show that the current status of these languages in
the areas relevant to the Charter’s application is not yet such that it would render possible
sustainable solutions which would, as their ultimate goal, entail a higher level of
undertakings.

2. What steps have been taken to apply stronger options of Part III inter alia
to the Hungarian language?
In the First Periodical Report on the application of the European Charter for
Regional or Minority Languages, the authorities of the Republic of Serbia pointed out
that in the process of ratification, i.e. specification of languages and undertakings under
Part III of the Charter, the Republic of Serbia was guided by an intention to provide to all
the languages to be specified an equal level of protection, i.e. to undertake the same
paragraphs and sub-paragraphs for these languages. Such an intention resulted in the
specification of languages for which, in practice, according to the national legislation,
protection and promotion is to be ensured pursuant to at least 35 paragraphs and subparagraphs under Part III of the Charter. By way of providing the same level of
protection, according to the understanding of the authorities of the Republic of Serbia, the
identical rights are being provided which the speakers of languages, for which
undertakings have been assumed, enjoy on their own or in a community with other
members of their respective groups with respect to the language that they speak.
Obviously, in the social life’s reality, the undertakings assumed regarding the Hungarian
language are being much more often realised due to the number of its speakers. Such an
option does not constitute a violation of the equal level of protection, and it has been
recognized, not only with regard to the exercising of rights pertaining to the language but
in other aspects as well, in the Agreement on the Protection of the Rights of the
Hungarian Minority in Serbia and Montenegro and the Serb Minority in the Republic of
Hungary, concluded between Serbia and Montenegro and the Republic of Hungary.
Under article 2, para. 4 of the said agreement, whose successor is the Republic of Serbia,
the parties to the agreement understand that the manner in which the rights stipulated
therein are enjoyed, out of which many are rights pertaining to the protection and use of
the Hungarian language, may depend on the size of the given minority population.
Bearing in mind this provision, the authorities of the Republic of Serbia hold the view

3

that there is in place an utterly reliable and sustainable legal basis for the utilization of
stronger options for the speakers of the Hungarian language, but without the violation of
the same level of protection ensured by the undertaking of the same paragraphs and subparagraphs for all the languages in relation to which the undertakings under Part III of the
Charter have been assumed. This was clearly indicated by way of statistical data in
adequate places in the First Periodical Report.
3. Several languages covered by the Charter are not in official use at local
level because the respective national minorities do not reach the legal thresholds of
25% or 15% respectively. What steps have until now been taken by the Serbian
authorities to encourage those municipalities where the respective minorities have
their highest (absolute or relative) concentration to introduce such languages in
official use through an amendment to the municipality’s statute?
Paragraphs 49 – 62 of the Second Periodical Report on the Application of the
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages contain information about the
steps taken to ensure conditions for the application of the Charter’s provisions on all
municipal territories where minority language speakers are present in sufficient numbers.
A form of encouragement for local self-government units is also the
implementation of a European Commission’s IPA 2007 project entitled Implementation
of Priorities in the Field of Human Rights and Protection of National Minorities, whose
one component is the building of local self-governments’ capacity for better performance
in the field of human and minority rights. The purpose of this project, which is being
successfully implemented by the Ministry of Human and Minority Rights, is to
strengthen the capacity of institutions on both national and local levels; to coordinate,
implement, monitor and evaluate the protection of human and minority rights in Serbia,
thus fulfilling its obligations stemming from its membership in the United Nations and
the Council of Europe. In the course of October 2010, the first of the two planned series
of workshops took place, intended for the local self-governments’ employees and
dedicated to the international, European, national and local dimensions of the protection
of human and minority rights as well as the improvement in information exchange and
joint operation mechanisms. The workshops covered five regional centres – Požarevac,
Niš, Vranje, Kraljevo and Novi Sad, with a participation of over 100 employees from 35
local self-governments. Participants in the workshops, amongst other things, were
acquainted in detail with the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages as
well as the undertakings resulting from Serbia’s accession to this multilateral treaty, with
a particular emphasis on the importance of local self-governments’ contributions to the
promotion of minority rights.

4. As mentioned in the first evaluation report of the Committee of Experts
(paragraphs 40-42), representatives of the Bulgarian and Hungarian national
minorities consider that existing administrative divisions represent obstacles to the
promotion of their languages. What steps have been taken to examine these
concerns in co-operation with the representatives of the said minorities?

4

Section 3.1.2. of the Second Periodical Report on the Application of the European
Charter for Regional or Minority Languages contains a reply in relation to the claims of
the Bulgarian national minority that the existing territorial divisions represents an
obstacle to the promotion of its language.
As regards the stance of the Hungarian national minority that the set-up of some
administrative districts bears negative consequences for the use of the Hungarian
language, it is important to point out that the Law on State Administration1 stipulates, as
a form of decentralization of the state administration, the formation of administrative
districts for the purpose of carrying out state administration’s tasks outside the
headquarters of a given organ of state administration. The ratification instrument
specifies that the term “territory in which regional or minority languages are in official
use” pertains to the areas where regional or minority languages are in official use in
accordance with the national legislation.
Bearing in mind that the local self-government units as whole entities are
becoming parts of their respective administrative districts and that the use of language
and alphabet pertains to the areas where the languages are in official use in accordance
with the national legislation, the Hungarian national minority’s concerns that the
established administrative districts may represent an obstacle to the promotion of the
Hungarian language are unfounded.
5. The Committee of Experts was informed of the letter sent by Bosniak
National Council to the President of the Government of the Republic of Serbia on 5
February 2010 concerning possible negative effects that the Decree on
Nomenclature of Statistic Territory Units may have on the promotion of the Bosnian
language. What is the position of the Serbian authorities on the concern raised in
this letter?
The Law on Amendments and Addenda to the Law on Regional Development2,
adopted in May 2010, designates, instead of the previous 7, 5 regions – NSTJ
(Nomenclature of Statistic Territory Units) at level 2. This law defines the regions as
functional statistical territorial units, consisting of one or more areas, introduced for the
purpose of planning and implementation of regional development policy, in accordance
with the nomenclature of statistical territorial units at level 2. They are not becoming
actual administrative territorial units and do not assume legal subjectivity. Article 5 of
this law stipulates that the Government, at the proposal submitted by an organ in charge
of statistics, is to designate the areas which constitute the regions in accordance with the
nomenclature of statistical territorial units.
Bearing this in mind, the Republican Statistical Office, observing all the
EUROSTAT procedures and criteria based on the European Union’s standards, proposed
a change to the Regulation on Nomenclature of Statistical Territorial Units3, which was
adopted by the Government of the Republic of Serbia in June 2010. The regulation
defines the regions more accurately – NSTJ level 2, i.e. their boundaries are defined as
1

Law on State Administration (Official Gazette of the Republic of Serbia, No. 79/05, 101/07 and 95/10).
Law on Regional Development (Official Gazette of the Republic of Serbia, No. 51/09 and 30/10).
3
Regulation on Nomenclature of Statistical Territorial Units (Official Gazette of the Republic of Serbia,
No. 109/09 and 46/10).
2

5

well as the remaining two levels of functional statistical territorial units – NSTJ 1 and
NSTJ 3. The Regulation’s article 3 specifies the criteria according to which NSTJ levels
are grouped, which in turn are based on general criteria set by the European Union’s
standards: 1) population size; 2) geopolitical position; 3) natural potentials; 4) existing
territorial set-up; 5) cultural and historical heritage. Based on these criteria, two entities
are formed at NSTJ level 1: Serbia – North is the unit at NSTJ 1 level, encompassing the
Belgrade Region and Vojvodina, and Serbia – South encompassing Šumadija and
Western Serbia Region, South and East Serbia Region, and Kosovo and Metohija Region.
Territorial units – regions at NSTJ level 2 – that constitute functional entities NSTJ 1 are
as follows: Belgrade Region, Vojvodina Region, Šumadija and West Serbia Region,
South and East Serbia Region and Kosovo and Metohija Region. Territorial units – areas
at NSTJ level 3 – constitute functional entities at NSTJ level 2. For the purpose of
providing a reply to the posed question, the composition of the Šumadija and West Serbia
Region is presented given that almost all the speakers of Bosnian language (99.7% in
Central Serbia according to the 2002 population census) live on that territory. Nine areas
NSTJ level 3 make up this region encompassing territorial units of local self-governments
which are parts of the following administrative districts: Zlatibor District, Kolubara
District, Mačva District, Moravica District, Pomoravlje District, Rasina District, Raška
District and Šumadija Administrative District.
Bearing in mind what has been stated above, the authorities of the Republic of
Serbia hold the view that the provisions of the Regulation on Nomenclature of Statistical
Territorial Units can not have any adverse impact on the promotion of the Bosnian
language. This regulation, as presented above, lays out the nomenclature of statistical
territorial units which represents a set of notions, titles and symbols used to describe
groups of territorial units. In accordance with the said nomenclature, statistical data are
being collected, processed and presented, and indicators of regional development success
are being designed.

6. Minority language classes can also be set up on the request of less than 15
pupils or parents if the Minister of Education approves it. The Serbian authorities
have informed the Committee of Experts of numerous cases where classes have
been set up with very few (e.g. two) pupils. What steps have been taken by the
Serbian authorities to actively inform pupils and parents of the possibility of setting
up minority language classes with less than 15 pupils?
The possibility for pupils to attend mother-tongue classes is regulated by the Law
on the Basics of the Education System. There is no a common format regarding the
manner in which pupils and parents are informed about the right to minority language
education. The most common practice, however, is to inform the parents at the point
when their children enrol in schools about the possibility for pupils to attend minoritylanguage classes, i.e. the possibility to study the subject entitled Mother Tongue with
Elements of National Culture. The law stipulates that a minority language curriculum is
to be implemented if at least 15 pupils apply for enrolment in the first grade. The
implementation of the teaching process and minority language curriculum may be
organized for a number of pupils which is below the threshold prescribed by the law if

6

the Minister of Education, or the Provincial Secretariat for Education at institutions on
the territory of the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina, approves it. There are no reliable
data on whether the schools inform the parents about the possibilities stated above
concerning the teaching process in cases when the minimal legal requirement of 15 pupils
has not been met. As stated above, there is no a common format in place for
dissemination of such information to parents, hence, the manner in which this is done
varies from one school to another.
The Law on National Minority Councils, which stipulates powers and
competences in the field of education, also grants an active role to the national councils
with respect to the dissemination of information about the possibility of minority
language education as well as the possibilities to set up minority language classes for
fewer than 15 pupils to their respective minority communities.

7. In light of the possibility of setting up minority language classes with less
than 15 pupils, what active steps have been taken by the Serbian authorities to
introduce the teaching of Czech with elements of national culture in Bela Crkva and
possibly other places where Czech is used (e.g. in Gaj, municipality of Kovin, and
Veliko Središte, Municipality Vršac)?
Since the 2007/2008 school year, the official curriculum in the Republic of Serbia
provides a possibility to introduce a minority language, including Czech, as the second
language within the scope of optional school subjects. For the teaching of the Czech
Language with Elements of National Culture to be organized, the Czech National
Minority Council must launch an initiative for the drafting of a curriculum for the
optional subject – Mother Tongue with Elements of National Culture, as well as initiate
the procedure for its approval, adoption and publication, provision of professional staff
and textbooks needed for the realization of such a programme. After that the parents,
when their children enrol in school, i.e. at the beginning of each school year, opt for
mother tongue (Czech, in this case) subject on behalf of their children, while the principal
of the given school is to submit a request to the authorized school administration of the
Ministry of Education for the funding of these classes.

8. Has the application made by the National Council of the German National
Minority for broadcasting time in German on Radio Novi Sad and RTV Novi Sad
been approved? What active steps have been taken by the Serbian authorities to
improve the presence of German in the print media (e.g. through a more frequently
published newsletter)?
9. What steps have been taken by the Serbian authorities to allot broadcast
time for a television programme in Czech?
Radio Television Vojvodina is broadcasting programming in nine, i.e. ten
languages: Serbian, Hungarian, Slovak, Romanian, Ruthenian, Croatian, Bunjevac,
Ukrainian, Roma and Macedonian. However, RTV Vojvodina has been operating in

7

particularly difficult conditions for the past ten years given that its main building and a
large part of its transmitter network equipment were destroyed during the NATO
bombing campaign. Hence, RTV Vojvodina is using outdated analogue equipment and is
facing personnel-related, financial and many other challenges. According to the
information obtained from RTV Vojvodina management, possibilities for launching
shows in German and Czech languages are currently being considered, with assistance
and financial support of the competent organs and the European Union now that Radio
Television Vojvodina has become a member of the Danube Region RTV Stations
Network.

10. What steps have been taken to adopt for each of the Part II languages a
structured policy for the promotion of appropriate types of transnational exchanges
in the fields covered by the Charter, including relations with neighbouring states?
Section 3.1.9. of the Second Periodical Report on the Application of the European
Charter for Regional or Minority Languages also contains information about the bilateral
agreement on protection of national minorities concluded with Macedonia as well as the
agreement in the fields of education, culture and sports, and the programme whereby the
manner in which this agreement in the field of culture is to be implemented. The
Republic of Serbia is ready to conclude new agreements with interested states on cooperation in the fields of social life where the same or similar language is used for the
purpose of promotion of contacts among these languages’ speakers.

11. In their comments on the first evaluation report by the Committee of
Experts, the Serbian authorities announced that the Ministry of Education would
request an expert team to carry out a revision of history textbooks in which certain
national minorities were presented in a stereotyped way. What has been the
outcome of this revision?
According to the information obtained from the Ministry of Education, the
planned activities regarding the revision of history textbooks where certain national
minorities were presented in a stereotyped way have been abandoned given that the
process of drafting new regulations has been launched which shall provide guarantees for
the elimination of the presentation of certain national minorities in a stereotyped way in
all textbooks, including history textbooks (see paras. 137 and 138 of the Second
Periodical Report on the Application of the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages). The Law on the Basics of the Education System, the Law on Textbooks and
Other Teaching Aids and the Textbook and Teaching Aid Quality Standards prescribe the
procedure for preparation, approval, publication and selection of textbooks, textbook sets
and other teaching aids, as well as the procedure for their monitoring and evaluation over
the course of their use in the educational process. The said documents specify prohibition
of any discrimination based on racial, national, ethnic, linguistic, religious or genderrelated grounds, disabilities, physical and psychological traits, health condition, age,
social and cultural background, financial status, political affiliation or any other grounds.

8

12. What steps have been taken by the Serbian authorities to strengthen preschool education for Croatian and Romanian and to provide pre-school education in
Ukrainian?
The Law on Pre-School Education, adopted in 2010, as part of the common
education system, stipulates the implementation of the educational work in mother
tongues for members of national minorities. It may also be implemented bilingually or in
Serbian language, if at least 50% of parents or children’s guardians opt for it. In cases
where pre-school education process is not occurring in individual mother tongues, the
main reason for that, according to the information obtained from the Ministry of
Education, is the lack of interest on the part of parents in the implementation of the preschool programme in mother tongue.
Compulsory and free-of-charge preparatory pre-school programme has bee
introduced as a very important measure intended to ensure better starting position for all
the children once they enrol in primary schools. The possibility for children to attend the
preparatory pre-school programme in mother tongue is regulated by law. In the
Autonomous Province of Vojvodina, at the point of enrolment in pre-school institutions,
each and every parent receives information about such possibility and declares in which
language he/she would like his/her child to attend the programme. Depending on the
number of pupils who have been enrolled, the principal of the given pre-school institution
forms groups for realization of the given programme and submits request for funding.
Since there is no organized educational work in place in Ukrainian language at
pre-school institutions, the Ukraine Language Summer School for which curricula for
both younger and older age groups respectively have been designed, is being organized in
Serbia. In addition to local teachers, those from Ukraine also hold classes at this school
since there are no enough trained teachers for all the activities prescribed by the school
curricula. Special teachers are engaged to hold additional classes in various subjects
(religious instruction, local history, drawing, literature and theatre classes).
Under the Law on National Minority Councils, the newly elected national
councils should carry out activities under their jurisdiction with respect to the pre-school
education.

13. What steps have been taken by the Serbian authorities to strengthen
primary education for Croatian and Romanian?
In order to strengthen primary education in Croatian language, the Ministry of
Education has approved the import and use of certain textbooks and workbooks from
Croatia on the basis of a positive opinion of the Croatian National Minority Council and
the Institute for Advancement of Education that they meet professional-pedagogical and
programmatic requirements. The Provincial Secretariat for Education is involved in the
activities related to the Croatian language textbooks so as to ensure within as short a
space of time as possible that these textbooks, despite the extremely small number of

9

copies, fulfil the quality standards just like the textbooks for teaching in Serbian
language.
Consultations are currently under way at the Ministry of Education with regard to
the regulation of the status of Croatian language teachers who, pursuant to the agreement
on co-operation in the fields of culture, education and sports, are coming from the
Republic of Croatia.
The data on teaching in Romanian language in primary schools are presented in
the paragraph 170, whereas the data on the studying of the Romanian language with
Elements of National Culture are presented in the paragraph 171 of the Second Periodical
Report on the Application of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages.
According to the information obtained from the Ministry of Education, about 60% of the
children of Romanian nationality attend primary schools in their mother tongue.
Textbooks for education in Romanian language are published by the Textbook Institute,
but they are also imported when needed from Romania.

14. Please provide more detailed information in regard to measures taken to
promote Romani primary education in Central Serbia.
The new Law on the Basics of the Education System, adopted in 2009, stipulates
the existence of a pedagogical teaching assistant at school whose task is to provide
assistance and additional support to children and pupils, in accordance with their needs,
as well as help teachers and professional teaching associates advance their work with
children and pupils who are in need of additional educational support. In 2009, the
Ministry of Education and the OSCE Mission to Serbia announced a public competition
for potential candidates for pedagogical assistants at primary schools with pupils of Roma
nationality who are in need of additional support and assistance. In this manner, support
was provided for the activities being implemented as part of the Roma Assistant in
Teaching Process project, the Decade of Roma Inclusion international project, the
Strategy for Advancement of the Position of Roma, and the Action Plan in the part which
dealt with the advancement of the Roma education. In the 2010/2011 school year, 180
pedagogical assistants were engaged to work in pre-school institutions and primary
schools with children and pupils of Roma nationality. Out of this number, 105
pedagogical assistants were engaged to work in primary schools in Central Serbia.
The Government of the Republic of Serbia adopted the Strategy for Advancement
of the Position of Roma and the Action Plan for its implementation in 2009 (see section
2.1.2. of the Second Periodical Report on the Application of the European Charter for
Regional or Minority Languages). The Action Plan in the field of education also features
measures related to the support for the implementation of the Roma Language with
Elements of the National Culture and Tradition programme.
Given that there are legal obstacles to the provision of an approval for primary
education in Romani language in Central Serbia, an initiative to promote such a teaching
process should be launched primarily by the Roma National Minority Council. The
Ministry of Education expects of the Council to define the following in the forthcoming
period: 1) how many pupils and in which primary schools would like to continue their
education in Romani language; 2) who will prepare the texts for Romani language

10

instruction textbooks; 3) a request for a change to the Annual Curricula of Schools where
the Romani language classes or a part of it would take place, for all the grades (I – VIII)
or only for the first and fifth grade (if they opt for the first option, they should submit the
changes and additions to all the curricula by grades, and if they go for the second option,
then this is necessary solely for the first and fifth grades); 4) changes and additions to the
rules on educational degrees of teaching staff members who would teach in Romani
language. All the proposals regarding curricula, rulebook or textbooks will be forwarded
by the Ministry of Education to the Institute for Advancement of Education for further
consideration and in order to obtain opinion on them or consent for their use.

15. What steps have been taken by the Serbian authorities to strengthen
secondary education for Romanian?
16. What steps have been taken by the Serbian authorities to strengthen
technical and vocational education for Romanian and Slovak?
The Provincial Secretariat for Education, in accordance with the Law on National
Minority Councils (article 15) takes into account the initiative of the Romanian National
Minority Council in the process of drafting its opinion, which is then submitted to the
competent minister in charge of education affairs in the procedure for specification of the
network of secondary schools and institutions dealing with pupils’ and students’ standard,
i.e. in the procedure for specification of educational institutions of particular importance
for the national minorities’ education. Each national minority council has the most
accurate data concerning the number of pupils attending mother tongue classes as well as
the needs of one’s own national minority community with respect to the educational
profiles and the requirements of labour market in the communities where they live.
Vocational education reform projects are currently under way in the system of the
Ministry of Education: CARDS, in collaboration with the European Agency for
Reconstruction; Serbian Vet project, in collaboration with GTZ, German organisation for
technical co-operation; ECO-NET project, in collaboration with KulturKontakt. Cooperation has been also established with many other partners: the Chamber of Commerce,
the Employers Association, the Industrialists and Entrepreneurs Association, the Union of
Representative Trade Unions, the National Employment Office, the Republican
Statistical Office, universities, NGOs, etc. The objective of these projects and contacts is
to modernize and promote vocational education, and to introduce vocational education
profiles which meet the requirements of the society’s development and labour market.

17. Please provide information about the application of Article 8 paragraph 1
d iv to Bosnian, Bulgarian, Croatian, Romani, Ruthenian and Ukrainian.
The information on education in technical and specialist schools in the Bosnian
language is contained within Paragraph 196, on Bulgarian in Paragraphs 197 and 198,
and on education in Romanian in Paragraph 202 of the Second Periodical Report on the
Implementation of The European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. In schools

11

on the territory of the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina, only the course of MotherTongue (Romani, Ukrainian) With Elements of National Culture is taught, and that
course is optional in secondary schools, so students can opt for it as they wish and it is
not financed from the Ministry of Education’s budget, but by the local administrations,
depending on the number of interested students and financial situation at the local level.
Since the school-year of 2010/2011 the courses of chemistry, non-metals and graphics, at
the School of Polytechnics, are taught in Croatian too.

18. What steps have been taken by the Serbian authorities to ensure the
teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected by the regional or minority
languages to all pupils in the respective language-areas?
The teaching plan for compulsory primary education envisages the possibilities
for multicultural communities to deviate by a certain percentage from the curricula in
history, music and visual arts, the world around us and the basics of society, in order to
treat the contents from history and culture of the minorities whose languages are in
official use on that territory, in accordance with the pupils’ age and basic teaching
contents of the course in question.
Teaching the course of Civic Instruction provides a broad range of opportunities
for intercultural education and upbringing through the processes of building, respecting
and strengthening the cultural pluralism and tolerance. The so-far experience in teaching
this course has shown that through educational and instructive process the pupils acquire
knowledge and key competences necessary for cohabitation with different individuals,
with full self-esteem, and the competences inter alia are: the capacity to constructively
communicate in various social situations, the awareness and understanding of national
and cultural identity interacting with cultural identity of Europe and the rest of the world,
as well as the ability to notice and understand different standpoints determined by
diversities.

19. What steps have been taken by the Serbian authorities to ensure that
citizens are actively encouraged by judicial staff to use a regional or minority
language in courts, for example through bi- or multilingual notices and sings in/on
court buildings, and information in public announcements of court forms?
Section 4.2.5.1 of the Second Periodical Report on the Implementation of The
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages contains information on informing
the citizens of the possibility to use minority languages in courts.
In accordance with the Law on Seats and Jurisdiction of Courts and Prosecutors,
which came into force on 1 January 2010, the judiciary network has been reorganized. At
the entrances to the reorganized court buildings, in accordance to Article 85 of the Court
Rules of Procedure4 signs with the official court name and national flag have been
posted. The court names are written on a separate plate, and the text is written in the
language and script in official use in court. If the court officially uses a minority language
4

The Court Rules of Procedure, (“The Official Gazette of the Republic of Serbia“, number 110/09)

12

and script besides the Serbian language and Cyrillic script, the text is written in
accordance with the order envisaged by a special relevant law.

20. Please provide information about the application of Article 9 paragraph 1
b ii to Albanian, Romani, Ruthenian and Ukrainian.
Section 4.2.3 of the Second Periodical Report on the Implementation of The
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages contains information on
application of Article 9 Paragraph 1 b ii, pertinent to the possibility of a party to use a
minority language in civic litigation procedures. Bearing in mind that the Republic of
Serbia’s regulations do not envisage keeping special records in courts, on the basis of
which data on the number of litigations where parties used minority languages could be
provided, the Report contains only partial data and those only from the courts that have
agreed to participate in the reporting. There are no available data on the use of the
Romani, Ruthenian, and Ukrainian languages in court litigations.

21. Please provide specific information about the application of Article 9
paragraph 2 a with respect to all Part III languages.
The regulations in force in the Republic of Serbia do not prescribe keeping special
records in courts, on the basis of which data on the number of legal documents adopted in
Part III minority languages could be provided. However, according to the information
obtained from the courts that took part on drafting the Second Periodical Report on the
Implementation of The European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, there are
no recorded cases of courts rejecting or denying the validity of documents presented by
parties to any procedure just because they were in a minority language.

22. What measures have been taken by the Serbian authorities to ensure the
application of Article 10 to Romani and Ukrainian?
Complying with the majority of undertaken obligations emanating from Article 10
of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages depends on whether a
minority language is in official use in a local administration unit. Starting from legal
provisions, a local administration unit is obliged to introduce a minority language and
script into use if the percentage of the minority members on its territory amounts to 15%
of total population according to the census data. However, the Republic of Serbia’s
regulations provide the possibility to local administrations to introduce a minority
language into official use through their statutes, even when the legal threshold is not met
(see Paragraph 61 of the Second Periodical Report on the Implementation of the
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages).
A strong impetus and contribution to protection, exercising and promotion of
minority rights, therefore the right to minority language use, comes from the Law on
National Councils of National Minorities, adopted in 2009 (see Section 2.2.2 of the

13

Second Periodical Report). The National Councils of the National Minorities are a form
of cultural autonomy and a form of functional decentralization in the sphere of the state’s
legislative function. The election and constitution of the National Councils during 2010
enabled them to launch initiatives in the areas where they have competences stipulated by
law, including the official use of language and script. The Romani and Ukrainian
languages are not in official use in any of the local administrations because the legal
requirements for their official introduction into official use have not been met, but, on the
other hand, adoption of the Law on the National Councils of National Minorities has
created legal conditions for the National Councils of National Minorities to propose
identification of their respective languages and scripts as official languages and scripts in
the local administration units.

23. Please provide information about the application of Article 10 paragraph
2 b to Bosnian, Bulgarian, Romani and Ukrainian.
The Constitutional provisions and regulations of the Republic of Serbia provide
the opportunity to those who submit written or oral applications in those languages (see
Section 5.3.1 of the First Periodical Report on the Implementation of the European
Charter for Regional or Minority Languages). According to the local administration data,
in practice there are open possibilities to exercise rights of parties to apply in their own
respective languages. However, local administrations do not possess consolidated data on
parties’ applications submitted in their respective minority languages in various
situations. Nevertheless, in local administrations where minority languages are in official
use, it is possible to indirectly identify the number of written applications to local
authorities, for instance through administrative procedures in minority languages, or
engagement of translators in administrative procedure, or the number of certificates and
register book confirmations issued, or the number of citizenship register certificates in
bilingual forms, etc. That information is contained within Section 4.3.2 of the Second
Periodical Report. Such an indirect way of insight into the scope of using the Romani and
Ukrainian languages is not possible because they are not in official use in any local
administration. That, however, dos not eliminate the possibility for those languagespeakers to address the local authorities in writing or speaking, but no accurate data are
available as keeping those records in local administrations is not envisaged.

24. Please provide information about the application of Article 10 paragraph
2 c to Albanian, Bosnian, Bulgarian and Romani (Central Serbia), and about its
application outside Vojvodina.
In the Republic of Serbia there is only one region – the Autonomous Province of
Vojvodina – and regional documents are published in minority languages in accordance
with the Law, as stated in Section 4.3.3 of the Second Periodical Report on the
Implementation of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages.

14

On the territory of Central Serbia, where speakers of Albanian, Bosnian,,
Bulgarian and Romani languages constitute respective majorities, there is no single
region and thus no regional documents published in minority languages.

25. Please comment on statements by representatives of the Romanian
speakers that television programmes in Romanian cannot be watched by almost two
thirds of the Romanian speakers in southern Banat.
26. Please comment on statements by representatives of the Ruthenian
speakers that the television and radio programs in Ruthenian do not reach all areas
in which Ruthenian is used.
The Radio Television of Vojvodina remained without transmission network
dismantled during the NATO bombing campaign. This is why the RTV programme is
difficult to watch on the territory of Banat, although there are technical difficulties in
programme broadcasting in other parts of Vojvodina too, those traditionally populated by
national minority communities.

27. Are there private television channels broadcasting programmes in
Bosnian, Bulgarian and Ukrainian?
Provisions of Article 43 of the Broadcasting Law stipulate that a legal or physical
entity registered for the activities of producing and broadcasting radio and television
programme should acquire the broadcaster status by obtaining a programme broadcasting
licence. A broadcaster can operate in radio and television programe production and
broadcasting as: a public broadcasting service institution; a commercial radio and/or
television station; radio and/or television station of local or regional community. The
National Broadcasting Agency (RRA) keeps records on licences issued for programme
broadcasting, containing data on broadcasters’ ownership structure too.
Section 4.4.4 of the Second Periodical Report on the Implementation of the
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages contains information on the
practice of encouraging or facilitating TV programme in minority languages. That
information lists data on TV stations too, with singling out the public companies founded
by local administrations, whereas the commercial TV stations (founded by legal and
physical entities) and civil sector’s TV stations are encompassed by the term “other
broadcasters“.
Besides the TV stations covered by the Second Periodical Report, an insight into
the Register on Licences Issued for Programme Broadcasting and Broadcasters’
Ownership Structure has established that one private TV station broadcasts programme in
Bosnian and another in Bulgarian, while no privately owned TV broadcast outlet
broadcasts programme in the Ukrainian language. TV programme in Bosnian is
broadcast by TV Universa from Novi Pazar, at the length of 12 hours a day. Bulgarian
programme is broadcast by “Pi canal“ TV from Pirot, lasting one hour a week.

15

28. Please provide more concrete information in regard to the application of
Article 11 paragraph 1 a iii, b ii and c ii in Central Serbia.
Section 4.4.2 of the Second Periodical Report on the Implementation of the
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages contains information on the
legislative framework which enables radio and TV programme broadcasters that exercise
the role of public service (public broadcasting services) to offer contents in minority
languages. The Serbian Broadcasting Service (RTS) broadcasts programme on the whole
territory of Serbia, whereas the Broadcasting Service of Vojvodina broadcasts
programme on the territory of the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina. Owing to the
large number of operators and the developed cable distribution system, radio and TV
programmes of public services and other broadcast outlets can be distributed, which
enhances their availability to all segments of the society, including national minority
members.
Sections 4.4.3 and 4.4.4 of the Second Periodical Report contain, besides data on
the governmental incentives to minority programme broadcasting, also the information
on broadcasters, as well as that on the minority radio and TV programme duration. The
next sequence of the reply to this question provides an overview of radio and TV
broadcasters that operate in Central Serbia:
Minority language

Broadcaster
RTV Bujanovac
Radio Bujanovac, Bujanovac

TV broadcaster
RTV Bujanovac
TV Bujanovac, Bujanovac

The Albanian Language

The Bosniak Radio, Tutin

RTV Aldi,
TV Aldi, Presevo
Regional TV Novi Pazar, Novi
Pazar

The Bosnian Language
TV Tutin, Tutin

The Bulgarian Language

Radio Bosilegrad, Bosilegrad

The Romani Language

RTV Khrlo e Romengo,
Radio Khrlo e Romengo,
Belgrade
RTV Bujanovac
Radio Bujanovac, Bujanovac
Radio Ema, Bujanovac
Radio Rom, Obrenovac
RTV Trstenik
Radio Trstenik, Trstenik

TV Forum, Prijepolje
RTV Caribrod
TV Caribrod, Dimitrovgrad
RTV Bujanovac
TV Bujanovac, Bujanovac
RTV Valjevo
TV Valjevo,
Valjevo
RTV Krusevac
TV Krusevac,
Krusevac
RTV Krajina
TV Krajina,
Negotin
RTV Nisava

16

TV Nisava, Nis

The number of radio and TV broadcasters that broadcast a minority programme is
by far greater than the one presented here, since the Second Periodical Report covers only
the broadcasters that have received state aid. Paragraph 280 of that Report presents the
number of radio and TV broadcasters that have minority language programmes, based on
the number of broadcasting licences issued, but with a note that their number is difficult
to establish due to the lack of any special records on radio and TV stations broadcasting
minority programmes in the Register of Licences Issued.

29. Please provide information about the application of Article 12 paragraph
1 b to all Part III languages.
Section 4.5.2 of the Second Periodical Report on the Implementation of the
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages contains information on financial
support to translating literature from original minority languages into the majority
(Serbian) language, as well as into other minority languages. This not only makes the
original minority literature available to the general readership, but also supports
development of minority languages by having them translated into other languages.

30. Please provide information about the application of Article 12 paragraph
1 c to all Part III languages.
The Government provides budgetary funds to financially support translation of
literature into minority languages. The enhanced availability of literature produced in
other languages to minorities is achieved through allowing all interested parties to apply
for translation funds allocated through annual public call procedure. Section 4.5.3 of the
Second Periodical Report on the Implementation of the European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages contains information on financial support to translating literature
from the original Serbian language into minority languages.

31. Please provide specific information about the application of Article 14 a
to Albanian, Bosnian, Bulgarian, Romani, Ruthenian, Slovak and Ukrainian.
The Section 3.1.9 of the Second Periodical Report on the Implementation of the
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages contains information on bilateral
agreements on national minority protection, concluded with Hungary, Romania and
Croatia. The same Section lists memoranda of understanding in the areas of education,
culture and others, where the same language is used, with Hungary, Slovakia, Ukraine
and Croatia, as well as programmes regulating the way of the agreements’
implementation. As regards the Romani language speakers, it should be emphasized that
in 2005 the Serbian Prime Minister signed the Roma Inclusion Decade Declaration,
whereby prime ministers of eight countries then involved with the Decade voiced
political readiness to work on reducing differences between Roma and the rest of the
17

population through implementation of national action plans in education, housing,
employment and health care. As stated in Article 417 of the Second Periodical Report,
the Republic of Serbia is ready to sign new agreements with interested parties, for the
areas of social life where the same or similar language is used.

18

