Strasbourg, 11 June 2013

ECRML (2013) 3

EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES

APPLICATION OF THE CHARTER IN SERBIA

2nd monitoring cycle

A.

Report of the Committee of Experts on the Charter

B.
Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers of the
Council of Europe on the application of the Charter by Serbia

2

The European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages provides for a control mechanism to evaluate how
the Charter is applied in a State Party with a view to, where necessary, making Recommendations for
improvements in its legislation, policy and practices. The central element of this procedure is the Committee
of Experts, established in accordance with Article 17 of the Charter. Its principal purpose is to examine the
real situation of the regional or minority languages in the state, to report to the Committee of Ministers on its
evaluation of compliance by a Party with its undertakings, and, where appropriate, to encourage the Party to
gradually reach a higher level of commitment.
To facilitate this task, the Committee of Ministers has adopted, in accordance with Article 15, paragraph 1, an
outline for the periodical reports that a Party is required to submit to the Secretary General. The report shall
be made public by the government concerned. This outline requires the state to give an account of the
concrete application of the Charter, the general policy for the languages protected under its Part II and in
more precise terms all measures that have been taken in application of the provisions chosen for each
language protected under Part III of the Charter. The Committee’s first task is therefore to examine the
information contained in the periodical report for all the relevant regional or minority languages on the territory
of the state concerned.
The Committee’s role is to evaluate the existing legal acts, regulations and real practice applied in each state
for its regional or minority languages. It has established its working methods accordingly. The Committee
gathers information from the respective authorities and from independent sources within the state, with a view
to obtaining a just and fair overview of the real language situation. After a preliminary examination of a
periodical report, the Committee submits, if necessary, a number of questions to the Party concerned on
matters it considers unclear or insufficiently developed in the report itself. This written procedure is usually
followed up by an “on-the-spot" visit of a delegation of the Committee to the respective state. During this visit
the delegation meets bodies and associations whose work is closely related to the use of the relevant
languages, and consults the authorities on matters that have been brought to its attention.
Having concluded this process, the Committee of Experts adopts its own report. This report is submitted to
the Committee of Ministers, together with suggestions for recommendations that the latter may decide to
address to the State Party.

3

CONTENTS
A.

Report of the Committee of Experts on the application of the Charter in Serbia .................... 4

Chapter 1 Background information ................................................................................................................ 4
1.1.

The ratification of the Charter by Serbia ................................................................................. 4

1.2.

The work of the Committee of Experts ................................................................................... 4

1.3.

General issues arising from the evaluation of the report ........................................................ 4
1.3.1.

Territorial application of the Charter .......................................................................... 4

1.3.2.

Status of Vlach under the Charter ............................................................................. 5

1.3.3.

Status of Bunjevac under the Charter........................................................................ 6

1.3.4.

Application of Part III of the Charter........................................................................... 6

Chapter 2 Conclusions of the Committee of Experts on how the Serbian authorities have reacted to
the recommendations of the Committee of Ministers .................................................................................. 7
Chapter 3 The Committee of Experts’ evaluation in respect of Part II and Part III of the Charter ............ 9
3.1.

The evaluation in respect of Part II of the Charter .................................................................. 9

3.2.

The evaluation in respect of Part III of the Charter ............................................................... 16

Chapter 4 Findings of the Committee of Experts in the second monitoring round................................. 42
Appendix 1: Instrument of ratification ............................................................................................. 45
Appendix 2: Comments by the Serbian authorities ......................................................................... 46
B.

Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on the

application of the Charter by Serbia ............................................................................................................. 54

4

A.
Report of the Committee of Experts on the application of the Charter in
Serbia
adopted by the Committee of Experts on 4 May 2011
and presented to the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
in accordance with Article 16 of the Charter

Chapter 1 Background information
1.1.

The ratification of the Charter by Serbia

1.
The European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages (hereafter ”the Charter”) was signed by
Serbia and Montenegro on 22 March 2005. The Assembly of Serbia and Montenegro adopted the Law on
the Ratification of the Charter on 21 December 2005. After the ratification by the President of Serbia and
Montenegro, pursuant to Article 18 of the Charter, the instrument of ratification of Serbia and Montenegro
was deposited with the Secretary General of the Council of Europe on 15 February 2006. The Charter
entered into force for the Republic of Serbia as the successor to the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro
on 1 June 2006.
2.
Article 15.1 of the Charter requires States Parties to present periodical reports at three-yearly
intervals after the first report. The Serbian authorities presented their second periodical report to the
Secretary General of the Council of Europe on 23 September 2010.
1.2.

The work of the Committee of Experts

3.
This evaluation report is based on the information obtained by the Committee of Experts from the
second report of Serbia and the replies to an additional questionnaire submitted to the Serbian authorities on
24 November 2010. The Committee of Experts also obtained information through interviews held with
representatives of the national minority councils and the Serbian authorities during an on-the-spot visit
(8-10 December 2010). Pursuant to Article 16.2 of the Charter, the Vojvodina Centre for Human Rights has
submitted an alternative report on the implementation of the Charter to which several national minority
councils and associations in Serbia have contributed. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts has received
statements from the national councils of the Bosniak, German and Vlach national minorities. The present
report reflects the policies, legislation and practice prevailing around the time of the on-the-spot visit. Any
later developments will be taken into account in the next report of the Committee of Experts concerning
Serbia.
4.
The report contains detailed observations that the Serbian authorities are encouraged to take into
account in order to develop their policy on regional or minority languages. The Committee of Experts has, on
the basis of its detailed observations, also established a list of proposals for recommendations to be
addressed to Serbia by the Committee of Ministers, as provided in Article 16.4 of the Charter (see Chapter
4.2 of the present report).
5.
The Committee of Experts wishes to express its gratitude to the Serbian authorities for the active and
fruitful co-operation it has enjoyed. In 2009, the Serbian authorities agreed to organise an implementation
roundtable on the Charter and the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities. The event,
which took place in the Assembly of Vojvodina, was attended by all national minority councils which have
adopted a joint declaration with detailed requests regarding the full implementation of both conventions.
Furthermore, Serbia has submitted its comprehensive second report on time. The co-operation with the
authorities and with the national minority councils during the on-the-spot visit was exemplary.
6.

The present report was adopted by the Committee of Experts on 4 May 2011.

1.3.

General issues arising from the evaluation of the report

1.3.1.

Territorial application of the Charter

7.
At the deposition of its instrument of ratification on 15 February 2006, Serbia and Montenegro
declared that it would apply the Charter in areas in which the regional and minority languages are in official
use. Pursuant to national legislation, the introduction of a minority language in official use is compulsory if a
national minority accounts for 15% of the population of an (entire) municipality (opština). In Vojvodina, a

5

minority language and script which is not in official use on the entire territory of the municipality shall be
introduced into official use in a local community (mesna zajednica) of that municipality if the population share
of persons belonging to the given minority reaches 25% in that place. If a national minority does not meet the
aforementioned thresholds, a municipality may, through a change of its statute, voluntarily introduce the
respective minority language in official use. According to the Law on the National Councils of the National
Minorities (Article 22.3), national minority councils have the competence to propose the introduction of their
minority language and script as a local co-official language.
8.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered that the thresholds of 15% and
25% may prevent the Charter from being applied to those regional or minority languages which are not in
official use but which are still present in sufficient numbers in municipalities or local communities for the
1
provisions of the Charter to be applied. The Committee of Experts therefore welcomed the fact that regional
or minority languages had frequently been voluntarily introduced in official use through a change in the
statute. This has happened even if the share of the minority population was very low locally (e.g. 0.5% in the
case of the Slovak national minority in Bačka Topola) or in Serbia as a whole (Czech is a local official
language although only 2,211 people belong to the Czech minority in Serbia). Against this background, the
Committee of Experts considered that the Serbian authorities should identify, in co-operation with eligible
municipalities, the municipal territories where the regional or minority languages are present in sufficient
numbers for the application of provisions of the Charter and where, if necessary, statutes could be
supplemented.
In addition, it “encourage[d] the Serbian authorities to take steps to secure the
implementation of the Charter in all municipal territories where the regional or minority languages are present
in sufficient numbers for the application of provisions of the Charter, including where necessary changes to
statutes of municipalities.”
9.
According to the second periodical report, the Serbian authorities, in co-operation with the national
councils of minorities whose languages are not yet in official use, will approach eligible municipalities with a
view to introducing these languages into official use. The first joint initiative of this kind will concern the
Romani and Ukrainian languages. During the on-the-spot visit, representatives of the National Council of the
Roma Minority informed the Committee of Experts that Romani could be introduced in official use in the
following municipalities due to a relevant local concentration of Roma: Bujanovac, Vranje, Surdulica, Vladičin
Han, Pirot, Bela Balanka, Niš, Prokuplje, Leskovac, Lebane, Bojnik and Aleksinac.
10.
A particular problem exists regarding Bunjevac and Vlach which both attain the thresholds of 15%
and 25% in several places. However, the Serbian authorities have informed the Committee of Experts that
Bunjevac and Vlach are not officially used in any unit of local self-government because they have not yet
been standardised. The Committee of Experts notes that the concept of “official use” in Serbia covers not
just written, but also oral communication with citizens for which a standardisation is not necessary.
Furthermore, there are plans to standardise Bunjevac and Vlach during the coming years. Against this
background, the Committee of Experts is of the view that the Serbian authorities should consider flexible
interim measures that would introduce official use of Bunjevac and Vlach and thus secure the implementation
of the Charter.
11.
The Committee of Experts considers that the Serbian authorities should continue to identify, in
co-operation with eligible municipalities, the municipal territories where the speakers of regional or minority
languages are present in sufficient numbers for the application of provisions of the Charter and where, if
necessary, statutes could be supplemented.
The Committee of Experts urges the Serbian authorities to pursue steps to secure the
implementation of the Charter in all municipal territories where the speakers of the regional or
minority languages are present in sufficient numbers for the application of provisions of the
Charter, including where necessary changes to statutes of municipalities.
1.3.2.

Status of Vlach under the Charter

12.
Members of the Vlach national minority are divided over the question as to whether Vlach is a
language in its own right or a variety of Romanian. Since Romanian is covered also by Part III of the Charter,
the question arose in the first monitoring cycle as to whether Vlach should be covered under Part II or also
under Part III of the Charter. The Committee of Ministers recommended Serbia to “clarify the status of …
Vlach in consultation with representatives of all speakers”. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts
“encourage[d] the Serbian authorities to clarify the status of Vlach under the Charter in co-operation with the
speakers.”

1

Cf. also 1st Report of the Committee of Experts on Slovakia, ECRML (2007) 1, paragraphs 44/47; 2nd Report of the Committee of
Experts on Sweden, ECRML (2006) 4, paragraph 16

6

13.
There are no indications that a consultation with representatives of all speakers (including those who
consider Vlach a variety of Romanian) has been carried out. However, the Committee of Experts notes that
the election of the National Council of the Vlach Minority in 2010 (a direct election where all persons
belonging to the Vlach minority could participate) led to a change in the composition of the national council.
While the previous national council considered Vlach to be a variety of Romanian, the new national council
aims at a standardisation of Vlach, which it expects to take several years. Until standardisation is achieved,
the national council does not consider the application of Part III of the Charter feasible. In light of the above,
the Serbian authorities confirmed in the second periodical report that Part II applies to Vlach.
14.
According to the second periodical report, the national councils have no competences to establish or
proclaim what language is spoken by the members of the national minority they represent. Furthermore, the
Committee of Experts observes that the divide between those speakers who consider Vlach to be a variety of
Romanian and those who consider it a language in its own right hampers the application of the Charter to
Vlach. It considers that the Serbian authorities should initiate a dialogue between representatives of all
speakers which could lead to a differentiated approach in language promotion, permitting the use of Vlach
and (standard) Romanian – rather than only one of the two – in certain fields (e.g. education, media), if such
requests are made by a sufficient number of people.
1.3.3.

Status of Bunjevac under the Charter

15.
In the first monitoring cycle, the Serbian authorities declared that they would not yet apply the
Charter to Bunjevac because it had not yet been standardised. However, they were willing to apply Part II to
Bunjevac in the future. The Committee of Experts underlined that the lack of standardisation was not in itself
an obstacle to the application of Part II to a regional or minority language. The Committee of Ministers
recommended Serbia to “clarify the status of Bunjevac … in consultation with representatives of all
speakers”. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts “encourage[d] the Serbian authorities to clarify the status
of Bunjevac under the Charter in co-operation with the speakers.”
16.
In the second periodical report, the Serbian authorities confirmed that they have started to apply Part
II to Bunjevac. The Committee of Experts welcomes this decision. Furthermore, the Serbian authorities
stated during the on-the-spot visit that they are considering including Bunjevac as a mother-tongue option in
the 2011 census form.
1.3.4.

Application of Part III of the Charter

17.
Serbia has ratified the same undertakings in respect of all Part III languages. The Committee of
Experts notes as in the previous monitoring cycle that the undertakings which have been chosen by Serbia, in
particular those in education and the media, do not adequately reflect the situation of all minority languages.
For example, higher-level undertakings could be applied to Hungarian.
18.
With regard to the scope of application of Part III, the Serbian authorities have reiterated in the
second monitoring cycle that they consider the implementation of the Charter as a process which can result
in the specification of further Part III languages and such steps will be considered as soon as the Part II
languages concerned have been introduced in education. The Committee of Experts welcomes the dynamic
approach taken by the Serbian authorities to the instrument of ratification and encourages them to pursue the
envisaged steps in co-operation with the speakers.

7

Chapter 2 Conclusions of the Committee of Experts on how the Serbian authorities
have reacted to the recommendations of the Committee of Ministers
Recommendation no. 1:
“promote awareness and tolerance in Serbian society at large vis-à-vis the regional or minority languages and
the cultures they represent”
19.
Several activities have been implemented as part of the project “Affirmation of Multiculturalism and
Tolerance in Vojvodina” of the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina. The projects covered television and radio
competitions for pupils on the history and culture of national minorities, TV documentaries, the organisation of
an “Ethno Day” by pupils in Vojvodina (presentations of national minorities living in Vojvodina, including
linguistic cultural and historical characteristics), and exhibitions.
Recommendation no. 2:
“clarify the status of Bunjevac and Vlach in consultation with representatives of all speakers”
20.
The Serbian authorities have confirmed that they will apply Part II to Bunjevac and Vlach. However,
there are no indications that consultations with representatives of all speakers (in the case of Vlach: including
those who consider Vlach a variety of Romanian) have been carried out.
Recommendation no. 3:
“introduce teaching of/in Part II languages at primary and secondary levels”
21.
There is still no stable presence of all Part II languages at primary and secondary levels within the
framework of the models of minority-language education. Bunjevac is taught in some primary schools, but not
at pre-school and secondary levels. Czech is not yet taught in the public education system. Apart from one
bilingual kindergarten, German is only taught as a foreign language and not within the models of minoritylanguage education. The curriculum for teaching Macedonian with elements of national culture has been
developed, but the introduction of such teaching is pending. Vlach remains completely absent from education.
Recommendation no. 4:
“strengthen teacher training and provide adequate teaching materials for all regional or minority languages”
22.
There are still important problems related to teacher training and the provision of adequate teaching
materials for all regional or minority languages. The 2007 strategy on specialised education development
deals with the general further training of teachers. The authorities suggest that a solution to the lack of
trained teachers for regional or minority languages could be co-operation with other states on the basis of
agreements in the fields of education and protection of national minorities. As to teaching materials, they are still
lacking in many cases. A new Law on Textbooks and other Teaching Aids regulates the publishing of textbooks
in regional or minority languages, as well as their import from other states. In practice, teaching materials are
translated from Serbian with significant delays or are imported, but this procedure is not approved for all
languages and all subjects.
Recommendation no. 5:
“secure the implementation of Articles 9 and 10, in particular regarding Romani and Ukrainian, and ensure that
the Part III languages can be used in relations with local branches of the state authorities”
23.
Articles 9 and 10 are not implemented with respect to Romani and Ukrainian, although there have
been individual cases where interpreters have been assigned to Romani speakers before court. The Serbian
authorities state that all participants in a trial are entitled to use their language through interpreters and be
informed on facts related to the case in their language, and that measures have been taken to increase the
number of interpreters and judges for Romani and Ukrainian. A joint initiative by the authorities in Vojvodina
and National Councils of the Roma and Ukrainian minorities, aimed at introducing Romani and Ukrainian in
official use in some municipalities, will follow. As to the use of Part III languages in relation with local
branches of state authorities, the Law on the Official Use of Language and Script has been amended. It now
provides that persons belonging to any national minority may communicate with the state authorities in the areas
where their language is in official use and are entitled to receive a reply in their language. Previously this was
only possible for members of a national minority whose population made up more than 2% of the total
population of Serbia, which in practice only applied to Hungarian. However, there are still problems in
practice in this respect.
Recommendation no. 6:
“take the necessary legal and practical measures to ensure that personal names and place names in the
regional or minority languages can be used officially in conformity with the tradition and orthography of the
languages concerned”

8

24.
The amended Law on the Official Use of Language and Script provides that persons belonging to
national minorities may freely choose and use the names of their children, as well as enter these names in all
public documents, official records and personal databases, according to the script and orthography of the
language concerned, in parallel with Serbian script and orthography. The Committee of Experts has not been
made aware of any practical measures aimed at improving the use of personal names in regional or minority
languages. Further place names have been officially designated but are not always used in practice.

9

Chapter 3 The Committee of Experts’ evaluation in respect of Part II and Part III of
the Charter
3.1.

The evaluation in respect of Part II of the Charter

Part II – Objectives and principles pursued in accordance with Article 2, paragraph 1
25.
Part II of the Charter applies to all regional or minority languages used in Serbia, i.e. Albanian, Bosnian,
Bulgarian, Bunjevac, Croatian, Czech, German, Hungarian, Macedonian, Romani, Romanian, Ruthenian,
Slovak, Ukrainian and Vlach. In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts did not deal with Bunjevac
under Part II as its status under the Charter was not yet clear. The recommendations that are quoted below from
the first evaluation report therefore did not concern Bunjevac.
Article 7 – Objectives and principles
Paragraph 1
In respect of regional or minority languages, within the territories in which such languages are used and according to the
situation of each language, the Parties shall base their policies, legislation and practice on the following objectives and principles:
a

the recognition of the regional or minority languages as an expression of cultural wealth;

26.
According to the second periodical report, the Statute of the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina
(hereafter: Vojvodina) has been amended to the effect that the Croatian language and script is now also
officially used by bodies and organisations of Vojvodina, whereas beforehand Croatian had only been
officially used by the Assembly of Vojvodina. The Committee of Experts welcomes this decision.
b

the respect of the geographical area of each regional or minority language in order to ensure that existing or
new administrative divisions do not constitute an obstacle to the promotion of the regional or minority language
in question;

27.
The Committee of Experts has been informed of a letter dated 5 February 2010 sent by the Bosniak
National Council to the President of the Government of the Republic of Serbia indicating the possible negative
effects that the Regulation on Nomenclature of Statistical Territorial Units may have on the promotion of the
Bosnian language. The Committee of Experts asked the Serbian authorities to comment on this issue. In their
reply, the Serbian authorities state that the Law on Amendments and Addenda to the Law on Regional
Development of 2010 defines the regions as functional statistical territorial units which are not becoming actual
administrative territorial units and do not assume legal subjectivity. The Committee of Experts takes note of the
Serbian authorities' statement that the Regulation on Nomenclature of Statistical Territorial Units will not have
any adverse impact on the promotion of the Bosnian language.
c

the need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in order to safeguard them;

28.
Resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in order to safeguard them covers several
aspects, for example the creation of a legal framework for the promotion of such languages, the establishment
2
of bodies which have responsibility in this field and provision of adequate financial resources. In the first
evaluation report, the Committee of Experts encouraged the Serbian authorities to provide adequate funding
to the national minority councils (self-government bodies with competences regarding the use of language and
script, education, information and culture) to allow them to effectively execute their tasks.
29.
The Serbian authorities state in the second periodical report that due to the economic crisis, the
financial allocations to the national councils have had to be reduced. During the on-the-spot visit,
representatives of several national minority councils voiced concern that the financial constraints would not
allow them to effectively execute their tasks.
30.
While acknowledging the economic difficulties of Serbia, the Committee of Experts urges the Serbian
authorities to secure adequate financial support that would allow national minority councils to effectively
execute their tasks.
d

31.

the facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of regional or minority languages, in speech and writing, in
public and private life;

The Committee of Experts will deal with the Part III languages under its evaluation of Part III.

Bunjevac
2

Cf. for example 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts on Germany, ECRML (2006) 1, paragraph 24; 2nd Report of the Committee of
Experts on Sweden, ECRML (2006) 4, paragraph 28

10

32.
According to the information obtained from the National Council of the Bunjevac Minority, the
process to standardise Bunjevac has begun and a grammar is being prepared. The national council expects
that standardisation will be achieved by 2013 and that it will facilitate the use of Bunjevac in public life.
33.
The presence of Bunjevac in the media remains good. Besides a radio and a television programme
broadcast by Radio Television Vojvodina, Bunjevac is present at Trend Radio in Bačka Topola, Radio
Subotica and Radio Sombor. There is a monthly in Bunjevac with a supplement for children. In addition, the
Serbian authorities have supported the publication of several books in Bunjevac and cultural events.
Czech
34.
Czech is an official language of Bela Crkva. In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts
“encouraged the Serbian authorities to take measures to facilitate the practical use of Czech by the
administrative authorities and the municipal court of Bela Crkva.” According to the second periodical report,
there has been no request for the use of Czech in administrative proceedings in Bela Crkva or in court
proceedings before the Magistrate Court in Vršac, the High Court in Pančevo and the Administrative Court in
Novi Sad during the reporting period. The Serbian authorities state that the Ministry of Justice intends to take
positive measures to facilitate the practical use of Czech and other minority languages in courts. During the
on-the-spot visit, however, representatives of the Czech national minority council stated that the absence of
demand is due to the lack of administrative and court staff able to use Czech. The Committee of Experts asks
the Serbian authorities to clarify, in the next periodical report, whether there are linguistically qualified staff
working at the local authority of Bela Crkva and at the courts which have jurisdiction of that municipality.
35.
As far as the media are concerned, the Serbian authorities informed the Committee of Experts in the
first monitoring cycle that broadcasting time on public television and radio for Czech could be allotted once a
Czech national minority council had been elected. In Serbia, national minority councils may request the
allotment of broadcasting time on television and radio. The broadcasting time depends on the size of the
national minority in accordance with the latest census. Within the framework of the Public Radio Broadcasting
Agency of Vojvodina, Radio Television Vojvodina 2 (RTV2) broadcasts programmes intended for the users of
the minority languages. In June 2010, the first National Council of the Czech Minority was elected, and it
intends to request the allotment of broadcasting time on public television and radio at RTV Vojvodina. The
Serbian authorities confirmed during the on-the-spot visit and in their replies to the questionnaire sent by the
Committee of Experts that they are currently considering the launch of a radio and television programme in
Czech, with technical and financial assistance from the European Union. Considering that, apart from
German (see below), Czech is the only regional or minority language in Vojvodina that is not yet present at
RTV Vojvodina, the Committee of Experts encourages the Serbian authorities to take measures to promote
the broadcasting of a radio and television programme in Czech at RTV Vojvodina.
German
36.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts encouraged the Serbian authorities to support
applications by the German speakers for radio broadcasts that can be received in all parts of Vojvodina and to
assist a newsletter published at regular intervals.
37.
According to the second periodical report, TV Panonija broadcast a weekly television programme in
German in co-operation with the National Council of the German Minority until 2010. In addition, Radio
Subotica continues to broadcast a weekly programme in German (30 minutes) which is produced by
freelancers. In order to make these broadcasts sustainable and to cover all parts of Vojvodina, the national
council applied to Radio Television Vojvodina for a radio programme in 2010 and a television programme
(30 minutes per month) in 2011. Furthermore, the national council intends to apply for state support for a
bilingual newsletter. During the on-the-spot visit, the Serbian authorities stated their willingness to consider
such applications. In their replies to the questionnaire sent by the Committee of Experts, they also confirmed
that they are currently considering the launch of a radio and television programme in German, with technical
and financial assistance from the European Union. The Committee of Experts encourages the Serbian
authorities to take measures to promote the broadcasting of a radio and television programme at RTV
Vojvodina and to support a newsletter.
The Committee of Experts encourages the Serbian authorities to facilitate and/or encourage the
broadcasting of radio and television programmes in Czech and German at RTV Vojvodina.
Macedonian
38.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts acknowledged the good situation of
Macedonian in the media in Vojvodina. Regarding the situation of Macedonian in Central Serbia, the
Committee of Experts invited the Serbian authorities to provide information in the next periodical report.
39.
According to the second periodical report, the presence of Macedonian in the media remains good.
There exists a radio and a television programme broadcast by RTV Vojvodina. In addition, the Serbian
authorities have supported a number of publications in Macedonian which are also distributed in Central

11

Serbia (a newspaper; the Sunica children's magazine; the Videlo magazine for literature, art and culture;
books in Macedonian, Serbian translations of books written by Macedonian authors and Macedonian
translations of books written by Serbian authors). However, the Committee of Experts lacks more specific
information regarding the situation of Macedonian in Central Serbia and asks the Serbian authorities to
provide such information in the next periodical report.
Vlach
40.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts “encouraged the Serbian authorities to adopt
a structured policy for the protection and promotion of Vlach and to strengthen its use in public life.”
41.
In the field of the media, the Serbian authorities have supported radio and television programmes in
Vlach, covering news and Vlach customs. Furthermore, television programmes in Romanian broadcast from
Zaječar have been subsidised. However, the Committee of Experts has no further information at its disposal
(broadcast time, length of the programme, regularity) and asks the Serbian authorities to submit such
information in the next periodical report. Moreover, three cultural projects have been supported by the
Serbian authorities. In addition to the observations made above (cf. 1.3.2), the Committee of Experts observes
that the promotional measures currently applied to Vlach do not adequately reflect the demographical situation
of Vlach (relatively high number of speakers, compact settlement). In general, there does not seem to be any
structured policy to facilitate and/or encourage the use of Vlach in public life.
The Committee of Experts urges the Serbian authorities to take without delay the necessary measures
for the promotion and protection of Vlach in public life in a differentiated approach respecting the
wishes of the speakers.
e

the maintenance and development of links, in the fields covered by this Charter, between groups using a
regional or minority language and other groups in the state employing a language used in identical or similar
form, as well as the establishment of cultural relations with other groups in the state using different languages;

42.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts had not been informed of any body or council
where representatives of the national minorities meet. In light of the new information received, the Committee
of Experts now considers that the Republic of Serbia Council for National Minorities, which acts as an
umbrella body for the individual national minority councils, can serve this purpose. Furthermore, the individual
national minority councils facilitate the maintenance and development of links within language groups, in the
fields covered by this Charter, as well as the establishment of cultural relations with other groups in the state
using different languages.
f

43.

the provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of regional or minority languages at all
appropriate stages;

The Committee of Experts will deal with the Part III languages under Article 8.

Awareness-raising
44.
There are three models of minority language education at primary and secondary schools, which apply
to the Part II and Part III languages alike. Teaching may be carried out in the minority language, bilingually, or
in Serbian with the possibility of learning the minority language “with elements of national culture” (about two
to four hours per week). At least 15 pupils or parents have to request the establishment of a minority
language class. While this threshold is too high for the purposes of the Charter, minority language classes
can also be set up at the request of less than 15 pupils or parents if the authorities approve it. The Serbian
authorities informed the Committee of Experts in the first monitoring cycle of numerous cases where classes
have been set up with very few pupils (two pupils, for example). However, the Committee of Experts also
noted that very few representatives of the minority language speakers were aware of this exemplary practice.
In light of the above, the Committee of Experts “encouraged the Serbian authorities to inform pupils and
parents more actively of the right to education in regional or minority languages and to encourage them to make
use of it“.
45.
In their replies to the questionnaire sent by the Committee of Experts, the Serbian authorities state
that there is no standard procedure for informing parents and/or pupils of the possibility to set up minority
language classes with less than 15 pupils. In addition, the authorities have no clear information at their disposal
as to how such information is provided, as the manner in which this is done differs from one school to another.
The Committee of Experts considers that more awareness-raising about the virtues of, and opportunities for,
minority language education is needed as many parents are under the impression that such teaching would
be cumbersome and counterproductive for the development of their children. Furthermore, the Committee of
Experts reiterates that a threshold of 15 pupils is too high for the purposes of the Charter as the speakers of a
number of minority languages in Serbia are unlikely to attain it. The Committee of Experts therefore urges the
Serbian authorities to inform pupils and parents more actively of the possibility to set up minority language
classes with less than 15 pupils and to encourage them to make use of it.

12

Teaching of/in Part II languages
46.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts also “encourage[d] the Serbian authorities to
provide for the teaching of/in Part II languages within the 3 models of regional or minority language education at
all appropriate stages.“ Furthermore, the Committee of Ministers recommended Serbia to “introduce teaching
of/in Part II languages at primary and secondary levels.”
Czech
47.
With regard to Czech, the Committee of Experts specified the aforementioned recommendations by
encouraging the Serbian authorities “to investigate the situation with a view to introducing the teaching of
Czech with elements of national culture in Bela Crkva and possibly other places where Czech is used (e.g. in
Gaj, municipality of Kovin, and Veliko Središte, municipality of Vršac).”
48.
According to the second periodical report, however, Czech is still not taught within any of the three
models mentioned above. According to the information received, there seems to be sufficient demand for
teaching Czech with elements of national culture in Češko Selo and Kruščica (municipality of Bela Crkva).
The Committee of Experts urges the Serbian authorities to investigate the situation with a view to providing for
the teaching of/in Czech within the three models of minority language education at all appropriate stages in Bela
Crkva and possibly other places where Czech is used (e.g. in Gaj, municipality of Kovin, and Veliko Središte,
municipality of Vršac).
German
49.
According to the second periodical report, a bilingual kindergarten has been set up in Subotica with
two groups using German with Serbian and one group using Hungarian with Serbian. Representatives of the
National Council of the German Minority have informed the Committee of Experts that 65 parents have applied
for the establishment of bilingual primary school classes in Subotica to ensure continuity for those children who
will leave the bilingual kindergarten in 2011. Furthermore, preparations are underway to apply the model of
bilingual kindergarten education in other cities of Vojvodina. The Committee of Experts welcomes the
introduction of bilingual pre-school education. It encourages the Serbian authorities to ensure that the
children can continue their bilingual education at primary and secondary levels in Subotica and to start
bilingual education also in other places where German is used (e.g. in Novi Sad, Sombor, Vršac, Pančevo and
Zrenjanin).
Macedonian
50.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts asked the Serbian authorities to submit
additional information about the teaching of Macedonian.
51.
According to the second periodical report, the three models mentioned above are currently not
applied to Macedonian. However, the National Council of the Macedonian Minority has prepared the curricula
for “Macedonian with elements of national culture” to be taught from the first to the fourth grade of primary
school. Such teaching may in the future be offered if there is demand for it. The Committee of Experts
welcomes the progress that has been made and encourages the Serbian authorities to provide for the teaching
of/in Macedonian at all appropriate stages.
Vlach
52.
The Serbian authorities state in the second periodical report that Vlach is not taught at any level of
education since it is not standardised. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts notes that there are Vlach
speakers who are interested in the teaching of “Romanian with elements of national culture”. As regards
Vlach, the Committee of Experts considers that the lack of standardisation should not necessarily need to
lead to a complete absence of Vlach from education. Rather, Vlach could be used orally in kindergarten and
in certain subjects of primary and secondary education as well as in extra-curricular activities in which written
communication plays no or a limited role. As far as Romanian is concerned, the Serbian authorities may
consider applying the models of minority language education to those pupils who (or whose parents) so
request. The Committee of Experts is of the view that there is room for a differentiated, rather than a uniform
and rigid approach to minority language education, permitting the use of both Vlach and Romanian in
conformity with the actual demand by the speakers. Consequently, the Serbian authorities are invited to carry
out their surveys at the beginning of each school year in such a way that pupils (or parents) can choose
between Vlach and (standard) Romanian. The Committee of Experts also urges the Serbian authorities to
introduce Vlach into education even before a possible standardisation is achieved.
Bunjevac
53.
According to the second periodical report, the subject “Bunjevac speech with elements of national
culture“ is taught at primary schools in Subotica and Sombor (total number of pupils in 2010: 171). The
Committee of Experts welcomes the progress that has been made. However, Bunjevac is not present at
kindergarten and secondary levels. The Committee of Experts encourages the Serbian authorities to take
the appropriate measures so that the pupils who currently study the subject “Bunjevac speech with elements
of national culture“ can continue this subject at secondary level, and to introduce Bunjevac in kindergarten.

13

The Committee of Experts urges the Serbian authorities to provide for the teaching of/in Part II
languages within the three models of minority language education at all appropriate stages.
g

the provision of facilities enabling non-speakers of a regional or minority language living in the area where it is
used to learn it if they so desire;

54.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts asked the Serbian authorities to provide
information about the application of this provision to Albanian, Bosnian, Bulgarian, Czech, German,
Macedonian, Romani, Ukrainian and Vlach and to report about the availability of facilities enabling adult nonspeakers of regional or minority languages to learn them.
55.
According to the second periodical report, facilities providing for the teaching of Albanian, Bosnian,
Bulgarian, Romani and Ukrainian are also attended by persons not belonging to the respective national
minorities. As regards the Part II languages, this provision has not been implemented so far for Czech,
Macedonian and Vlach to which the models of minority-language education are not being applied so far.
Apart from one bilingual kindergarten, German is taught as a foreign language and not within the models of
minority-language education. The Committee of Experts encourages the Serbian authorities to provide
facilities enabling non-speakers of Czech, German, Macedonian and Vlach living in the area where these
languages are used to learn them if they so desire.
h

the promotion of study and research on regional or minority languages at universities or equivalent institutions;

56.
The Committee of Experts notes that this provision is not implemented with regard to Vlach which
remains completely absent from higher education.
i

the promotion of appropriate types of transnational exchanges, in the fields covered by this Charter, for regional
or minority languages used in identical or similar form in two or more states.

57.
The Committee of Experts will deal with transnational exchanges for the Part III languages under
Article 14.
58.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts encouraged the Serbian authorities to adopt,
for each Part II language, a structured policy for the promotion of appropriate types of transnational exchanges
in the fields covered by the Charter. In addition, the Committee of Experts asked the Serbian authorities to
clarify to what extent the financial support by the authorities of Vojvodina to transnational exchanges organised
by associations of national minorities benefit Czech and German. The Serbian authorities had also not
provided any information with respect to Vlach.
59.
In light of the replies by the Serbian authorities to the questionnaire sent by the Committee of Experts,
this provision has not been applied to Czech, German and Vlach. However, the Serbian authorities stated their
willingness to conclude new agreements with interested states where these languages are used as majority or
minority languages to promote appropriate types of transnational exchanges in the fields covered by the Charter.
The Committee of Experts welcomes this and encourages the Serbian authorities to promote, for each Part II
language, appropriate types of transnational exchanges in the fields covered by the Charter.
Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake to eliminate, if they have not yet done so, any unjustified distinction, exclusion, restriction or
preference relating to the use of a regional or minority language and intended to discourage or endanger the maintenance or
development of it. The adoption of special measures in favour of regional or minority languages aimed at promoting equality
between the users of these languages and the rest of the population or which take due account of their specific conditions is
not considered to be an act of discrimination against the users of more widely-used languages.

60.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts asked the Serbian authorities to provide
information about the further development of the draft law against discrimination.
61.
According to the second periodical report, the Law on Prohibition of Discrimination (2009) prescribes
that causing and inciting inequality, hate and intolerance on the grounds of minority languages are severe
forms of discrimination, which result in the initiation of a trial and ordering of sanctions. As regards special
measures in favour of minority languages, the Constitution foresees that special regulations and provisional
measures which may be introduced into economic, social, cultural and political life for the sake of achieving
full equality between persons belonging to national minorities and citizens belonging to the majority shall not
be considered to be an act of discrimination if they are directed towards the elimination of the extremely
unfavourable living conditions which particularly affect them (Article 76.3). The Committee of Experts,
however, observes that States Parties to the Charter are obliged to actively promote regional or minority
languages in all domains of public life, not limited to “extremely unfavourable living conditions”.

14

Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to promote, by appropriate measures, mutual understanding between all the linguistic groups of the
country and in particular the inclusion of respect, understanding and tolerance in relation to regional or minority languages
among the objectives of education and training provided within their countries and encouragement of the mass media to
pursue the same objective.

62.
In the first monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts had received complaints by the National
Council of the Vlach Minority about widespread stereotypes in the Serbian society at large with regard to the
Vlach speakers. On the same occasion, the National Council of the German Minority informed the
Committee of Experts that history textbooks still present the German speakers predominantly in the context
of World War II as “state enemies”. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts had received complaints from
representatives of the Bulgarian speakers according to which history textbooks presented that linguistic group
in a negative light. In light of the above, the Committee of Experts “encourage[d] the Serbian authorities to
continue their efforts to promote awareness and tolerance vis-à-vis the regional or minority languages and the
cultures they represent as an integral part of the cultural heritage of Serbia, both in the general curriculum at all
stages of education and in the media.” Furthermore, the Committee of Ministers recommended that the
authorities “promote awareness and tolerance in Serbian society at large vis-à-vis the regional or
minority languages and the cultures they represent”.
63.
In their replies to the questionnaire sent by the Committee of Experts, the Serbian authorities state that
the process of drafting new regulations has been launched which shall provide guarantees for the elimination of
the presentation of certain national minorities in a stereotyped way in all textbooks. The Committee of Experts
welcomes this initiative and encourages the Serbian authorities to pursue the steps taken.
64.
According to the second periodical report, several activities have been implemented as part of the
project “Affirmation of Multiculturalism and Tolerance in Vojvodina” of the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina.
The projects covered television and radio competitions of pupils in history and culture of national minorities,
TV documentaries, the organisation of an “Ethno Day” (presentations of national minorities living in
Vojvodina, including linguistic cultural and historical characteristics) by pupils in Vojvodina, and exhibitions.
Another project concerned the creation of the travelling exhibition “At home at the Danube – Living Together
of Germans and Serbs in Vojvodina”, which has been successfully presented in Vojvodina and Germany.
3
The Committee of Experts reiterates that the extent to which a minority language is protected and promoted
is linked to how it is perceived by majority language speakers. As a result, awareness-raising with the
majorities is of utmost importance. The Committee of Experts therefore welcomes the initiatives taken.
65.
The Committee of Experts urges the Serbian authorities to continue their efforts to promote
awareness and tolerance vis-à-vis the regional or minority languages and the cultures they represent as an
integral part of the cultural heritage of Serbia, both in the general curriculum at all stages of education and in the
media.
Paragraph 4
In determining their policy with regard to regional or minority languages, the Parties shall take into consideration the needs
and wishes expressed by the groups which use such languages. They are encouraged to establish bodies, if necessary, for
the purpose of advising the authorities on all matters pertaining to regional or minority languages.

66.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts “encourage[d] the Serbian authorities to
secure a stable legal basis for the functioning of national minority councils and ensure regular meetings of the
Republic of Serbia Council for National Minorities.” Furthermore, it encouraged the Serbian authorities to make
additional efforts to ensure that the speakers of Albanian and Czech are also represented by national minority
councils.
67.
According to the second periodical report, the adoption of the Law on the National Councils of the
National Minorities (2009) has created a stable legal basis for the functioning of national councils of national
minorities in the Republic of Serbia. Furthermore, the new decree on the Council of the Republic of Serbia
for National Minorities (Article 5) prescribes that the Council shall meet at least four times a year. At the
request of at least half of the national councils, the president of the Council is obliged to convene a meeting
within a period not longer than 30 days. Since the elections of 6 June 2010, the speakers of Albanian and
Czech are also represented by national minority councils. The election of both councils can be attributed to
an awareness-raising campaign by the Serbian authorities which had aimed at mobilising persons belonging
to national minorities to participate in the elections. The Committee of Experts commends the Serbian
authorities on the considerable efforts they have displayed in this respect.
Paragraph 5
3

Cf. 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts on Croatia, ECRML (2005) 3, paragraph 39; 2 nd Report of the Committee of Experts on
Sweden, ECRML (2006) 4, paragraph 63

15
The Parties undertake to apply, mutatis mutandis, the principles listed in paragraphs 1 to 4 above to non-territorial languages.
However, as far as these languages are concerned, the nature and scope of the measures to be taken to give effect to this
Charter shall be determined in a flexible manner, bearing in mind the needs and wishes, and respecting the traditions and
characteristics, of the groups which use the languages concerned.

68.
The Committee of Experts notes that Romani, while a Part III language, may also be considered a
non-territorial language in Serbia.

16

3.2.

The evaluation in respect of Part III of the Charter

Part III – Measures to promote the use of regional or minority languages in public life in accordance with
the undertakings entered into under Article 2, paragraph 2
69.
Part III of the Charter applies to Albanian, Bosnian, Bulgarian, Croatian, Hungarian, Romani,
Romanian, Ruthenian, Slovak and Ukrainian.
70.
The Committee of Experts will not comment on provisions in relation to which no major issues were
raised in the first report and for which it did not receive any new elements requiring a revised assessment or
a different presentation of their implementation. It reserves, however, the right to evaluate the situation again
at a later stage. These provisions are listed below:
For Albanian
Article 8, paragraph 1 e (ii);
Article 11, paragraph 1 f (ii); paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a;
Article 13, paragraph 1 c.
For Bosnian
Article 11, paragraph 1 f (ii), paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a;
Article 13, paragraph 1 c.
For Bulgarian
Article 8, paragraph 1 e (ii);
Article 11, paragraph 1 f (ii), paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a;
Article 13, paragraph 1 c.
For Croatian
Article 11, paragraph 1 f (ii), paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a;
Article 13, paragraph 1 c.
For Hungarian
Article 8, paragraph 1 e (ii);
Article 11, paragraph 1 f (ii), paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a, c;
Article 13, paragraph 1 c.
For Romani
Article 8, paragraph 1 e (ii);
Article 11, paragraph 1 f (ii), paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a, c;
Article 13, paragraph 1 c.
For Romanian
Article 8, paragraph 1 e (ii);
Article 11, paragraph f (ii), paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a;
Article 13, paragraph 1 c.
For Ruthenian
Article 8, paragraph 1 e (ii);
Article 11, paragraph 1 f (ii), paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a, c;
Article 13, paragraph 1 c.
For Slovak
Article 8, paragraph 1 e (ii);
Article 11, paragraph 1 f (ii), paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a, c;
Article 13, paragraph 1 c.

17

For Ukrainian
Article 8, paragraph 1 e (ii);
Article 11, paragraph 1 e (i), f (ii), paragraph 2;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a;
Article 13, paragraph 1 c.
Article 8 – Education
General issues
71.
In the first monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts identified three structural problems that affected
the availability and quality of regional or minority language education: the overall shortage of teachers qualified
to teach in regional or minority languages, the lack of compulsory professional development courses and the
lack of teaching materials produced specifically for regional or minority language education. The Committee
of Experts encouraged the Serbian authorities to develop a coherent strategy in the field of teacher training
and provide adequate teaching materials for regional or minority language education. Furthermore, the
Committee of Ministers recommended that the Serbian authorities “strengthen teacher training and
provide adequate teaching materials for all regional or minority languages”.
72.
According to the second periodical report, in 2007 the authorities adopted a strategy on specialised
education development, which deals with issues related to the general further training and professional
development of teachers. As for regional or minority language teachers, the authorities propose as a solution the
cooperation with other states pursuant to agreements in the fields of education and protection of national
minorities. No specific information is provided with respect to the practical implementation of this initiative. With
respect to teaching materials the authorities refer to the new Law on Textbooks and other Teaching Aids, which
regulates the publishing of textbooks in regional or minority languages, as well as their import from other states.
They also underline the role of the National Councils of National Minorities in preparing the textbooks.
73.
The Committee of Experts has been informed however that in practice the problems identified in the
first evaluation report have not been solved. According to the representatives of the speakers, there is still a
shortage of teachers with respect to Hungarian education, as well as a lack of teachers for certain subjects
(history, mathematics, geography, physics, chemistry, biology and English) in Romanian.
74.
As for further training of teachers, the representatives of the speakers have pointed out that, for
example, only one seminar for teachers involved in Romanian-language education has been organised in
Serbia and the certificates attained in Romania are still not recognised. The problem related to the recognition
of certificates has also been raised with reference to Croatian.
75.
With respect to teaching materials, in most cases these are still translated from Serbian and with
significant delays. Textbooks may be imported from abroad, upon approval, but this varies from one language to
another. The imported textbooks cover only certain subjects or certain grades and with reference to Romanian,
for example, the speakers have pointed out that they may only be used as additional teaching material and are
also more expensive. Moreover, there are no pre-school teaching materials in Albanian and no textbooks in
Bulgarian for third grade social sciences in primary school, the material used for the fourth grade has not yet
been approved and adequate textbooks are still lacking for the entire secondary education, pending the
educational reform.
The Committee of Experts urges the Serbian authorities to develop a coherent strategy in the field of
teacher training and provide adequate teaching materials for regional or minority language
education.
76.
The authorities have pointed out that new legal provisions have been adopted in Serbia in the reporting
nd
period (see paragraphs 137-140 of the 2 periodical report). The 2009 Law on Fundamentals of Educational
System provides that education for persons belonging to national minorities takes place in their mother tongue.
Exceptionally, this may also be carried out bilingually or in Serbian. Primary and secondary schools may offer
individual educational programmes for minority languages, too, for pupils who do not know the language of
teaching. The Serbian authorities have also pointed out that, as part of their mandate, the National Councils of
the National Minorities are involved at various levels in policy making in the minority language education.

18

Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used, according to the situation
of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the state:

Pre-school education
a

i

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

iii

to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those pupils whose families so
request and whose number is considered sufficient; or

iv

if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school education, to favour and/or
encourage the application of the measures referred to under i to iii above;

77.
In the first monitoring cycle the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking fulfilled for Albanian,
Bosnian, Bulgarian, Hungarian, Romani, Ruthenian and Slovak, partly fulfilled for Croatian and Romanian,
and not fulfilled for Ukrainian. It encouraged the Serbian authorities to strengthen pre-school education for
Croatian and Romanian and to provide pre-school education in Ukrainian.
78.
According to the second periodical report, pre-school education entirely in Albanian, as well as
bilingual education is available. Bilingual groups were organised for the first time in the reporting period.
However, the number of children attending pre-school education in Albanian decreased to 843 in the 2009/2010
school year.
79.
Pre-school education in Bosnian is organised in Novi Pazar by the Islamic Community Board and it is
attended by 140 children.
80.

With regard to Bulgarian, 330 children attend bilingual education, as in the previous monitoring cycle.

81.
The number of children attending pre-school education in Croatian increased from ten to 58 in
2009/2010, while the number of those taking part in bilingual education dropped from 53 to 20. The overall
number has thus slightly increased (by 15). The Committee of Experts still considers these numbers to be
extremely low considering the number of Croatian-speakers.
82.
The number of children attending pre-school education in Hungarian dropped from 4,680 in the
previous monitoring cycle to 4,447 in 2009/2010. However, the number of children attending bilingual
education has increased from 510 to 946.
83.
With regard to Romani, according to the second periodical report, no pre-school education in Romani
is organised in Serbia. However, the authorities state that in Vojvodina, in 2007/2008 and 2008/2009,
approximately 1,000 children were involved annually in the programmes of care and education for children
from six months to primary school age in Romani. In seven municipalities and two towns in Central Serbia,
non-governmental organisations of Romani-speakers, supported by donations, organise bilingual education
in Serbian and Romani for Romani-speaking children. In the two towns, between 55 and 230 children have
attended this form of pre-school education.
84.
The number of children attending pre-school education in Romanian dropped from 189 to 138 in
2009/2010, while the number of children attending bilingual education increased from 57 to 106. The overall
situation remains the same. The Committee of Experts maintains its opinion that these numbers are extremely
low considering the number of Romanian-speakers in Vojvodina.
85.
171 children attended pre-school education in Ruthenian in 2009/2010, a slight decrease compared
to the previous monitoring cycle.

19

86.
With regard to Slovak, the number of children attending pre-school education entirely in this
language decreased to 785 in 2009/2010, while the number of those taking part in bilingual education slightly
increased to 66. The Committee of Experts considers the overall number of 851 children relatively low
bearing in mind the number of Slovak-speakers in Vojvodina.
87.
There is still no pre-school education in Ukrainian. According to the authorities, parents have
expressed no interest for education in Ukrainian for their children. The Committee of Experts recalls (see under
Article 7.1.f) that more awareness-raising about the virtues of, and opportunities for, bilingual education is
needed, as parents are sometimes under the impression that bilingual teaching would be cumbersome and
counterproductive for the development of their children. It could be envisaged, for example, that the
responsible authorities regularly provide parents of newly-born children with an information package about
the opportunities of mother-tongue or bilingual education in the minority languages concerned. The
authorities also state that a Ukraine Language Summer School is organised, offering various activities on the
basis of different curricula for different age groups. Teachers from Ukraine are also invited to hold classes,
since there are not enough trained teachers in Serbia for all the activities involved.
88.
The Committee of Experts maintains that the undertaking is fulfilled for Albanian, Bosnian, Bulgarian,
Hungarian, Ruthenian and Slovak and partly fulfilled for Croatian and Romanian. It considers the undertaking
partly fulfilled for Romani and not fulfilled for Ukrainian. The Committee of Experts urges the Serbian
authorities to strengthen pre-school education for Croatian, Romani (Central Serbia) and Romanian and to
offer pre-school education in Ukrainian.
Primary education
b

i

to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of primary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

iii

to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or minority languages as an integral part
of the curriculum; or

iv

to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils whose families so
request and whose number is considered sufficient;

89.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking fulfilled.
Nevertheless it encouraged the Serbian authorities, in co-operation with the speakers, to strengthen primary
education for Croatian and Romanian and also to provide in the next periodical report more detailed
information with regard to measures taken to promote Romani primary education in Central Serbia.
90.
According to the second periodical report, the number of children attending primary education in
Albanian dropped from 9,173 in 2006/2007 to 8,327 in 2009/2010.
91.
With regard to Bosnian, the number of pupils attending teaching of Bosnian with elements of national
culture has increased, reaching 10,644 in the 2009/2010 school year. However, in the first evaluation report,
the Committee of Experts had noted that a demand for Bosnian primary education in the municipalities of
Priboj and Nova Varoš seemed to exist, but no teaching of Bosnian took place. According to the
representatives of the Bosnian-speakers, the situation has remained unchanged.
92.
With respect to Bulgarian, the Committee of Experts had been made aware in the first monitoring
cycle that there was a need for Bulgarian-medium education also in Dimitrovgrad, although it was unclear
whether a request to this end had been made. According to the second periodical report, primary education in
Bulgarian has been made available both in Bosilegrad and Dimitrovgrad, in two schools and was attended in
2009/2010 by 46 pupils. The number of children attending teaching of Bulgarian with elements of national
culture in Bosilegrad and Dimitrovgrad decreased to 1,330 in 2009/2010. Teaching of Bulgarian with elements of
national culture has been introduced at one primary school in Ivanovo (town of Pančevo) and is attended by 16
pupils from the fifth to the seventh grade. The subject is not offered in the first four grades, as no adequate
textbooks exist.
93.
The number of children attending primary education in Croatian has increased from 197 to 319. The
number of pupils attending Croatian with elements of national culture also slightly increased to 374 in 2009/2010.
However, the Committee of Experts maintains that the number of pupils attending Croatian-language primary
education is extremely low given the number of Croatian-speakers in Bačka. According to the representatives
of the Croatian-speakers the low numbers of children attending primary education in Croatian are due to the
lack of textbooks and of teachers. The authorities have informed the Committee of Experts that the import

20

and use of certain textbooks and workbooks from Croatia has been approved. Consultations are also
underway concerning the status of the teachers from Croatia teaching in Serbia pursuant to the bilateral
agreement in the fields of culture, education and sport.
94.
The number of children attending primary education in Hungarian has dropped from 17,128 to 16,168.
The number of pupils learning Hungarian with elements of national culture has also decreased from 2,088 to
1,463.
95.
With respect to Romani, in the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts commended the
Serbian authorities for the efforts undertaken to promote Romani primary education in Vojvodina and
encouraged them to provide more detailed information with regard to measures taken to promote Romani in
Central Serbia. According to the second periodical report, 695 pupils attend classes of Romani with elements
of national culture in Vojvodina, a number significantly lower than in the previous monitoring cycle (1,266). In
relation to the absence of education in Romani, the authorities state that there is a need to select the variety of
the Romani language, to approve subsequently textbooks and teaching materials and to train teachers. As for
measures taken to promote Romani in Central Serbia, the authorities refer to the 105 pedagogical assistants
employed in primary schools in the region. They have also informed the Committee of Experts that there are
legal obstacles to approving primary education in Romani in Central Serbia and that an initiative to this end
should be launched primarily by the National Council of the Roma National Minority, defining the number of
pupils, the schools where Romani education should be organised and the persons responsible for drafting the
textbooks. This information should be relayed to the authorities along with a request for a change in the Annual
Curricula of Schools and proposals for changes and additions to the rules on educational degrees of teaching
staff members who would teach in Romani.
96.
The number of children attending primary-school classes in Romanian in Vojvodina has decreased
from 1,444 to 1,258. These numbers still represent 60% of the Romanian-speaking pupils. The number of
pupils learning Romanian with elements of national culture has dropped from 469 to 244. In Ovča (BelgradePalilula) primary teaching in Romanian has been organised for five pupils and teaching of Romanian with
elements of national culture for twelve pupils. The representatives of the Romanian-speakers have
expressed their concern about the merger of classes in the primary school in Kuštilj, where teaching in
Romanian is organised, especially since they see this as the first step to the future closure of the school.
They have also pointed out that a request for the independent running of the school in Torak/Torac was sent
to the authorities three years ago, but no reply has been received.
97.
The number of pupils attending primary education in Ruthenian has dropped from 607 to 523. There
has also been a slight decrease to 266 in 2009/2010 of the number of pupils attending Ruthenian with elements
of national culture.
98.
The number of pupils attending primary education in Slovak has also decresed to 3,178 and the number
of those attending teaching of Slovak with elements of national culture in Vojvodina remained nearly the same
(620 in 2009/2010). Teaching of Slovak language with elements of national culture was also organised for
43 pupils from the first to eighth grades at a primary school in Boljevci/Bol'ovce (city municipality of Surcin).
99.
With regard to Ukrainian, the number of children attending teaching of the language with elements of
national culture has remained nearly the same (114 in 2009/2010). Ukrainian with elements of national
culture was taught for the first time in 2009/2010 for 25 pupils in Budisava (local community in the territory of
Novi Sad).
100. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking is fulfilled for Albanian,
Bosnian, Bulgarian, Croatian, Hungarian, Romanian, Ruthenian, Slovak and Ukrainian. Nevertheless, it again
encourages the Serbian authorities, in co-operation with the speakers, to strengthen primary education for
Croatian and Romanian. The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking partly fulfilled with respect to
Romani. It encourages the authorities to take measures to promote Romani primary education in Central
Serbia.
Secondary education
c

i

to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of secondary education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

21
iii

to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or minority languages as an integral
part of the curriculum; or

iv

to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils who, or where
appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered sufficient;

101.
In the first monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking fulfilled for
Albanian, Bulgarian, Hungarian, Ruthenian and Slovak and partly fulfilled for Romanian. It was not in a
position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking with regard to Bosnian, Croatian, Romani and
Ukrainian. The Committee of Experts encouraged the Serbian authorities to strengthen secondary education
for Romanian and to provide in the next periodical report information about the application of the present
undertaking to Bosnian, Croatian, Romani and Ukrainian.
102.
According to the second periodical report, the number of children attending secondary education in
Albanian has significantly increased, from 1,041 to 2,431 pupils, at two grammar schools in Bujanovac and
Preševo/Preshevë.
103.

There is no teaching in Bosnian or teaching of Bosnian at secondary level.

104.
With regard to Bulgarian, in 2009/2010 25 pupils attended secondary education in Bulgarian at one
grammar school in Dimitrovgrad. However, according to the representatives of the Bulgarian-speakers, for
2010/2011 a similar class has not been approved. The number of pupils attending Bulgarian with elements of
national culture decreased to 490 in 2009/2010.
105.
Secondary education in Croatian is organised at one grammar school in Subotica and was attended
by 32 pupils in 2009/2010. Teaching of Croatian with elements of national culture was not organised in 20072009.
106.
The number of pupils attending secondary education in Hungarian has remained nearly the same
(1,140).
107.
There is no secondary education in Romani or teaching of Romani. The authorities refer to the same
issues as in the case of primary education: the need to select the variety of the Romani language, and
subsequently to approve textbooks and teaching materials and train teachers. The authorities also state that
teaching of Romani with elements of national culture is optional in secondary schools and it is financed by the
local administrations, depending on the number of interested students and financial resources at local level.
108.
With regard to Romanian, 119 pupils attended secondary-school teaching in Romanian in
Vršac/Vârşeţ in 2009/2010, while 28 pupils in Vršac/Vârşeţ and Kovačica attended classes teaching
Romanian with elements of national culture. Although the overall number has slightly increased (by 27), the
Committee of Experts maintains its view that it is extremely low considering the number of Romanianspeakers.
109.
The number of pupils attending secondary education in Ruthenian has slightly decreased (60 in
2009/2010). Teaching of Ruthenian with elements of national culture has been organised since 2007/2008 at
one grammar school in Novi Sad and in Šid since 2008/2009. In both schools it was attended by 41 pupils in
2009/2010.
110.
The number of pupils attending secondary education in Slovak also decreased to 344 in 2009/2010.
The number of pupils attending Slovak with elements of national culture has remained the same (34).
111.
No secondary education in Ukrainian or teaching of Ukrainian is provided, according to the authorities
due to a lack of interest from the pupils. The authorities also inform the Committee of Experts that teaching of
Ukrainian with elements of national culture is optional in secondary schools and it is financed by the local
administrations, depending on the number of interested pupils and financial resources at local level (see also
paragraph 108 above).
112.
The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking fulfilled for Albanian, Bulgarian, Hungarian,
Ruthenian and Slovak, partly fulfilled for Croatian and Romanian and not fulfilled for Bosnian, Romani and
Ukrainian. It encourages the authorities to take measures, including awareness raising measures and
financial measures, to provide, within secondary education, at least for the teaching of Bosnian, Romani and
Ukrainian, as an integral part of the curriculum to those pupils who so wish in a number considered sufficient.

22

Technical and vocational education
d

i

to make available technical and vocational education in the relevant regional or minority languages; or

ii

to make available a substantial part of technical and vocational education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or

iii

to provide, within technical and vocational education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or minority languages as
an integral part of the curriculum; or

iv

to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils who, or where
appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered sufficient;

113.
In the first monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking fulfilled for
Albanian and Hungarian and partly fulfilled for Romanian and Slovak. It was not able to reach a conclusion
regarding Bosnian, Bulgarian, Croatian, Romani, Ruthenian and Ukrainian. Therefore, the Committee of
Experts encouraged the Serbian authorities to strengthen technical and vocational education for Romanian
and Slovak and to provide information about the application of this undertaking to Bosnian, Bulgarian,
Croatian, Romani, Ruthenian and Ukrainian in the next periodical report.
114.
According to the second periodical report, the number of pupils attending technical and vocational
education in Albanian decreased to 1494 in 2009/2010.
115.

With regard to Bosnian, one religious school in Novi Pazar provides education in Bosnian.

116.
Since 2009/2010 teaching in Bulgarian has been organised at the Secondary School for Tourism in
Dimitrovgrad for 16 pupils. Teaching of Bulgarian with elements of national culture takes place at two schools in
Bosilegrad and Dimitrovgrad and is attended by 161 pupils.
117.
With regard to Croatian technical and vocational education, the Committee of Experts has been
informed by the authorities that since 2010/2011 three courses at the School of Polytechnics in Subotica are
taught in Croatian as well.
118.
The number of pupils attending technical and vocational education in Hungarian decreased from
5,484 to 5,362 in 2009/2010. Teaching of Hungarian with elements of national culture was organised in 2007 for
four pupils in Subotica/Szabadka and five pupils in Temerin, as well as in 2008 for three pupils in Ada.
119.
With respect to Romani, the authorities have informed the Committee of Experts that teaching of
Romani with elements of national culture is optional in secondary schools and it is financed by the local
administrations, depending on the number of interested students and financial resources available at local level.
The Committee of Experts has however no specific information concerning the teaching of Romani within
technical and vocational education.
120.
With regard to Romanian, the number of pupils attending technical and vocational education in
Romanian in Alibunar increased slightly from 107 to 118 in 2009/2010. The Committee of Experts maintains
that this number is low considering the number of Romanian-speakers.
121.
Teaching of Ruthenian with elements of national culture was organised for the first time in 2008/2009
for two pupils at the medical school in Novi Sad.
122.
With regard to Slovak, the number of pupils attending technical and vocational education in Slovak
has remained nearly the same (97 in 2009/2010). The Committee of Experts considers that these numbers
are extremely low considering the number of Slovak-speakers.
123.
With regard to Ukrainian the authorities have informed the Committee of Experts that teaching
Ukrainian with elements of national culture is optional in secondary schools and it is financed by the local
administrations, depending on the number of interested students and financial resources available at local level.
The Committee of Experts has however no specific information concerning the teaching of Ukrainian within
technical and vocational education.
124.
The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking fulfilled for Albanian, Bulgarian, Hungarian, partly
fulfilled for Bosnian, Croatian, Romanian, Ruthenian and Slovak and not fulfilled for Romani and Ukrainian. It
urges the Serbian authorities to strengthen technical and vocational education for Bosnian, Croatian,
Romanian, Ruthenian and Slovak and to take measures to ensure the application of this undertaking for
Romani and Ukrainian.
University and higher education

23
e

...
ii

to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher education subjects; or

125.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking fulfilled for all
languages. However, it encouraged the Serbian authorities to provide information about the number of
students studying Bosnian and Croatian at university and in higher education.
126.
According to the information received in the second monitoring cycle, in 2009/2010 40 students
attended courses at the State University’s Department of Philosophic-Philological Studies in Novi Pazar,
within the Department of Serbian Language and Literature, where Bosnian is an optional subject. The
studies may lead to a degree in Serbian language, in Bosnian language or, the most frequent choice of
students, in Serbian-Bosnian languages. 30 students were enrolled in 2009/2010 at the University of Novi
Pazar, in the Department of Serbian/Bosnian Languages as Teaching Subjects, where Bosnian is also an
optional subject and the studies may lead to a degree of teacher of Serbian or teacher of Bosnian.
127.
As regards Croatian, no information is provided on the number of students studying the language at
the Department of South Slavic Philology of the Faculty of Philology in Belgrade.
128.
The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking is fulfilled for all
languages. Nevertheless, the authorities are requested to provide information on the number of students
studying Croatian as a higher education subject.
Adult education
f

...
iii

if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult education, to favour and/or encourage
the offering of such languages as subjects of adult and continuing education;

129.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking partly fulfilled for
Hungarian and Romani. It was not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking for Albanian,
Bosnian, Bulgarian, Croatian, Romanian, Ruthenian, Slovak and Ukrainian. The Committee of Experts
encouraged the Serbian authorities to provide information in the next periodical report on measures taken in
order to promote adult education for all Part III languages.
130.
No such information is provided in the second periodical. With respect to Hungarian, the authorities
refer again only to the number of persons involved in adult education in Hungarian as a teaching language (93).
As for Romani, the authorities report on the number of Roma attending education for adults either in Serbian or
Hungarian.
131.
In light of this information, the Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the
undertaking is partly fulfilled for Hungarian. It asks the authorities to provide specific information on the extent to
which they favour and/or encourage the offering of Hungarian as a subject of adult and continuing education.
The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled for Albanian, Bosnian, Bulgarian, Croatian,
Romanian, Ruthenian, Slovak and Ukrainian. Given the lack of specific information concerning Romani in adult
education, the Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this undertaking and
requests further information in the next periodical report. The Committee of Experts urges the Serbian
authorities to take measures to favour and/or encourage the offering of all Part III languages as subjects of adult
and continuing education.
g

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected by the regional or
minority language

132.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled, as the
undertaking was implemented only for minority language-speaking pupils, who are taught the regional or
minority language “with elements of national culture”. It encouraged the Serbian authorities to make
arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected by the regional or minority
languages to all pupils in the respective language-areas.
133.
In the second monitoring cycle, the authorities have informed the Committee of Experts that in
primary education, in multicultural communities, it is possible to depart to a certain extent from the regular
curricula in history, music and visual arts, the world around us and the basics of the society and to present
subjects from the history and culture reflected by the regional or minority languages in the area. It is not clear
to the Committee of Experts to what extent this ensures the teaching of the history and the culture reflected
by the regional or minority languages in practice. It therefore asks the authorities to provide specific
information in this respect in the next periodical report.

24

134.
The Committee of Experts has also been informed that the Serbian authorities have translated and
disseminated teaching materials for the history of Romani-speakers, prepared by the Council of Europe. The
Committee of Experts compliments the Serbian authorities for this.
135.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking partly fulfilled.

Article 9 – Judicial authorities
General issues
136.
In the first monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts noted that as Romani and Ukrainian were not
in official use in any municipality of Serbia, Article 9 of the Charter could not be applied to these languages.
Referring to the general observations made with regard to the declaration by Serbia on the territorial
application of the Charter, the Committee of Experts encouraged the authorities to take the necessary
measures to ensure the application of Article 9 to these languages.
137.
Regarding the other Part III languages, the Committee of Experts noted a decline in use before
judicial authorities, mainly due to the lack of encouragement and occasionally discouragement of the
speakers to use regional or minority languages in courts, as well as to practical obstacles, for instance
shortage of staff who spoke these languages and financial problems. However, the Serbian authorities had
already taken measures to address especially the problems related to the shortage of staff. The Committee
of Experts encouraged them to pursue these commendable measures further. The Committee of Experts
was also of the opinion that judicial staff should actively encourage citizens to use a regional or minority
language in courts, for example through bi- or multilingual notices and signs in/on court buildings, and
information in public announcements or court forms. It encouraged the Serbian authorities to actively inform
citizens about the possibility of using a regional or minority language in courts. Furthermore the Committee
of Ministers recommended that the Serbian authorities “secure the implementation of [Article] 9, in
particular regarding Romani and Ukrainian […]”.
138.
In the second periodical report, the authorities do not provide any information on the use of Romani
and Ukrainian in courts. They report on measures taken to increase the number of interpreters and judges for
Romani and Ukrainian. According to the representatives of the speakers, Ukrainian has not been used in
courts.
139.
As to measures taken to actively inform citizens about the possibility of using a regional or minority
language in courts, the authorities refer to the obligation of each court to inform the parties about the
languages officially used in the territory of the court and to request the party to declare the language it
chooses for the proceedings. They also report that, according to the legal provisions in force, at the entrance
of the court buildings, the name of the court is written in the language and script in official use. If the court
officially uses a regional or minority language, besides the Serbian language and the Cyrillic script, the text is
written in accordance with the order envisaged by a special relevant law.
140.
The authorities also mention that a brochure and a poster on Judiciary Reform for All Citizens have
been printed by the Ministry of Justice and sent to courts to inform persons belonging to national minorities of
their rights and the new network of courts.
141.
No further information is provided with respect to the active encouragement of citizens to use a
regional or minority language in courts, through bi- or multilingual notices and signs in court buildings, and
information in public announcements or court forms. The authorities have however declared that in the future
they intend to pay more attention to positive measures in order to facilitate the use of minority languages in
courts. The Committee of Experts would welcome more information in this respect in the next periodical
report.
142.
A reform in the field of judiciary took place in the reporting period. The new Law on Seats and
Regions of Courts and Public Prosecution Offices entered into force in January 2010 and the 138 municipal
courts have been reorganised into 34 magistrate courts, each with its own court units. Specialisation within
the network of courts has also been foreseen to strengthen the efficiency and quality of judgements. The
Law on Judges and the Law on Public Prosecution Offices forbid discrimination and provide that the national
composition of the population, the adequate representation of the members of the national minorities and the
knowledge of the professional legal terminology in minority languages shall be taken into consideration when
electing and proposing candidates for judges and prosecutors.
143.
However, the Committee of Experts has been informed during the on-the-spot visit that
representatives of the speakers of most languages are dissatisfied with the judicial reform. In the case of
Albanian, the number of Albanian-speaking judges appointed in Vranje, which covers the municipalities of
Preševo/Preshevë and Bujanovac, is too low according to the speakers and the use of Albanian is

25

increasingly difficult in the larger court units. According to the Bulgarian-speakers, criminal as well as other
proceedings are conducted in Pirot, and, although interpreters are used, the costs are borne by the party. No
Romanian judges were appointed in the courts in Vršac/Vârşeţ and Zrenjanin/Zrenianin, nor any candidates
at the Prosecution Office. The representatives of the Hungarian-speakers still see as a problem the fact that
proceedings can be conducted in a regional or minority language only in the first instance whereas the
proceedings of the second instance (appeals) are conducted in Serbian, as well as the fact that the minutes
and decisions have to be concurrently drawn up in Serbian. The representatives of the Slovak-speakers
have also informed the Committee of Experts that knowledge of Slovak was not taken into consideration
when appointing judges in areas where the language is in official use.
144.
The Committee of Experts notes that there are still practical problems related to the use of regional
or minority languages in courts. As to the judicial reform, the Committee of Experts points out that the
reorganisation must not constitute an obstacle to the promotion of regional or minority languages. Citizens
should be actively encouraged to use regional or minority languages in court.
145. The second periodical report also states that the amended Article 11 paragraph 3 of the Law on
Official Use of Language and Script provides that official use of languages of national minorities also implies
in particular, inter alia, the use of languages of national minorities in administrative and court proceedings and
conduct of administrative and court proceedings in minority languages.
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents using the regional or minority
languages justifies the measures specified below, according to the situation of each of these languages and on condition that the
use of the facilities afforded by the present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of
justice:
a

in criminal proceedings:
...
ii

to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or minority language; "

if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations involving no extra expense for the persons concerned;

146.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking fulfilled for
Albanian, Bosnian, Bulgarian, Croatian, Hungarian, Romanian and Slovak, although there seemed to exist
practical obstacles in exercising the right to use these languages. It encouraged the authorities to provide
information on measures taken to overcome these practical obstacles. The Committee of Experts was not in
a position to conclude with regard to Romani, Ruthenian and Ukrainian. It encouraged the Serbian
authorities to provide information in the next periodical report on steps taken to guarantee the accused the
right to use these languages in practice.
147.
In the second periodical report, the authorities provide information on the use of Hungarian and
Romanian in a number of cases for the entire criminal proceedings or by the accused. They also report that
Albanian has been used by the accused in criminal proceedings. The authorities also state that regional or
minority languages have been used by the accused in cases at the Novi Sad/Újvidék/Nový Sad High Court
and the Subotica/Szabadka High Court, where Croatian, Hungarian, Ruthenian and Slovak are used.
However, it is unclear which of these languages is concerned, which makes it impossible for the Committee of
Experts to reach a conclusion about the practical fulfilment of this undertaking concerning Ruthenian.
148.
No information concerning Romani and Ukrainian is provided in the second periodical report.
According to the representatives of the speakers, Romani has, however, been used in two cases in Subotica
and one case in Novi Sad.
149.
The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking is fulfilled for
Albanian, Bosnian, Croatian, Hungarian, Romanian and Slovak. It has not enough information to conclude with
respect to Bulgarian, Romani, Ruthenian, and Ukrainian and asks the authorities to provide information about
the application of this undertaking to these languages.
a

...
iii

to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not be considered inadmissible solely
because they are formulated in a regional or minority language; and/or
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations involving no extra expense for the persons concerned;

26

150.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking fulfilled for
Albanian, Bosnian, Bulgarian, Croatian, Hungarian, Romanian, Ruthenian and Slovak. It encouraged the
Serbian authorities to provide information regarding Romani and Ukrainian.
151.
No information concerning Romani and Ukrainian is provided in the second periodical report. With
respect to other languages, the authorities inform the Committee of Experts that Hungarian and Romanian
have been used in a number of cases for the entire criminal proceedings and that in one case one witness
used Albanian. Regional or minority languages have been used by witnesses or participants at the Municipal
Courts in Alibunar and Kovačica/Antalfalva, as well as at the Novi Sad/Újvidék/Nový Sad High Court, where
Hungarian, Romanian, Ruthenian and Slovak are used.
152.
The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking is fulfilled for
Albanian, Bosnian, Croatian, Hungarian, Romanian, Ruthenian and Slovak. It has not enough information to
conclude with respect to Bulgarian, Romani and Ukrainian and asks the authorities to provide information
about the application of this undertaking to these languages.
b

in civil proceedings:
...
ii

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she may use his or her regional
or minority language without thereby incurring additional expense; and/or
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

153.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking fulfilled for Bosnian,
Bulgarian, Croatian, Hungarian, Romanian and Slovak. It encouraged the authorities to provide information
regarding Albanian, Romani, Ruthenian and Ukrainian.
154.
In the second periodical report, the authorities state that Albanian has been used in two cases, by a
party and by a witness respectively. They also report on cases in which Hungarian, Romanian and Slovak
have been used either for the entire civil proceedings or by the parties or witnesses. The authorities also refer
to the use of minority languages in cases at the Municipal Courts of Alibunar and Kovačica/Antalfalva, as well
as at the High Court in Subotica/Szabadka, where Croatian, Hungarian, Romanian and Slovak are in official
use. In the High Court in Subotica/Szabadka, the court only covered expenses in four cases.
155.
No information is provided with respect to Romani, Ruthenian and Ukrainian. The authorities state
that there are no available data on the use of these languages in court.
156.
The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking fulfilled for Albanian, Bosnian, Croatian,
Hungarian, Romanian and Slovak. It has not enough information to conclude with respect to Bulgarian, Romani,
Ruthenian and Ukrainian and would welcome more information on the implementation of this undertaking.
c

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
...
ii

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she may use his or her regional
or minority language without thereby incurring additional expense; and/or

if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

157.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts was not in a position to conclude with respect to
this undertaking and encouraged the Serbian authorities to provide information in the next periodical report
about the actual oral use of the Part III languages as far as hearings are conducted in administrative disputes.
158.
No information on the actual oral use of regional or minority languages in administrative matters is
provided in the second periodical report. The authorities report that the new Law on Administrative Disputes,
adopted at the end of 2009, provides that the rules governing the civil proceedings, including those
concerning the use of language and script, shall apply accordingly to procedural matters not regulated by it.
159.
The Committee of Experts is again not in a position to conclude with respect to this undertaking.
The authorities provide no information concerning the actual oral use of the Part III languages as far as
hearings are conducted in administrative disputes. The Committee of Experts asks the Serbian authorities to
provide further information in this respect in the next periodical report.
Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake:

27
a

not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the state solely because they are drafted in a regional
or minority language; or

160.
In the first monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts did not receive any specific information about
this undertaking. It reserved its conclusion until it had received the relevant information in the next periodical
report.
161.
In the second monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts has been informed that there are no
recorded cases of courts denying the validity of legal documents because they were drafted in a regional or
minority language.
162.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking fulfilled.

Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or minority languages the most important national statutory texts and
those relating particularly to users of these languages, unless they are otherwise provided.

163.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled. It
noted the lack of balance in the implementation of the undertaking for the different Part III languages, as well
as the absence of a general legal obligation to make available in regional or minority languages the most
important national statutory texts and of a structured policy in this field. The Committee of Experts was of the
view that the absence of translated laws hampered the development of the regional or minority languages in
the legal field. It encouraged the Serbian authorities to make available in the regional or minority languages the
most important national statutory texts and those relating particularly to users of these languages, to be
identified in co-operation with the speakers.
164.
In the second periodical report, the authorities state that national statutory texts (e.g. the Constitution of
the Republic of Serbia, the Law on Prohibition of Discrimination, the Law on the National Councils of the National
Minorities) have been translated into the minority languages officially used in Vojvodina, i.e. Croatian,
Hungarian, Romanian, Ruthenian and Slovak.
165.
No further information concerning the other Part III languages is provided in the second periodical
report. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking is partly fulfilled for
Croatian, Hungarian, Romanian, Ruthenian and Slovak. The Committee of Experts asks the Serbian
authorities to provide information concerning the other Part III languages in the next periodical report. It urges
the Serbian authorities to make available in the regional or minority languages the most important national
statutory texts and those relating particularly to users of these languages, to be identified in co-operation with
the speakers.
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
General issues
166. In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts noted that the application of most provisions of
Article 10 to Romani and Ukrainian was not possible as neither of the languages was in official use at local
level. It encouraged the Serbian authorities to take the necessary measures to ensure the application of
Article 10 to Romani and Ukrainian. Furthermore, the Committee of Ministers recommended that the Serbian
authorities “secure the implementation of [Article] 10, in particular regarding Romani and Ukrainian
[…]”.
167.
No information on measures taken to ensure the application of this article to Romani and Ukrainian
is provided in the second periodical report. The authorities refer to the Law on National Councils of the
National Minorities and to their role in approaching the local authorities and introducing the language in official
use and state that a joint initiative of authorities in Vojvodina and National Councils of the Roma and
Ukrainian minorities, aimed at introducing Romani and Ukrainian in official use in some municipalities, will
follow.
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the state in which the number of residents who are users of regional or minority languages
justifies the measures specified below and according to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is
reasonably possible:
a

...
iv

to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written applications in these
languages; or

28

168.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts noted that there was no general legal basis
for the implementation of the undertaking and that in practice, citizens are regularly asked to produce, at their
own expense, a Serbian translation of the documents submitted in a regional or minority language. According
to the authorities, the shortcomings were due to the lack of linguistically trained staff. Therefore the
Committee of Experts welcomed the adoption by the authorities of a plan to increase the participation of
persons belonging to national minorities in state administration bodies. It also noted that awareness raising
measures among civil servants on the right to submit oral or written applications in regional or minority
languages (e.g. through internal circulars) were necessary. The Committee of Experts considered this
undertaking formally fulfilled for Hungarian and not fulfilled for Albanian, Bosnian, Bulgarian, Croatian, Romani,
Romanian, Ruthenian, Slovak and Ukrainian. The Committee of Experts encouraged the Serbian authorities to
take the necessary legal and practical measures to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may
submit oral or written applications in these languages to state authorities. Furthermore, the Committee of
Ministers recommended to Serbian authorities to ensure that “ […] the Part III languages can be used in
relations with local branches of the state authorities”.
169.
According to the second periodical report, the Law on the Official Use of Language and Script has
been amended. It now provides that persons belonging to any national minority may communicate in the areas
where their language is in official use with the state authorities and are entitled to receive a reply in that language.
Previously this was only possible for members of a national minority whose population made up more than
2% of the total population of Serbia, which in practice only applied to Hungarian. The Committee of Experts
welcomes this amendment as a first step towards the fulfilment of this undertaking. However, the authorities
also explain that due to a lack of applications from the speakers, the undertaking has not been implemented
in practice.
170.
No further information is provided with respect to measures taken to raise awareness of the civil
servants on the right to submit oral or written applications in regional or minority languages. According to the
representatives of the minority language speakers, problems in practice persist, as institutions require
documents to be submitted in Serbian and in Cyrillic script. This is the case, for example, with the Agency for
Business Registers, responsible also for keeping the Register of Associations, which requires that documents
are translated into Serbian and certified by a translator. The Ministry of Defence also requires that
certificates confirming student status issued by universities are translated into Serbian and certified by a
translator.
171.
In view of the information received, the Committee of Experts considers the undertaking only
formally fulfilled for Albanian, Bosnian, Bulgarian, Croatian, Hungarian, Romanian, Ruthenian and Slovak and
not fulfilled for Romani and Ukrainian.
The Committee of Experts urges the Serbian authorities to take the necessary measures to ensure
that users of regional or minority languages may in practice submit oral or written applications in these
languages to state authorities.
c

to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in a regional or minority language.

172.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking fulfilled, as the state
authorities issued personal documents in the regional or minority languages (e.g. identity cards, health
insurance booklets, diplomas). It nevertheless asked the Serbian authorities to submit information regarding
other documents in the next periodical report.
173.
No further information is provided in the second periodical report. The Committee of Experts maintains
its previous conclusion that the undertaking is fulfilled, but asks the Serbian authorities to provide further
information on documents drafted in regional or minority languages by administrative authorities in the next
periodical report.
Paragraph 2
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who are users of regional or minority
languages is such as to justify the measures specified below, the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
...
b

the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written applications in these languages;

29

174.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking partly fulfilled for
Albanian, Croatian, Hungarian, Romanian, Ruthenian and Slovak and not fulfilled for Romani and Ukrainian. It
was unable to conclude regarding Bosnian and Bulgarian. The Committee of Experts encouraged the Serbian
authorities to take practical steps so as to ensure the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to
submit oral or written applications in these languages and asked the Serbian authorities to provide information
about the application of this undertaking to Bosnian and Bulgarian in the next periodical report.
175.
In the second periodical report, the authorities provide information on the use of languages in
administrative proceedings and on certificates from registry books and books of citizens issued in bilingual
forms, both at the level of the local authorities. In these cases, Croatian, Hungarian, Romanian, Ruthenian and
Slovak have been used. The Committee of Experts points out that the current undertaking covers a wide
spectrum of documents and asks the authorities to provide further information in the next periodical report.
176.

The authorities also report on applications submitted in Albanian.

177.
With respect to Bosnian, the authorities refer to applications submitted in the municipality of Sjenica
and state that their number is relatively low.
178.
No information is provided in the report with respect to Bulgarian, Romani and Ukrainian. According to
the Bulgarian-speakers, there is no encouragement to submit applications in the minority languages and the
application forms are provided only in Serbian.
179.
As to regional authorities (i.e. the provincial authorities in Vojvodina) applications received in a minority
language are mostly in Hungarian.
180.
The authorities also state that in Vojvodina, in most towns and municipalities where regional or minority
languages are in official use, knowledge of the relevant minority language is a condition for employment and an
exam is organised to this end. The certificate issued pursuant to this exam is also recognised by other
institutions. The authorities also organise specialised language courses. 21 local authorities have permanently
employed interpreters/translators.
181.
Based on this information, the Committee of Experts considers that in relation to local authorities, the
undertaking is fulfilled for Albanian, Bosnian, Croatian, Hungarian, Romanian, Ruthenian and Slovak and not
fulfilled for Romani and Ukrainian. It has not enough information to conclude with respect to Bulgarian. The
Committee of Experts asks the Serbian authorities to provide specific and structured information with respect to
all languages in the next periodical report. In relation to regional authorities, the Committee of Experts considers
the undertaking fulfilled in respect of Hungarian, formally fulfilled in respect of Croatian, Romanian, Ruthenian
and Slovak and not fulfilled with respect to Romani and Ukrainian. It asks the authorities to provide specific
information concerning the application of this undertaking in practice in Vojvodina in the next periodical report.
For Albanian, Bosnian, Bulgarian and Romani (Central Serbia) the undertaking, in relation to regional authorities,
is not applicable at present.
c

the publication by regional authorities of their official documents also in the relevant regional or minority
languages;

182.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking fulfilled for
Hungarian, Romanian, Ruthenian and Slovak, partly fulfilled for Croatian, and not fulfilled for Romani
(Vojvodina) and Ukrainian. It was not in a position to conclude with regard to Albanian, Bosnian, Bulgarian and
Romani (Central Serbia) and requested the Serbian authorities to clarify the application of this undertaking
outside Vojvodina.
183.
In the second monitoring cycle, the authorities inform the Committee of Experts that the only “regional
authorities” in the legal system in Serbia are those of Vojvodina. Here decisions and other documents by the
Assembly and the Executive Council are published in the official journal or on the websites of the authorities
also in the official languages of the province, namely Croatian, Hungarian, Romanian, Ruthenian, Serbian
and Slovak.
184.
No regional authorities in Central Serbia exist and therefore no documents are published in regional or
minority languages.
185.
In light of the information received, the Committee of Experts considers the undertaking fulfilled for
Croatian, Hungarian, Romanian, Ruthenian and Slovak. For Albanian, Bulgarian and Bosnian the undertaking
is at present not applicable. It considers the undertaking not fulfilled for Romani and Ukrainian. It encourages
the authorities to take measures to ensure the publication by regional authorities of their official documents also
in Romani and Ukrainian.

30
d

the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in the relevant regional or minority languages;

186.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts noted that although the local authorities are
obliged to publish the decisions of local assemblies in the official journal in all official languages of a given
municipality, there are practical problems due to a lack of translation departments and financial means. Also, it
was not clear which other official documents were published in regional or minority languages. The Committee
of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled for Albanian, Bosnian, Bulgarian, Croatian, Hungarian,
Romanian, Ruthenian and Slovak and not fulfilled for Romani and Ukrainian. It encouraged the Serbian
authorities to take the necessary organisational measures to ensure the publication by local authorities of their
official documents also in relevant regional or minority languages.
187.
In the second periodical report, the authorities state that local authorities have increased costs related
to translations and adequate computer programmes. The Law on Maximum Number of Employees in Local
Administration also contains special provisions related to translators in the local authorities in whose territory
minority languages are in use.
188.
The authorities also refer to the publication of official documents in Albanian, Bosnian, Croatian,
Hungarian, Ruthenian and Slovak, in the official journals of municipalities where these languages are in official
use. The authorities also report on websites of local authorities, published also in minority languages for
Albanian, Bulgarian, Bosnian, Croatian, Hungarian, Romanian and Slovak. There also seem to be some
published documents of local authorities in Romani, but the Committee of Experts has not received conclusive
information in this respect.
189.
According to representatives of the Hungarian-speakers, however, problems in practice due to a
shortage of staff and financial means still persist.
190.
Based on the information received according to which there exists a wide-spread practice of publication
of documents by local authorities in most of the regional or minority languages, the Committee of Experts
considers the undertaking fulfilled for Albanian, Bosnian, Bulgarian, Croatian, Hungarian, Romanian, Ruthenian
and Slovak. The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking not fulfilled for Ukrainian. It asks the Serbian
authorities to provide specific information concerning Romani.
g

the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official language(s), of traditional and correct
forms of place-names in regional or minority languages.

191.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking partly fulfilled for
Albanian, Bosnian, Bulgarian, Croatian, Hungarian, Romanian, Ruthenian and Slovak. It encouraged the
Serbian authorities to designate, in co-operation with the speakers, traditional and correct forms of placenames in Bulgarian and Croatian and to take steps to ensure that officially designated place-names in regional
or minority languages were used in practice. The Committee of Experts was not in a position to draw a
conclusion with respect to Romani and Ukrainian and encouraged the Serbian authorities to clarify whether there
existed place-names in Romani and Ukrainian which fall within the scope of this undertaking. Furthermore, the
Committee of Ministers recommended that the Serbian authorities “take the necessary legal and practical
measures to ensure that […] place names in the regional or minority languages can be used officially in
conformity with the tradition and orthography of the languages concerned”.
192.
According to the second periodical report, place-names have been further designated in Albanian,
Bosnian, Hungarian, Romanian and Slovak.
193.
With respect to Bulgarian, the authorities state that the request of the National Council of the
Bulgarian National Minority to the municipality of Dimitrovgrad to use traditional names has not yet been
answered and that afterwards the National Council shall establish the traditional place-names in Bulgarian.
194.
As for Croatian, eight place-names have been established for local communities in the municipalities
of Subotica, Sombor, Apatin, Sremska Mitrovica and Šid.
195.
Based on the information received, it is not clear to the Committee of Experts how many of the
designated names are actually used in practice. Furthermore, the representatives of the speakers have
informed the Committee of Experts that problems still persist with respect to place-names. According to the
Bosnian-speakers, place-names in Bosnian are only used in Tutin. Place-names in Croatian are still not used
in the locality of Novi Slankamen (municipality of Inđija). According to representatives of the Romanianspeakers, several municipalities and local communities do not use their names in Romanian. This is the
case of the municipalities of Plandište, Sečanj, Bela Crkva/Biserica Albă, Žitište, Kovin/Cuvin, Kovačica, the

31

town of Vršac/Vârşeţ and the locality Sutjeska/Sărcia (municipality of Sečanj). Street or square names and
frequently used institutions' names are not written also in Romanian in the municipalities where the language
is in official use. As for Slovak, only place names at the entrance to a municipality are also in the minority
language.
196.
The authorities have informed the Committee of Experts, after consultations with representatives of
Romani-speakers, that there are no traditional place-names in this language. Regarding Ukrainian, they
state that the Ukrainian-speakers use phonetically modified Serbian names for towns. However, it is not
clear to the Committee of Experts whether these phonetically modified place-names are traditional placenames in conformity with this provision that could be introduced in official use.
197.
The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled for Albanian, Bosnian, Bulgarian,
Croatian, Hungarian, Romanian, Ruthenian and Slovak. The undertaking does not seem to be applicable
regarding Romani at present. With regard to Ukrainian, the Committee of Experts asks the Serbian authorities to
clarify in the next periodical report whether the Ukrainian language has traditional names for places inhabited by
Ukrainian speakers in relevant numbers.
The Committee of Experts urges the Serbian authorities to take steps to ensure that officially
designated place-names in regional or minority languages are used in practice.
Paragraph 3
With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting on their behalf, the Parties
undertake, within the territory in which regional or minority languages are used, in accordance with the situation of each
language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
...
c

to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request in these languages.

198.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts did not conclude on the present undertaking and
asked the authorities to provide more concrete and language-specific information in the next periodical report.
199.
In the second periodical report, the authorities state that although the Law on Public Services does not
st
contain specific provisions (see also paragraph 203, 1 evaluation report), oral and written applications may be
submitted to public services in regional or minority languages, as public services shall act according to the Law
on General Administrative Procedure and the Law on Official Use of Language and Script. The companies
providing public services (Elektroprivreda Srbije, Panonske termoelektrane-toplane, Telekom Srbija) have
declared themselves ready to deal with requests in regional or minority languages. However, no such requests
seem to have been submitted in practice. Srbija PTT has stated that it ensures the implementation of legal
regulations in areas where regional or minority languages are officially used.
200.
The Committee of Experts considers that there seems to be a legal basis for the implementation of this
undertaking, but there is no information on the use of regional or minority languages for submitting requests to
public services in practice. The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking formally fulfilled. The
Committee of Experts encourages the Serbian authorities to take organisational and practical measures to
ensure the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit requests to public services in these
languages.
Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the Parties undertake to take one or
more of the following measures:
...
c

compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a knowledge of a regional or
minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that language is used.

201.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts had no information on how local and regional
authorities which officially use a minority language deal with requests from public service employees having a
knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that language is used. It
was not in a position to conclude and invited the Serbian authorities to provide specific information in the next
periodical report.
202.

No such information is provided in the second periodical report.

32

203.
The Committee of Experts is again not in a position to conclude with respect to this undertaking. It
underlines that this provision refers to the way the authorities deal with requests from public service
employees, whether in state, local or regional authorities or public services, having a knowledge of a regional or
minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that language is used.
Paragraph 5
The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or minority languages, at the request of those
concerned.

204. In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts noted some legal uncertainties and practical
shortcomings with respect to this undertaking. The Committee of Experts considered that the legal basis for
the use of family names in official records and the possibility of issuing bilingual forms needed to be clarified.
The Committee of Experts also pointed out that the correct use of names was a basic aspect of the
protection of regional or minority languages which directly affects their speakers and it was necessary to raise
awareness among responsible civil servants (e.g. through internal circulars) that names in regional or
minority languages must be entered into personal documents in conformity with the tradition and orthography
of the languages concerned. In view of the very limited information regarding the practical implementation of that
legislative framework, it considered the undertaking formally fulfilled and requested the authorities to provide
further information in the next periodical report. Furthermore the Committee of Ministers recommended that the
Serbian authorities “take the necessary legal and practical measures to ensure that personal names […]
in the regional or minority languages can be used officially in conformity with the tradition and
orthography of the languages concerned”.
205.
In the second periodical report, the authorities state that the amended Law on the Official Use of
Language and Script provides that the persons belonging to national minorities may freely choose and use the
names of their children, as well as enter these names in all public documents, official records and personal
databases, according to the orthography of the language concerned, in parallel with Serbian orthography and
script. In Vojvodina, the decision on precise regulation of certain issues on the official use of national minorities'
language and script provides that persons belonging to national minorities may enter their names and the names
of their children into the registry books in their original form in the script and according to the orthography of the
language concerned. The Decision on multilingual forms of certificates from the registry books and entries in
the same books allows the local authorities where minority languages are officially used to issue a certificate
from the registry books in bilingual forms, if required, and in the way in which it had been originally entered in the
registry books. If a name is only entered in the registry books in Serbian the registrar will inform the person on
how to request that the name is also entered in the registry book in the original way, after the relevant
administrative procedure.
206.
A new Law on Registry Books was also adopted in 2009. The certificates from the registry books are
issued on the basis of the data contained in the integral texts of the registry books, and they contain the latest
data entered in the registry books, including the personal names. The instructions for the application of this law
provide that the names of the columns of the certificates from the registry books may also be written in the
minority language and script, at the back of the form. According to the Hungarian-speakers, this could lead to a
contradiction with the decision and practice to issue bilingual forms in Vojvodina.
207.

The authorities also inform of numerous applications for changing names in Hungarian.

208.
No further information with respect to the practical implementation to each of the Part III languages is
provided in the second periodical report. This is also the case for Albanian, Bosnian, Bulgarian, Romani and
Ukrainian, for which the Committee of Experts had lacked information in the previous monitoring cycle. No
information is provided with respect to measures taken to raise awareness of civil servants with respect to the
use of the correct form of the name in the regional or minority language.
209.
The Committee of Experts has been informed that in practice problems have persisted. According to
the Albanian speakers, birth certificates in Vranje are issued in Serbian and in Cyrillic script and when identity
cards are issued on their basis, mismatches occur in writing the Albanian names. According to the Bulgarianspeakers, Bulgarian is not used in birth registers and marriage registers, because a person would have to
apply for a name change. This includes, for example, the suffixes in the case of feminine names at marriage,
which can only be added after a procedure on name changing. According to the representatives of the
Bosnian-speakers, the orthography and script of Bosnian are not complied with in personal documents. With
respect to Croatian, the speakers have pointed out that consistent application of Croatian is necessary, rather
than simply copying the text in Latin letters. According to the speakers, Romani is not used at all. Personal
documents are rarely issued in Slovak, except in Bački Petrovac/Báčsky Petrovec.

33

210.
In view of the information received, the Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the
undertaking is only formally fulfilled. It asks the Serbian authorities to provide specific information in the next
periodical report.
The Committee of Experts urges the Serbian authorities to take the necessary measures to ensure the
practical use or adoption of family names in the regional or minority languages.
Article 11 – Media
211.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts noted the overall impressive offer of radio and
television in regional and minority languages in Serbia, in particular in Vojvodina. It considered the undertakings
under a.iii, b.ii and c.ii, seen together, as fulfilled and asked for more concrete information in the next periodical
report with regard to the situation in Central Serbia.
212.
Also in the second monitoring round, despite the recent changes in the media system, this good record
persists and public and private broadcasting seen together provide a substantial offer of radio and television
programmes in all regional and minority languages in Serbia.
General issues
213.
According to the Law on Broadcasting and the Distribution Schedule of Radio Frequencies, the Radio
Broadcasting Agency has been issuing licences since 2006, based on a compulsory public tender. The
authorities refer to the documentation submitted for the tender and state that an important number of applicants
included programmes in minority languages in their schedule.
214.
The Committee of Experts has been informed that in practice regional or minority language media has
been negatively affected by the privatisation process and by the allocation of frequencies and issuing of
broadcasting permits, pursuant to various legal changes. Only a third (404) of the total number of applicants
(1,170) for national, provincial, regional and local broadcasting licences received them. Radio stations
broadcasting in minority languages, for instance Radio Apatin, Radio Bačka Topola and Radio Kovin, have lost
frequencies. Radio Subotica has lost two of its three frequencies, which has led to a decrease in the amount of
programmes in regional or minority languages. No local frequencies had been foreseen for Zrenjanin.
According to the speakers, no frequency has been foreseen for media broadcasting in Bosnian. One other
problem the representatives of the speakers pointed out is that in practice, many broadcasters do not maintain
the minority language programmes, which they introduce in their offer only to receive broadcasting frequencies
or funds. The Committee of Experts has also been informed that there are contradictions in the legal provisions
regulating the media sector. For instance the Law on Local Self-Government and the Law on National Councils
of National Minorities allow these entities to establish broadcasting media, which is inconsistent with the Law on
Broadcasting and the Law on Public Information. The same problem arises in respect of the draft Law on Illicit
Joining and the Publicity of Ownership of Public Media. The Committee of Experts underlines the importance of
the coherence among the various legal acts mentioned above and invites the Serbian authorities to comment on
these issues in the next periodical report.
215.
The Committee of Experts encourages the Serbian authorities to ensure that legal changes in the
media sector do not negatively affect the offer of programmes in regional or minority languages.
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in which those languages are
spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent,
have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
a

to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:
...
iii

to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer programmes in the regional or minority languages;

216.
In the first monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts was informed that Serbia was privatising local
television and radio broadcasters. It noted that the lack of regulatory measures ensuring that the broadcasters
concerned would continue to make adequate provision for programmes in the regional or minority languages
could have serious repercussions on the future situation of these programmes. The Committee of Experts
encouraged the Serbian authorities to ensure that the privatisation of local broadcasters does not negatively
affect the offer of programmes in the regional or minority languages.
217.
According to the second periodical report, the authorities have decided to adjourn the privatisation of
broadcasters offering programmes in regional or minority languages. Prior to this decision, a third of the
broadcasting media had already been privatised. The Rules on the Method of Privatisation of radio and/or
television stations of local and regional communities provide however that broadcasters who offer programmes

34

in regional or minority languages are under an obligation to maintain the programme concept. Furthermore, the
Law on Local Self-Government, adopted in 2007, allows municipalities to establish radio stations and television
channels in order to broadcast programmes in the regional or minority languages which are in official use, as
well as in regional or minority languages which are not in official use, if the broadcasted programme refers to the
achieved level of minority rights.
218.
However, the Committee of Experts has been informed that the process of privatisation has
significantly affected the broadcasting of programmes in regional or minority languages. Two of the radio
stations broadcasting in regional or minority languages in Vojvodina, Radio Subotica and Radio Srbobran, were
among the first to be included in the privatisation and they had no licence to broadcast during the whole process.
Privatisation problems were also pointed out for Radio Sombor and Radio Bačka Topola. The case of Radio
Subotica has drawn the special attention of both local and provincial authorities, as well as of non-governmental
organisations.
219.
In the first monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts had also been informed about the poor sound
quality of radio programmes in Bosnian, Romani, Romanian, Ruthenian, Slovak and Ukrainian and of television
programmes in Hungarian, Bosnian, Romanian, Ruthenian and Slovak. It also noted that public broadcasting
in regional or minority languages was generally affected by a lack of financial means, qualified journalists and
modern equipment. The Committee of Experts invited the Serbian authorities to comment on these aspects.
220.
According to the second periodical report, the Ministry of Culture, through annual tenders for cofinancing media and productions in minority languages, funds projects covering inter alia the production of
programmes, the training of journalists and the acquisition of equipment. Funds were also granted to
projects concerning training of staff, including one aimed at training and employing Romani-speakers in
media institutions. The Provincial Secretariat for Information of Vojvodina launched in 2009 a programme of
scholarships for media students, aimed at improving the staff structure of public media institutions, but this
has had few results in practice. Annually, the Provincial Secretariat of Information of Vojvodina also issues a
tender for equipment, promotion of programmes and information to the public in minority languages. The
authorities also acknowledge the reception problems of radio and television programmes in regional or minority
languages, but do not propose any solutions for improvements.
221.
The Committee of Experts has been informed that public broadcasters offering programmes in regional
or minority languages, including RTV Vojvodina, are facing serious financial difficulties. The quality of the
programmes, as well as the sound quality are not satisfactory for most of the regional or minority languages.
According to representatives of minority language speakers, one problem is the lack of permanent and
systematic funding for programmes in regional or minority languages, especially at local and regional level. The
Committee of Experts notes that the problems identified in the first monitoring cycle persist. The Committee of
Experts encourages the Serbian authorities to take measures to ensure adequate financial and technical
conditions for broadcasters offering radio and television programmes in regional or minority languages.
222.
In the second periodical report the authorities also provide information about radio stations and
television channels broadcasting in regional or minority languages and receiving funds from the authorities, for
the production of programmes and technical equipment.
223.
At national level, Radio Belgrade broadcasts one programme in Romani. No programmes in regional or
minority languages are broadcast by TV Belgrade. There is one weekly television programme (Građanin)
dedicated to national minorities in Serbia. In Vojvodina, RTV Voivodina (TV Vojvodina and Radio Novi Sad)
broadcast radio and television programmes – as far as Part III languages are concerned – in Hungarian,
Romani, Romanian, Ruthenian, Slovak, Ukrainian and television programmes in Croatian.
224.
One public television channel broadcasts four hours daily in Albanian. A public radio station used to
broadcast 6.5 hours per day in Albanian, but it ceased to operate in 2009 and is currently waiting for a licence.
225.
One public television channel, TV Tutin, broadcasts 24 hours daily in Bosnian. Regionalna TV Novi
Pazar also broadcasts in Bosnian. The representatives of the speakers have expressed their wish for
broadcasting of programmes in Bosnian by the public service of Serbia. The Committee of Experts has not been
informed of any public radio stations broadcasting programmes in Bosnian.
226.
One public television channel broadcasts 3.5 hours daily in Bulgarian, while one public radio station
broadcasts 17 hours per day in Bulgarian.
227.
The public television channel TV Vojvodina broadcasts six hours monthly in Croatian and three public
radio stations broadcast from 30 minutes weekly to three hours daily in Croatian.
228.
Three public television channels broadcast programmes in Hungarian. TV Vojvodina broadcasts
64 hours monthly in Hungarian, including replays and two other public television channels broadcast 30 minutes

35

daily in Hungarian. Eleven public radio stations broadcast programmes in Hungarian. Radio Novi Sad
broadcasts 24 hours daily in Hungarian, Radio Subotica 18 hours, while nine other public stations broadcast
programmes varying between one hour weekly to one hour daily. The Committee of Experts has been informed
that Radio Subotica has now only one frequency instead of three and therefore it needed to reduce the amount
of programmes in regional or minority languages. Also the quality of the programmes continues to be affected
by the small number of journalists producing the Hungarian programmes.
229.
Six public television stations broadcast programmes in Romani. TV Vojvodina broadcasts 58 hours
monthly and five other TV stations (four in Central Serbia) broadcast short programmes in Romani (from
30 minutes weekly to four hours monthly). Eight public radio stations broadcast programmes in Romani. At
national level, Radio Belgrade broadcasts 30 minutes daily in Romani. Radio Novi Sad broadcasts one hour
daily in Romani. According to the speakers, the quality is very poor and the programme does not cover the
whole territory where Romani is used. Six other radio stations broadcast programmes in Romani, from one to
four hours weekly. Out of these, two are in central Serbia, but one has no licence since 2009.
230.
Three public television channels broadcast programmes in Romanian. TV Vojvodina broadcasts
58 hours monthly, while two others broadcast from one hour weekly to 2.5 hours daily. The Committee of
Experts has been informed by representatives of the Romanian-speakers that the programmes in Romanian
still cannot be watched by Romanian-speakers in southern Banat. Seven public radio stations broadcast
programmes in Romanian. Radio Novi Sad broadcasts five hours daily and six others broadcast from one hour
weekly to 2.5 hours daily.
231.
The public television channel TV Vojvodina broadcasts 58 hours monthly in Ruthenian. Four public
radio stations broadcast programmes in Ruthenian: Radio Novi Sad broadcasts five hours daily and three other
radio stations broadcast from 30 minutes weekly to 45 minutes daily. As in the previous monitoring cycle, the
Committee of Experts has been informed by representatives of the Ruthenian-speakers that the television
and radio programmes in Ruthenian do not reach all areas in which Ruthenian is used. The representatives
of the speakers have also pointed out the problem of the outdated technical equipment which the editorial
offices in minority languages use in their activity.
232.
Three public television channels broadcast programmes in Slovak. TV Vojvodina broadcasts 58 hours
monthly and two others broadcast from one hour weekly to 2.5 hours daily. Seven public radio stations
broadcast programmes in Slovak: Radio Novi Sad broadcasts five hours daily and six others broadcast from one
hour weekly to six hours daily.
233.
The public television channel TV Vojvodina broadcasts programmes in Ukrainian (30 minutes weekly).
Three public radio stations broadcast programmes in Ukrainian: Radio Novi Sad broadcast 15 minutes daily and
one additional hour weekly and two other stations broadcast one hour weekly.
234.
The Committee of Experts refers to the concerns raised above concerning the possible future negative
consequences in relation to the financial and technical conditions of broadcasters and underlines the importance
of sustaining broadcasting in these languages. Nevertheless, it considers at present the undertaking fulfilled for
Bulgarian, Croatian, Hungarian, Romani, Romanian, Ruthenian, Slovak and Ukrainian and, concerning
television, also fulfilled for Albanian and Bosnian. There seem to exist problems for radio in Albanian and
Bosnian and the Committee of Experts would like to receive information on further developments in this respect
in the next periodical report.
b

...
ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the regional or minority languages on
a regular basis;

235.
No information on private radio stations broadcasting programmes in Albanian is provided in the
second periodical report. According to the speakers, there are two radio stations in Bujanovac and one in
Preshevo. The Committee of Experts understands that these have not received any support from the
authorities.
236.
With regard to Bosnian, the authorities state that there are plans to begin operating a radio station in
Tutin, broadcasting 24 hours daily in Bosnian. According to the representatives of the speakers, two local private
radio stations broadcast programmes in Bosnian, for five and twelve hours daily respectively.
237.
No information concerning radio stations broadcasting programmes in Bulgarian is provided in the
second periodical report.
238.
According to the information received by the Committee of Experts, there is still no private radio station
broadcasting programmes in Croatian.

36

239.
One private radio station broadcasts exclusively in Hungarian and eleven others broadcast
programmes in Hungarian.
240.
Six private radio stations broadcast programmes in Romani, of which two are in Central Serbia, from
one hour monthly to most of the day.
241.
One private station broadcasts exclusively in Romanian and three private radio stations have
Romanian-language programmes, from one hour weekly to four hours per day. The speakers have informed
the Committee of Experts that the scope and quality of the programmes is not satisfactory and pointed out that
some of the broadcasters only declared formally that they would broadcast in Romanian to obtain a frequency.
242.
daily.

Four private radio stations broadcast programmes in Ruthenian, from 30 minutes weekly to 1.5 hours

243.
Six private radio stations broadcast programmes in Slovak, from 30 minutes weekly to almost
24 hours in Slovak. According to the representatives of the Slovak-speakers, many broadcasters do not
maintain the minority language programmes, which they include in their offer only to receive frequencies and
funds.
244.
One private radio station now broadcasts programmes in Ukrainian, for one hour weekly.
Committee of Experts welcomes this development.

The

245.
The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking fulfilled for Albanian, Bosnian, Hungarian,
Romani, Romanian, Ruthenian, Slovak and Ukrainian and not fulfilled for Croatian. It has not enough
information to conclude with respect to Bulgarian.
c

...
ii

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the regional or minority
languages on a regular basis;

246.
One private television channel in Preševo/Preshevë broadcasts 24 hours daily in Albanian. According
to the speakers, there are also two television channels in Bujanovac broadcasting in Albanian. The Committee
of Experts understands that these do not receive any support from the authorities.
247.
One private television channel in Prijepolje broadcasts programmes in Bosnian. TV Universa from
Novi Pazar also broadcasts twelve hours daily in Bosnian. The Committee of Experts understands that this
has not received any support from the authorities.
248.
One television channel (TV Pi Canal from Pirot) broadcasts a one-hour weekly programme in
Bulgarian. The Committee of Experts understands that this has not received any support from the
authorities.
249.
One private television channel broadcasts programmes in Croatian (30 minutes weekly). The
Committee of Experts notes that this is a decrease compared to the previous cycle and maintains that the
programme is too short.
250.
Two private television channels broadcast exclusively in Hungarian. Two other channels broadcast
programmes in Hungarian, from 30 minutes weekly to twelve hours daily.
251.

One private television channel broadcasts programmes in Romani, almost 24 hours daily.

252.
One private television channel broadcasts twelve hours daily in Romanian. The representatives of the
speakers refer also to other television channels broadcasting weekly programmes in Romanian. They have
informed the Committee of Experts that the scope and quality of the programmes broadcast by private
broadcasters is not satisfactory and pointed out that some of the broadcasters only declared formally that they
would broadcast in Romanian to obtain a frequency.
253.

One private television channel broadcasts 30 minutes weekly in Ruthenian.

254.
TV Petrovac broadcasts 24 hours daily in Slovak. Two other private television channels broadcast
programmes in Slovak (30 minutes weekly).
255.

There are no private television channels broadcasting in Ukrainian.

37

256.
The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking fulfilled for Albanian, Bosnian, Hungarian,
Romani, Romanian, Ruthenian, Slovak, partly fulfilled for Croatian and Bulgarian and not fulfilled for Ukrainian. It
encourages the Serbian authorities to take measures to extend the broadcasting of private TV programmes in
Croatian and Bulgarian and to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in
Ukrainian on a regular basis.
d

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual works in the regional or
minority languages;

257.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts had no information concerning funding schemes
for the promotion and distribution of audio and audiovisual works in regional or minority languages and the
volume of the funding. Therefore it was not in a position to give a full assessment on the fulfilment of the
undertaking, but based its evaluation on information about support given to individual projects. The Committee
of Experts encouraged the Serbian authorities to provide more comprehensive information concerning the
funding in the next periodical report.
258.
The Committee of Experts considered the undertaking fulfilled for Bulgarian, Croatian, Hungarian,
Romani and Ruthenian. It was not in a position to conclude with respect to Albanian, Bosnian, Romanian, Slovak
and Ukrainian and encouraged the Serbian authorities to provide more information in the next periodical report.
259.
In the second periodical report, the authorities provide information concerning projects financed on the
basis of tenders by the Ministry of Culture, the Provincial Secretariat of Information and the Provincial Secretariat
of Culture of Vojvodina.
260.
The authorities state that they have supported the Albanian version of one website and the activity of
the editorial office in Albanian of the Jug Press regional information agency in Leskovac.
261.
With regard to Bosnian, the authorities have supported the website of the National Council of the
Bosnian National Minority. The Committee of Experts has been informed that the support has been granted only
for one year.
262.
The authorities have supported the production of a documentary film about the migration of Bulgarians.
It is not clear however whether this documentary is in Bulgarian.
263.
With respect to Romanian, the authorities have supported the production of a programme for children,
one CD and one recording of Romanian music. Considering the number of Romanian-speakers, these
measures are insufficient.
264.
Regarding Ruthenian, the authorities state that they have supported the Ruthen Press news agency.
On the basis of a tender for production and broadcasting of television programmes in the field of culture and art,
the Provincial Secretariat of Culture of Vojvodina granted support to a television channel for the production and
broadcasting of the Rusinski magazin television programme.
265.
The authorities have supported the production of one television programme in Slovak. The Committee
of Experts maintains that this measure is insufficient, given the size of the Slovak-speaking group.
266.

No information is provided with respect to Ukrainian.

267.
As to the other Part III languages, the Serbian authorities have supported the production of radio and
television programmes, CDs, films and websites in Croatian, Hungarian and Romani.
268.
The Committee of Experts would like to point out that this undertaking refers to the encouragement
and/or facilitation of the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual works in the regional or minority
languages. Therefore, based on the information received, the Committee of Experts considers the undertaking
fulfilled for Croatian, Hungarian and Romani, partly fulfilled for Romanian, Ruthenian and Slovak and not fulfilled
for Ukrainian. It has not enough information to conclude with respect to Albanian, Bosnian and Bulgarian. It
encourages the authorities to increase support for Romanian, Ruthenian and Slovak and to encourage and/or
facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual works in Ukrainian. It asks the authorities to
provide more information with respect to Albanian, Bosnian and Bulgarian.
e

i

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one newspaper in the regional or
minority languages; or

269.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts noted that newspapers were published at least
weekly in all regional or minority languages, apart from Bosnian, Romani and Ukrainian. However, based on
concrete circumstances and the overall number of publications supported, the Committee of Experts considered
the undertaking fulfilled for all languages.

38

270.
According to the second periodical report, a newspaper in Bosnian is published weekly and receives
support from the authorities.
271.
There are one fortnightly and two monthlies in Romani and two monthlies and one quarterly in
Ukrainian. However, the Committee of Experts underlines in this respect that a “newspaper” in conformity
4
with the present undertaking has to be published at least weekly.
272.
The authorities have continued to provide support for an important number of newspapers and other
publications in minority languages, although their number appears to have decreased compared to the previous
monitoring cycle. Nevertheless, the authorities have supported one weekly and one children’s monthly in
Albanian, one weekly, one fortnightly and one monthly for children in Bulgarian, one weekly and two
monthlies in Croatian, one daily, six weeklies, three monthly and two quarterly publications in Hungarian,
one weekly and three monthly publications in Romanian (two for children and youth, one art magazine), one
weekly and two monthlies in Ruthenian, one weekly and two monthlies in Slovak. The authorities have also
continued to provide support to publications covering various genres (literature, art, science, magazines for
children) in Bosnian, Croatian, Hungarian, Romani, Romanian, Ruthenian, Slovak, Ukrainian.
273.
The Committee of Experts has been informed that the newspapers in minority languages are facing
serious financial problems. This problem has been especially pointed out by the representatives of the
Bosnian-speakers, the Hungarian-speakers and the Romanian-speakers.
274.
The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled for Albanian, Bosnian, Bulgarian,
Croatian, Hungarian, Romanian, Ruthenian and Slovak and not fulfilled for Romani and Ukrainian. It
encourages the Serbian authorities to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one newspaper in
Romani and Ukrainian and the maintenance of the existing newspapers in regional or minority languages.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to ensure that the interests of the users of regional or minority languages are represented or taken into
account within such bodies as may be established in accordance with the law with responsibility for guaranteeing the freedom
and pluralism of the media.

275.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts was informed that the statute of the Public
Broadcasting Service of Serbia provided that the Programme Board has an obligation to take into
consideration the opinions and recommendations of the national minority councils in respect of programmes
in minority languages. However, neither the Managing Board and Programme Board of Radio TV Novi Sad,
nor the Managing Board of the Public Broadcasting Service of Serbia had representatives of minorities among
the members. The Committee of Experts encouraged the Serbian authorities to submit detailed information on
how the interests of the users of the regional or minority languages are taken into account by the programme
boards.
276.
In the second periodical report, the authorities refer to the obligations of the public broadcasting
agencies related to the interests of national minorities as well as to the supervision of these obligations. The
authorities explain that these provisions guarantee the representation of the interests of the regional or minority
language speakers, although the latter do not have any representatives on the board of directors or the
programme boards of the public broadcasting agencies. The authorities also state that, according to the Law on
the National Councils of the National Minorities, the national councils give opinions on the procedure of
appointment of the members of the board of directors, the programme board and the managing director of the
Radio Broadcasting Agency of Serbia and the Radio Broadcasting Agency of Vojvodina, if these agencies
broadcast programmes in minority languages, set criteria for the appointment of the programme editor in charge
of minority languages, propose to the board of directors of the broadcaster the appointment of the editor in
charge of the programme in minority languages among the candidates who meet the criteria and give an opinion
on the candidates.
277.
The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking fulfilled, as the opinion of national minority
councils is taken into account. Nevertheless, considering the strong presence of regional or minority languages
in the media, the Committee of Experts invites the Serbian authorities to investigate the possibility of also
representing the interests of the users of these languages in relevant media bodies.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 1
4

Cf. 1st Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of Serbia, paragraph 267; 2 nd Report of the Committee of Experts in respect of
the Slovak Republic, paragraph 654.

39
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural centres, museums, archives,
academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals
and the culture industries, including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties undertake, within the territory in which
such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this field:
...
b

to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in regional or minority languages by
aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;

278.
In the first monitoring cycle, due to the lack of information, the Committee of Experts was not in a
position to conclude whether this undertaking was fulfilled.
279.
In their second periodical report, the Serbian authorities indicate that they have provided grants to
support the translation into Serbian of books written in Hungarian, Romani, Romanian, Ruthenian and Slovak.
They have also supported the translation of two books from one minority language to another: Zodijak by
Miroslav Demak from Slovak into Serbian, Hungarian, Romanian and Ruthenian, and Polumjesec i čekić by
Robert Tili from Croatian into Hungarian.
280.
Nevertheless, with regard to Albanian, Bosnian, Bulgarian and Ukrainian, no information has been
provided.
281.
While taking note of the examples regarding Croatian, Hungarian, Romani, Romanian, Ruthenian and
Slovak, the Committee of Experts asks the Serbian authorities to inform whether there is a support scheme for
translations into the other Part III languages.
c

to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages by aiding and developing
translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;

282.
In its first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking fulfilled for
Hungarian, Romani, Romanian, Ruthenian and Slovak as the translation of books into these five languages was
supported by the authorities.
283.
In their second periodical report, the Serbian authorities have referred to the translation of works into
Bulgarian, Hungarian, Romani, Romanian and Ruthenian.
284.
While taking note of the examples regarding Bulgarian, Hungarian, Romani, Romanian and Ruthenian,
the Committee of Experts asks the Serbian authorities to inform whether there is a support scheme for
translations into the other Part III languages.
f

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or minority language in
providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

285.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts had no information about the implementation of
this undertaking and invited the Serbian authorities to report about it in their next periodical report.
286.
Articles 16 -18 of the Law on the National Councils of the National Minorities give the National Councils
the responsibility of establishing cultural institutions to maintain the specific cultural properties and national
identity of the national minority concerned and exercise the rights and obligations of the founders. The national
councils have the power to appoint one member of the board of directors of the institution concerned, give
opinions on the proposed members of the board of directors and give an opinion on the procedure of
appointment of the director of the institution concerned. They establish the strategy of cultural development of
the national minority, prescribe what institutions and manifestations in the field of culture are of particular
importance for the preservation, promotion and development of specific and national identity and propose at
least one candidate for the common list of candidates for the election of the National Council of Culture and
have other competences in the field of culture. Furthermore, the national councils of national minorities are
active participants in the adoption of the final decision on co-financing in each tender procedure.
287.

Therefore, the Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.

Paragraph 2
In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake,
if the number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural
activities and facilities in accordance with the preceding paragraph.

288.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts did not receive any information about the
implementation of this undertaking and invited the Serbian authorities to report about it in their next periodical
report.

40

289.
No specific information related to cultural activities in territories other than those in which the regional or
minority languages are traditionally used is provided in the second periodical report.
290.
Therefore, the Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on the fulfilment of this
undertaking and invites the Serbian authorities to report about it in their next periodical report.
Article 14 – Transfrontier exchanges
The Parties undertake:
a

to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the states in which the same language
is used in identical or similar form, or if necessary to seek to conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster
contacts between the users of the same language in the states concerned in the fields of culture, education,
information, vocational training and permanent education;

291.
In the first evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking partly fulfilled for
Croatian, Hungarian and Romanian. It was not in a position to conclude for Albanian, Bosnian, Bulgarian,
Romani, Ruthenian, Slovak and Ukrainian, due to lack of specific information. The Committee of Experts
encouraged the Serbian authorities to engage in consultations with Croatia, Hungary and Romania to make
the intergovernmental joint committees established by the bilateral agreements on the mutual protection of
national minorities operational and to provide specific information about the implementation of this undertaking
for Albanian, Bosnian, Bulgarian, Romani, Ruthenian, Slovak and Ukrainian in the next periodical report.
292.
According to the second periodical report, the intergovernmental joint committee for national
minorities with Croatia resumed its activity and the third and fourth meetings were organised in October 2009
and June 2010. However, the Committee of Experts has been informed by the representatives of the
Croatian-speakers that the implementation of the adopted recommendations meets with difficulties in
practice. The activity of the intergovernmental joint committee for national minorities with Hungary also
resumed and a third meeting was organised in spring 2009. According to the representatives of the
Hungarian-speakers the meetings of this body are rare and its recommendations are not implemented. The
first meeting of the intergovernmental joint committee with Romania, dealing primarily with procedural
matters, was organised in November 2009.
293.
The authorities also report on co-operation agreements in the fields of education, culture and sports
concluded with Croatia, Hungary, Slovak Republic and Ukraine. They also refer to a subsequent cultural cooperation programme between the Serbian and Slovak ministries of culture for 2010-2013. They report that a
co-operation programme in the field of culture for 2009-2011 has been concluded by the two relevant
ministries in Serbia and Ukraine and on that basis the Cultural Days of Serbia in Ukraine, involving the
Ukrainian national minority in Serbia, were organised in 2009. A similar programme between Serbia and
Hungary for 2010-2011 was prepared. The Committee of Experts notes that these programmes mostly
address cultural activities, whereas the present undertaking refers also to education, information, vocational
training and permanent education.
294.
No information is provided in the second periodical report with regard to Albanian, Bosnian,
Bulgarian, Romani and Ruthenian.
295.
In light of the information received the Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that
the undertaking is partly fulfilled with respect to Croatian, Hungarian and Romanian. It considers the
undertaking also partly fulfilled with respect to Slovak and Ukrainian and not fulfilled with respect to Albanian,
Bosnian, Bulgarian, Romani and Ruthenian. The Committee of Experts encourages the Serbian authorities
to strengthen the application of the present undertaking with respect to Croatian, Hungarian, Romanian,
Slovak and Ukrainian. It also encourages the Serbian authorities to seek to conclude agreements with states
where Albanian, Bosnian, Bulgarian, Romani and Ruthenian are used in identical or similar form, in such a way
as to foster contacts between the users of these languages in the fields of culture, education, information,
vocational training and permanent education.
b

for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or promote co-operation across borders, in
particular between regional or local authorities in whose territory the same language is used in identical or similar
form.

296.
In the first monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts received no information about this undertaking
and requested that the Serbian authorities provide it in the next periodical report.
297.
According to the second periodical report, local authorities in Serbia have established cooperation
with similar entities in Bulgaria, Croatia, Hungary, Romania and Slovakia. The Provincial Secretariat for
Regulations, Administration and National Minorities of the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina co-operates
with the Government of Hungary.

41

298.
The Committee of Experts has received no information with respect to Albanian, Bosnian, Romani,
Ruthenian and Ukrainian.
299.
The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking fulfilled with respect to Bulgarian, Croatian,
Hungarian, Romanian and Slovak. The Committee of Experts asks the Serbian authorities to provide
information with respect to Albanian, Bosnian, Romani, Ruthenian and Ukrainian in the next periodical report.

42

Chapter 4 Findings of the Committee of Experts in the second monitoring round
A.
Serbia enjoys a rich linguistic diversity with 15 regional or minority languages, ten of which have been
given special protection under Part III of the Charter: Albanian, Bosnian, Bulgarian, Croatian, Hungarian,
Romani, Romanian, Ruthenian, Slovak and Ukrainian. The other languages are only covered by Part II:
Bunjevac, Czech, German, Macedonian and Vlach. In the reporting period, Serbia has explicitly recognised
that Bunjevac and Vlach are both covered by Part II of the Charter.
B.
Serbian regulation determines that in order for a language to be in official use a national minority
must constitute 15% of the population in a municipality. In addition, in Vojvodina, a minority language can be
in official use if 25% of the population in a local community within a municipality belong to a minority.
However, the Committee of Experts underlines that a language might be in a situation where it is entitled to
protection according to the Charter even if the number of persons belonging to the given minority is below the
thresholds. Based on a number of concrete examples where municipalities have introduced regional or
minority languages in official use even though the thresholds have not been met, the Committee of Experts is
confident that where such situations exist, solutions beneficial to the regional or minority languages will be
found.
C.
The protection of minorities and their languages enjoys a high level of constitutional recognition in
Serbia. One example is the system of national minority councils which grants national minorities a certain
level of autonomy in the fields of language and script, education, media and culture. All regional or minority
language groups have set up such councils in the reporting period, which is also due to a successful
awareness-raising campaign carried out by the authorities. However, due to the economic crisis, the financial
allocations to the national councils have had to be reduced which limits the ability of the councils to effectively
execute their tasks. Support for the national councils is of great importance and should therefore be
strengthened.
D.
Although legislation concerning regional or minority languages is highly developed, there are frequent
weaknesses in its implementation. One reason is that there are inadequate financial resources for those who
have to apply the language legislation (e.g. local authorities). Another reason is that there are within the
Serbian society at large varying levels of awareness regarding the value of multilingualism. The extent to
which a regional or minority language is protected and promoted is also linked to how it is perceived by
majority language speakers. Therefore, awareness-raising within the majority is of utmost importance. In this
context, it is to be welcomed that new regulations will be drafted which shall eliminate from school textbooks the
presentation of certain national minorities in a stereotyped way.
E.
Serbia has a long-established system of regional or minority language education in which the
teaching in these languages plays a prominent role. Such education shall be provided when at least 15 pupils
or their parents demand it. While the legal threshold of 15 pupils is too high for the requirements of the
Charter, the authorities offer such education in practice even for very few pupils. The Serbian system of
regional or minority language education has a high potential and should therefore be actively promoted vis-àvis pupils and parents. However, the availability and quality of such education is affected by a lack of
teachers teaching in regional or minority languages and a lack of adequate teaching materials.
F.
In general, the state of use on regional or minority languages before courts is relatively good,
despite some problems in detail. There have also been some negative side effects of the general judicial
reform which need to be addressed. However, the authorities have stated their intention to strengthen
positive measures in order to further facilitate the use of minority languages in courts.
G.
As regards the use of regional or minority languages in relations with administrative authorities, the
Law on the Official Use of Language and Script has been amended. It now provides that persons belonging to
any national minority may communicate in the areas where their language is in official use with the state
authorities and are entitled to receive a reply in their language. Previously this was only possible for members
of a national minority whose population made up more than 2% of the total population of Serbia, which in
practice only applied to Hungarian. However, this legal possibility is not yet implemented in practice.
Furthermore, there is still a lack of linguistically skilled staff.
H.
Serbia has traditionally had a very high level of regional or minority language presence in radio and
television broadcasts. The presence of Romani is especially impressive. The Serbian authorities support
printed media in all Part III and some Part II languages.
I.
There is a substantial offer of cultural activities and facilities relating to regional or minority languages,
which are supported by the Serbian authorities.

43

J.
Serbia has granted the same level of protection to all Part III languages in its ratification instrument.
The ten languages covered by Part III differ widely with regard to the level of protection previously achieved. For
some of the languages the ratification implies an improvement in the level of protection and promotion, but some
others, especially in Vojvodina, have already achieved a higher level than that granted through the ratification of
the Charter. The Committee of Experts underlines that, according to Article 4.2 of the Charter, a higher level
previously achieved should not be lowered because of the ratification of the Charter.
Overview of the situation of the regional or minority languages
K.
Since 2010, the speakers of Albanian are represented by a national minority council. The situation
of Albanian in education remains on the whole good but has slightly declined in the media. A relatively high
number of Serbia’s undertakings under the Charter remain fulfilled for Albanian. However, there are
shortcomings hampering the effective use of Albanian in relations with administrative authorities. Pursuant to
the judicial reform, practical problems have arisen with respect to the use of Albanian in courts.
L.
The presence of Bosnian in schools needs to be strengthened, especially in secondary education. The
presence in the media has slightly improved, with television channels broadcasting programmes in Bosnian
and a weekly newspaper.
M.
The situation of Bulgarian-language education remains good, in particular at the lower levels.
However, Bulgarian-medium education could still be strengthened. Bulgarian is present on public television
and radio, as well as on private television. It is also used in the print media
N.
With regard to Bunjevac, the Serbian authorities have confirmed that Part II will apply. Bunjevac is
taught in some primary schools within the models of minority-language education, but not at pre-school and
secondary levels. While there is some presence of Bunjevac on radio, television and in the print media, it has
not yet been introduced in official use in any municipality.
O.
The Statute of the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina has been amended to the effect that the
Croatian language and script is now also officially used by bodies and organisations of Vojvodina. Croatian
has a weak presence in education considering the number of its speakers. There are public television and
radio programmes broadcast in Croatian as well as a modest presence on private television. Several print
media are published in Croatian.
P.
Since 2010, the speakers of Czech are also represented by a national minority council. The
situation of Czech in the cultural field remains good. Czech has official status in one municipality, but the local
administrative and judicial authorities do not use it in practice. Despite demand by pupils and parents, Czech is
not yet taught within the models of minority-language education. In the media, two weekly local radio
programmes are broadcast in Czech. In addition, a newsletter is published in Czech.
Q.
German continues to have only a weak presence in public life. Apart from one bilingual
kindergarten, German is only taught as a foreign language and not within the models of minority-language
education. In the media, a weekly local radio programme is broadcast in German, but the allotment of
television broadcasting time at RTV Vojvodina is still pending. There is no newspaper in German.
R.
In respect of Hungarian, the Committee of Experts has maintained that almost all undertakings of
Serbia under the Charter are fulfilled or partly fulfilled. However, this achievement is partly due, as in the
previous monitoring cycle, to the fact that these undertakings, in particular those in education and the media,
do not adequately reflect the favourable situation of Hungarian, and higher-level undertakings could be
applied to this language.
S.
The curriculum for teaching Macedonian with elements of national culture has recently been
developed and there are plans to introduce such teaching. In the media, Macedonian continues to have a
good presence on television, radio and in print media. In addition, there are several cultural events (folklore,
arts, exhibitions) which use Macedonian.
T.
Serbia has continued to make commendable efforts in promoting Romani. It is particularly
noteworthy that Romani is present on private radio and television. However, Articles 9 and 10 of the Charter
are not applied in practice to Romani as the language lacks official status at local level. More efforts are
needed with respect to education, particularly in Central Serbia.
U.
At all levels of Romanian-language education, the number of pupils remains too low considering the
size of the Romanian language group. There is a broad range of radio and television programmes in
Romanian. However, not all of them cover the entire area where Romanian is spoken.

44

V.
The level of protection of Ruthenian remains high, which is reflected by its official status in the
Autonomous Province of Vojvodina, in municipalities and courts. Deficits exist regarding the availability of
television and radio programmes in Ruthenian in all areas where Ruthenian is used.
W.
The overall situation of Slovak is good. It is used in relations with administrative and judicial authorities
and has been introduced in official use even in the municipalities of Bačka Topola, Pančevo and
Zrenjanin/Zreňanin despite the very low local population share of its speakers. Furthermore, Slovak has a
good presence in the media. In education, however, the number of pupils attending technical and vocational
classes teaching Slovak is extremely low.
X.
There is still no Ukrainian-language education at pre-school, secondary and technical and vocational
level. Articles 9 and 10 of the Charter are not applied in practice to Ukrainian as the language lacks official
status at local level. In the media, there is a presence in public service radio and television and in private radio.
Y.
There exists no structured policy to promote Vlach. The unclear status of Vlach prevents de facto its
official use. Despite demand, Vlach is not taught within the models of minority-language education. In the
media, a stronger presence on radio and a presence on television is needed.

The Serbian government was invited to comment on the content of this report in accordance with Article 16.3
of the Charter. The comments received are attached in Appendix II.
On the basis of this report and its findings the Committee of Experts submitted its proposals to the
Committee of Ministers for recommendations to be addressed to Serbia. At the same time it emphasised the
need for the Serbian authorities to take in to account, in addition to these general recommendations, the
more detailed observations contained in the body of the report.
rd

At its 1173 meeting on 11 June 2013, the Committee of Ministers adopted its Recommendation addressed
to Serbia, which is set out in Part B of this document.

45

Appendix 1: Instrument of ratification

Serbia:

Declaration contained in the instrument of ratification deposited on 15 February 2006 - Or. Engl. - and
updated by a letter from the Permanent Representative of Serbia, dated 20 July 2006, registered at the
Secretariat General on 20 July 2006 - Or. angl.
In accordance with Article 2, paragraph 2, of the Charter, Serbia and Montenegro has accepted that the
following provisions be applied :
- in the Republic of Serbia, for the Albanian, Bosnian, Bulgarian, Hungarian, Romany, Romanian, Ruthenian,
Slovakian, Ukrainian and Croatian languages :
Article 8, paragraph 1 a (iii), a (iv), b (iv), c (iv), d (iv), e (ii), f (iii), g;
Article 9, paragraph 1 a (ii), a (iii), b (ii), c (ii), d, paragraph 2 a, b, c, paragraph 3;
Article 10, paragraph 1 a (iv), a (v), c, paragraph 2 b, c, d, g, paragraph 3 c, paragraph 4 c, paragraph 5;
Article 11, paragraph 1 a (iii), b (ii), c (ii), d, e (i), f (ii), paragraph 2, paragraph 3;
Article 12, paragraph 1 a, b, c, f, paragraph 2;
Article 13, paragraph 1 c;
Article 14 a, b.
Period covered: 1/6/2006 The preceding statement concerns Article(s) : 1

Reservation contained in the instrument of ratification deposited on 15 February 2006 - Or. Engl.
As to Article 1.b of the Charter, Serbia and Montenegro declares that the term "territory in which the regional
or minority languages is used" will refer to areas in which regional and minority languages are in official use in
line with the national legislation.
Period covered: 1/6/2006 The preceding statement concerns Article(s) : 2

46

Appendix 2: Comments by the Serbian authorities
The Republic of Serbia’s comments on the second report of the Committee of experts on the
implementation of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages in Serbia

I Introduction
The Committee of Experts, established pursuant to the Article 17 of the European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages (hereinafter: “the Charter“), adopted the Second Report on the Charter’s Implementation
in Serbia at the session held on 4 May 2011. The report contains proposed recommendations founded on
the second cycle of monitoring the Charter’s implementation, to be directed to Serbia by the Council of
Europe’s Committee of Ministers. In accordance with Article 16, Paragraph 3, the Committee of Experts has
called upon the Serbian authorities to provide their comments on the Second Report’s contents.
Serbia highly esteems the Committee of Experts’ activities in the process of supervising the Charter’s
implementation and welcomes the cooperation it has established with the Committee of Experts during the
preparation of the Second Report on the Implementation of the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages in the Republic of Serbia (hereinafter: “The Second Periodical Report on the Charter’s
Implementation“, reflected in preparation of the additional questionnaire which, in order to collect more
detailed data, was sent to the Serbia authorities on 24 November 2010, as well as during the visit of the
Committee of Experts’ delegation to Serbia between 8 and 10 December 2010.
Serbia considers its compliance with obligations undertaken by ratification of the Charter very important,
because preservation of linguistic diversity is one of the most valuable elements of its cultural heritage,
contributing to maintenance and development of European cultural wealth and tradition. With that, Serbia is
joining Europe in preservation and enhancement of the use of regional or minority languages, as one of the
fundamental postulates of the European area’s integration. Besides, preservation and development of
minority languages as one of the key identity elements of national minorities – the speakers of minority
languages – are part of the new minority policy pursued in the country within the process of building a
democratic state based on rule of law. Having in mind all the above mentioned, Serbia is sincerely committed
to compliance with obligations emanating from the Charter.
The national report on Charter implementation, which is the basis for monitoring, as well as the Report’s
supplement composed on the basis of the Committee of Experts’ questionnaire, was developed and fully
based on the principles of transparency.
The Second Periodical Report on the Charter’s Implementation was published on the website of the Human
and Minority Rights Directorate and made available to the public at: www.ljudskaprava.gov.rs, which meets
the obligation emanating from Article 2 of the Charter. Upon the completion of the second monitoring cycle,
the Human and Minority Rights Directorate will publish on its website: the Committee of Experts’ Second
Report on the Charter’s Implementation, the Republic of Serbia’s Comments to the Report and the
Recommendation of the Council of Europe’s Committee of Ministers on the Charter’s implementation in
Serbia upon the basis of the second monitoring cycle.
Serbia considers that it is of utmost importance for the Charter’s implementation to perpetuate an open and
constructive dialogue with the bodies competent for its Charter implementation. In these terms, Serbia finds
the Second Committee of Experts’ Report based on expert analysis of the legal acts, policies and practice
implemented in Serbia for minority languages.
Serbia’s comments to the Committee of Experts’ Second Report were prepared by the Human and Minority
Rights Directorate within the Ministry of Human and Minority Rights, Public Administration and the Local SelfGovernment. During the process of comment development, relevant line ministries and provincial secretariats
were consulted.
Starting from the fact that the authorities regularly cooperate with national minority councils as bearers of
cultural autonomy in the realms of education, cultural information and the official use of language and script,
as well with non-governmental organisations dealing with improvement and protection of minority languages
and organisations gathering the representatives of minority language speakers, it is attentively noted that a
range of observations and suggestions presented in the Committee of Experts’ Second Report is known to
the relevant authorities and their solutions are being actively sought.
Bearing in mind the positive nature of the Committee of Experts’ Second Report, Serbia is providing the
following comments:

47

II Comments on chapter 4 of the second report (sections А – Y)
Section F
In general, the state of use of regional or minority languages before courts is relatively good, despite
some problems in details. There have also been some negative side effects of the general judicial
reform which need to be addressed. However, the authorities have stated their intention to
strengthen positive measures in order to further facilitate the use of minority languages in courts.
The Republic of Serbia’s authorities, along with the already taken steps that the Committee of Experts was
informed of during the period upon the development of the Second Periodical Report on the Charter’s
Implementation, are carrying on with the activities toward enhancement of the implementation of the use of
minority languages in courts. Within the judiciary reform process in the Republic of Serbia, a special attention
was paid to election of judges trained for proceedings in national minority languages, as well as to recruitment
of court staff speaking some of the minority languages. According to the Ministry of Justice’s data, the
number of judges capable of presiding in proceedings in: Hungarian, at the Higher Court in Subotica – is 3, at
the Basic Court in Subotica – 13, Novi Sad’s Basic Court – 2; in Romanian, at the Basic Court in Pancevo –
2; in Slovakian, Pancevo’s Basic Court – 1; in Albanian, Basic Court in Vranje – 5 and in Bulgarian, Basic
Court in Vranje – 3.
In order to improve the rights of national minority members to the use of their respective native languages
before judiciary bodies, in early 2011 the Ministry of Justice and the Provincial Ombudsman launched an
initiative for professional training of judges to be able to preside in proceedings in national minority
languages. The judges’ training could be held at the Judicial Academy, supported by the Ministry of Justice
and the Provincial Ombudsman, who has voiced readiness to coordinate the organisation of professional
training within the free legal aid project. Both the Judicial Academy and the Supreme Cassation Court have
been informed of this initiative.
In order to reinforce the measures of facilitating the use of minority languages in courts, new Court Rules of
Procedure have been adopted, the implementation of which is monitored by the Ministry of Justice.
Compared to the previous, these rules, implemented as of 2010, regulate proceedings and submission of
decisions in national minority languages in more detail, and the novelty is in the obligation of proceedings’
record keeping in minority languages.
In order to avoid the unnecessary repetition regarding certain sections of Chapter 4 of the Second
Periodical Report – the Committee of Experts’ Findings in the second monitoring cycle, we would like
to refer to the relevant replies presented in Chapters III and IV of our Comments:
Regarding Section C: reply to Paragraph 30
Regarding Section Ј: reply to Paragraph 17
Regarding Section Y: reply to Paragraph 14

III Comments to chapters 1 and 2 of the second report
Paragraph 10
A particular problem exists regarding the Bunjevac and Vlach languages which both reach the
thresholds of 15% and 25% in several places. However, the Serbian authorities have informed the
Committee of Experts that the Bunjevac and Vlach languages are not officially used in any unit of
local self-government because they have not yet been standardised. The Committee of Experts
notes that the concept of "official use" in Serbia covers not just written, but also oral communication
with citizens for which standardisation is not necessary. Furthermore, there are plans to standardise
the Bunjevac and Vlach languages during the coming years. Against this backdrop, the Committee
of Experts is of the view that the Serbian authorities should consider flexible interim measures that
would introduce official use of Bunjevac and Vlach and thus secure the implementation of the
Charter.

48

The Republic of Serbia’s authorities deem the non-existence of standardised Bunjevac and Vlach languages
a realistic obstacle to their introduction into official use in the local self-government units where national
minority members reach the legally stipulated limits. Namely, by Article 11, Paragraph 3 of the Law on Official
Use of Language and Script it is stipulated that the official use of language and script imply in particular: the
use of national minority language in administrative and court procedures and the administrative and court
proceedings run in the national minority language; the use of national minority language in communication
between bodies with public competences and citizens; issuance of personal documents and keeping official
records and personal data collections in national minority languages, accepting those documents in minority
languages as valid; the use of national minority languages on voting tickets and electoral materials and use of
national minority languages in the work of representative bodies.
It is therefore incontestable that the existence of standardised language is a prerequisite for implementation
of this provision, in order to have written communication in a minority language, and the Republic of Serbia’s
authorities share the Committee’s opinion that for spoken communication with the citizens language
standardisation is not necessary.
Given that the Bunjevac and Vlach languages are not in official use in any local self-government unit, the
Republic of Serbia’s regulations prescribe that the bodies or organisations administering procedures provide
the use of minority languages for national minority members who exercise their rights and fulfill their
obligations before them (Article 16, Point 1 of the Law on Official Use of Language and Script). In that
context Paragraph 251 of the Second Periodical Report of the Charter’s Implementation should be observed,
stating that parties have the right to address local self-government units speaking national minority
languages. In practice, there are objective possibilities to exercise this right, apart from some places with low
percentage of minority language speakers, because part of the local self-government staff is made of
minority language speakers themselves. However, there are no accurate data on spoken referrals of parties
in minority languages in local self-government units, because the regulations do not stipulate keeping
separate records on that. Still, minority languages are in practice used in spoken communication with local
authorities, which is confirmed by data obtained from certain local self-government units. For instance,
according to the information provided by the Negotin municipality, where a certain number of Vlach speakers
are employed, almost all spoken communication with citizens – Vlach speakers flows in that language.
Paragraph 14
According to the Second Periodical Report, the national councils have no competences to establish
or proclaim what language is spoken by members of the national minority they represent.
Furthermore, the Committee of Experts observes that the divide between those speakers who
consider Vlach to be a variety of Romanian and those who consider it a language in its own right
hampers the application of the Charter to Vlach. It considers that the Serbian authorities should
initiate a dialogue between representatives of all speakers which could lead to a differentiated
approach in language promotion, permitting the use of Vlach and (standard) Romanian - rather than
only one of the two - in certain fields (e.g. education, media), if such requests are made by a
sufficient number of people.
The Republic of Serbia’s authorities consider the absence of standardised Vlach language, i.e. the lack of
script, the only obstacle to the full implementation of the Charter to this language, not as the Committee of
Experts alleged that “the divide between those who deem the language spoken by the Vlach a variant of
Romanian and those who consider it to be a separate language prevents the Charter’s implementation to the
Vlach language”. As stated in Paragraphs 104 and 105 of the Second Periodical Report on the Charter’s
Implementation, the state undertakes measures to encourage or facilitate the use of the Vlach language in
the areas where implementation does not necessitate standardisation, i.e. existence of script of the language
(news programmes in broadcast media and culture projects).
In Paragraph 42 of the Second Periodical Report on the Charter’s Implementation, the Republic of Serbia’s
position on the identity of the Vlach national minority and Vlach language was made clear. Starting from the
constitutional arrangements (Article 47) and the Law on Protection of the Rights and Liberties of National
Minorities (Article 5), the state is in practice governed by the fundamental principles of the freedom of national
determination and expression, so in this context it treats the Vlach national minority as a single national
identity, and the Vlach language as a separate language spoken by a vast majority of the Vlach. This way the
Republic of Serbia has accepted all the specificities implied by a national minority identity, including, in this
case, the basis of will voiced at the census and the language they speak. At the 2002 census, of 40,054
persons who declared themselves as Vlach, 91.89% stated that their mother-tongue was Vlach, 7.71% that
their mother-tongue was Serbian, 0.30% that their mother-tongue was Romanian, 0.01% that some other
languages were their native and 0.08% did not declare what their mother-tongue was or they were not
familiar with what their mother-tongue was.

49

The Law on National Minority Councils defined competences of national minority councils in the areas of
education, culture, information in minority languages and the official use of language and script. With election
of national minority councils in June 2010, they became the bearers of the right to self-government in these
areas. Bearing in mind that a certain number of the Vlach speak Romanian (0.30%), the Vlach National
Council has the possibility of finding better solutions to provide the use of language in the areas mentioned by
the Committee of Experts, within its competences.
Paragraph 17
Serbia has ratified the same undertakings in respect of all Part III languages. The Committee of
Experts notes as in the previous monitoring cycle that the undertakings which have been chosen by
Serbia, in particular those in education and the media, do not adequately reflect the situation of all
minority languages. For example, higher-level undertakings could be applied to Hungarian.
As stated in the replies to the additional questionnaire, when ratifying the Charter, i.e. defining language
issues and obligations from Part III of the Charter, the Republic of Serbia had the intention of providing equal
level of protection to all languages defined therein, i.e. of transposing identical paragraphs and subparagraphs for all of them. Such an intention resulted in defining languages that are in practice provided with
protection and improvement, in accordance with national legislation, by at least 35 paragraphs and subparagraphs from Part III of the Charter. Providing equal level of protection, as interpreted by the Republic of
Serbia’s authorities, the same rights are provided for speakers of languages to which the undertaken
obligations pertain, be them individual or in community with other members of their group, when regards the
language they speak. Understandably, the undertaken obligations are fulfilled in practice depending on many
factors, primarily on the number of a certain minority language speakers. The given practice in compliance
with obligations emanating from the Charter precisely confirms this fact. However, the authorities emphasise
that there is a legislative framework for using reinforced possibilities for speakers of certain minority
languages, without frustrating the equal protection level provided with transposing of identical paragraphs and
sub-paragraphs for all languages covered by obligations undertaken from Part III of the Charter. Providing the
equal protection level, as interpreted by the Republic of Serbia’s authorities, the identical rights are provided
for speakers of languages pertinent to the obligations undertaken, individually or in community with other
members of their group, when regards the language they speak. Arguably, in the social life reality, the
obligations undertaken are much more and more often implemented for the Hungarian language because of
the large number of its speakers. Such a possibility does not undermine the equal protection level and is
recognised, not only with regards to exercising language rights, in the Agreement between Serbia and
Montenegro and the Republic of Hungary on protection of the rights of the Hungarian national minority living
in Serbia and Montenegro and the Serbian national minority living in the Republic of Hungary. In accordance
with Article 2 Paragraph 4 of the Agreement, the successor of which is the Republic of Serbia, the state
parties take note of the way of exercising rights envisaged by the Agreement, many of which are the rights
regarding use and protection of the Hungarian language, can depend on the number of members of the
minority in question. Bearing the given provision in mind, the Republic of Serbia’s authorities have taken the
position that there is a quite reliable and sustainable legal basis for use of reinforced possibilities provided for
the Hungarian language speakers, without frustrating the equal protection level provided by undertaking the
identical paragraphs and sub-paragraphs for all languages covered by the obligations from Part III of the
Charter. This is clearly explicated in certain places of the reports on the Charter’s implementation in form of
statistical data.
Paragraph 21
There is still no stable presence of all Part II languages at primary and secondary school levels within
the framework of the models of minority-language education. Bunjevac is taught in some primary
schools, but not at pre-school and secondary levels. Czech is not yet taught in the public education
system. Apart from one bilingual kindergarten, German is only taught as a foreign language and not
within the models of minority-language education. The curriculum for teaching Macedonian with
elements of national culture has been developed, but the introduction of such teaching is pending.
Vlach remains completely absent from education.
As noted by the Committee of Experts in the comments, the Republic of Serbia established the education
system on/in regional or minority languages long ago. Such practice was reasserted with adoption of the Law
on the Bases of Education and Pedagogy System, with its Article 9 providing the possibility for national
minority members to get education in their respective mother-tongues, bilingually or in the Serbian language,
studying the subject of Native Language with Elements of National Culture. However, as stated on several
occasions, the introduction of teaching in/on a minority language into the Republic of Serbia's educational
system is primarily up to the national minority councils, since they are the bearers of the right to selfgovernment in the area of education, by Law on National Minority Councils. According to Article 13 of the
Law, the minority councils, inter alia, propose to the National Education Council the general bases of pre-

50

school education, curricula for primary and secondary schools and the bases of pedagogy programme, for
contents that reflect the identity of a national minority, especially in the areas of history, musical education
and visual arts, as well as the primary and secondary school programmes for national minority languages and
the language, or speech, of national minority with elements of national culture.
In the period after the Second Periodical Report on the Charter’s Implementation was developed, the Czech
National Minority Council drafted a curriculum for the Czech language with elements of national culture for the
first grade of primary school. Upon approval by the Ministry of Education and Science and the procedure of
application of sufficient number of interested children, teaching Czech language with elements of the national
culture will be organised as well.
IV. Comments on chapter 3 of the second periodical report
Paragraph 30
While acknowledging the economic difficulties in Serbia, the Committee of Experts urges the Serbian
authorities to secure adequate financial support that would allow national minority councils to
effectively execute their tasks.
The funds for national councils’ work, in accordance with provisions of the Law on National Minority Councils,
are provided from the budgets of the Republic of Serbia, the Autonomous Province, the local self-government
units, donations, and other revenues. The amount of public funds provided for activities of the national
councils is determined for each year by the Law on Budget of the Republic of Serbia and by decisions on
budget of the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina and local self-government units. More detailed regulation of
fund allocation from the Republic of Serbia’s budget for funding the work of national minority councils entered
into the National Minority Council Register, was defined by the Decree on the Procedure of Allocating Funds
from the Budget of the Republic of Serbia for Funding the Work of the National Minority Councils, adopted by
the Serbian Government in December 2010. For funding the regular activities, the national councils got the
total of 145,148,862.89 dinars from the Serbian national budget in 2010, and the funds envisaged for 2011
are 224,400,000 dinars.
The funds provided from the budget of the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina are allocated, in accordance
with decision of the province’s relevant authorities, to the national councils that have headquarters on the
territory of the autonomous province. From the budget of the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina, the national
councils received 30,635,000.00 dinars in 2010, and in 2011, the allocated funds are 40,000,000.00 dinars.
The funds provided from local self-government budgets are allocated, in accordance with decisions of the
relevant local authorities, to the national councils representing national minorities that make at least 10% total
population in the local self-government unit, or the national minorities the language of which is in official use
on the territory of local self-government unit.
The authorities, as stated before, have been making strenuous endeavours to provide financial support,
despite economic difficulties, so that the national councils could perform their duties efficiently.
Paragraph 45
In their replies to the questionnaire sent by the Committee of Experts, the Serbian authorities state
that there is no standard procedure for informing parents and/or pupils of the possibility to set up
minority language classes with fewer than 15 pupils. In addition, the authorities have no clear
information at their disposal as to how such information is provided, as the manner in which this is
done differs from one school to another. The Committee of Experts considers that more awarenessraising about the advantages of, and opportunities for, minority language education is needed as
many parents are under the impression that such teaching would be cumbersome and
counterproductive for the development of their children. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts
reiterates that a threshold of 15 pupils is too high for the purposes of the Charter as the speakers of a
number of minority languages in Serbia are unlikely to reach it. The Committee of Experts therefore
urges the Serbian authorities to inform pupils and parents more actively of the possibility to set up
minority language classes with less than 15 pupils and to encourage them to make use of it.
The authorities hold the position that learning in/about the national minority language does not depend on the
limited number of students, given that the Ministry of Education and Science, within the legal possibilities,
accommodates the needs of almost all schools that submit a request for even fewer than 15 students. The
activities within each school primarily depend on their development plan, enveloping priorities in attaining the
educational and pedagogic goals for a three-to-five year period. As development plans are adopted by
administrative bodies, upon the proposal, inter alia, of national minority councils, only a proactive approach of

51

national councils to this issue and their commitment to performing the duties undertaken can accelerate the
introduction of optional subject of mother-tongue with elements of national culture into schools, or tuition in
mother tongue.
Paragraph 52
The Serbian authorities state in the Second Periodical Report that Vlach is not taught at any level of
education since it is not standardised. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts notes that there are
Vlach speakers who are interested in the teaching of "Romanian with elements of national culture".
As regards Vlach, the Committee of Experts considers that the lack of standardisation should not
necessarily lead to a complete absence of Vlach from education. Rather, Vlach could be used orally
in kindergartens and in certain subjects of primary and secondary education as well as in extracurricular activities in which written communication plays no or a limited role. As far as Romanian is
concerned, the Serbian authorities may consider applying the models of minority language education
to those pupils who (or whose parents) request so. The Committee of Experts is of the view that
there is room for a differentiated, rather than a uniform and rigid approach to minority language
education, permitting the use of both Vlach and Romanian in conformity with the actual demand by
the speakers. Consequently, the Serbian authorities are invited to carry out their surveys at the
beginning of each school year in such a way that pupils (or parents) can choose between Vlach and
(standard) Romanian. The Committee of Experts also urges the Serbian authorities to introduce
Vlach into education even before a possible standardisation is achieved.
The Republic of Serbia has fulfilled legal conditions that make education in minority languages possible, as
reiterated on several occasions, through existence of three education models in primary and secondary
schools: in native language, bilingual and in the Serbian language with the possibility of studying native
language with elements of national culture. With election of national councils in 2010, in accordance with the
provisions of the Law on National Minority Councils, the councils as the holders of right to self-government
were given competences in the area of education. The national councils’ competences in the area of
education are laid down in Paragraph 35 of the Second Periodical Report on the Charter’s Implementation. In
accordance, with their competences, the national minority councils become initiators of introduction of tuition
in/about national minority languages, for those minority languages that have not been encompassed by the
Republic of Serbia’s educational system so far. Their engagement will determine the pace at which tuition in
national minority language will be introduced or studying the subject of Native Language with Elements of
National Culture. Thus, it is up to the Vlach National Council to not only initiate the introduction of the Vlach
language before standardisation of this language, but to also decide on the way in which this should be done
by proposing curricula for the Vlach language. As for the Committee of Experts’ appeal to the authorities to
conduct surveys at the beginning of each academic year in such a way that students (or their parents) can
choose between Vlach and (standard) Romanian, it should be emphasised that such surveys are under the
competences of the national minority councils and school boards.
Paragraph 208
No further information with respect to the practical implementation to each of the Part III languages
is provided in the Second Periodical Report. This is also the case for Albanian, Bosnian, Bulgarian,
Romany and Ukrainian, for which the Committee of Experts had lacked information in the previous
monitoring cycle. No information is provided with respect to measures taken to raise awareness of
civil servants with respect to the use of the correct form of the name in the regional or minority
language.
In order to get the national minority members acquainted with their right to inscription of personal names in
registry books in the minority language and script, the Ministry of Human and Minority Rights, Public
Administration and Local Self-Government has submitted the notification of the procedure and method of
inscription of national minority members in registry books to all administrative bodies entrusted with the affairs
of keeping registers and deciding in first-instance procedures in the area of registers, according to the Law on
Registers. At the same time, a request was sent out to post this notification on notice boards of local
administration, as well as in all areas within local self-government for which books are kept. In local selfgovernment units where, by Statute, national minority language(s) is(are) in official use, this notification is
posted in language and script of national minority(-ies) too. Besides, all the agencies entrusted with keeping
registry books were given instruction by the Ministry to get national minority members acquainted with the
right of inscription of personal names in language and script of the national minority member in all procedures
pertinent to inscription of certain facts into registers.

52

Paragraph 214
The Committee of Experts has been informed that in practice regional or minority language media
have been negatively affected by the privatisation process and by the allocation of frequencies and
issuing of broadcasting licences, pursuant to various legal changes. Only a third (404) of the total
number of applicants (1,170) for national, provincial, regional and local broadcasting licences
received them. Radio stations broadcasting in minority languages, for instance Radio Apatin, Radio
Backa Topola and Radio Kovin, have lost frequencies. Radio Subotica has lost two of its three
frequencies, which has led to a decrease in the amount of programmes in regional or minority
languages. No local frequencies were foreseen for Zrenjanin. According to the speakers, no
frequency was foreseen for media broadcasting in Bosnian. Another problem the representatives of
the speakers pointed out is that in practice, many broadcasters do not maintain the minority
language programmes, which they introduce in their offer only to receive broadcasting frequencies
or funds. The Committee of Experts has also been informed that there are contradictions in the legal
provisions regulating the media sector. For instance the Law on Local Self-Government and the Law
on National Minority Councils allow these entities to establish broadcasting media, which is
inconsistent with the Law on Broadcasting and the Law on Public Information. The same problem
arises in respect of the draft Law on Illicit Concentration and the Transparency of Ownership of
Public Media. The Committee of Experts underlines the importance of the coherence among the
various legal acts mentioned above and invites the Serbian authorities to comment on these issues
in the next periodical report.
The Republic’s Broadcasting Agency (RRA), in accordance with the Law on Broadcasting, issues licences
upon public calls. Public call is opened announced when, on the basis of broadcasting frequency distribution
plan there are possibilities to issue new programme broadcasting licences. At the time when the
Broadcasting Development Strategy was adopted, in 2005, the Agency registered, on the basis of public call
and data received from the relevant services within the Ministry for Capital Expenditures (telecommunication
sector), 755 broadcasters –543 solely radio stations; 73 solely TV stations and 139 stations broadcasting
both radio and TV programme. The Agency at the time assessed that the number of active
locations/frequencies (transmitters) in Serbia was even larger. At that moment the Radio Frequency
Allotment Plan was adopted, clearly determining the allocation of radio and/or TV frequencies at all levels of
broadcasting. The plan of radio frequency allotment is adopted by the relevant ministry in charge of
telecommunication issues and establishes the radio frequency distribution on the Republic of Serbia’s
territory, while the Agency, pursuant to the Plan, calls for public competition. When taking decisions on
issuing licences, the RRA Council considered the competition documentation according to the criteria
published and made available to applicants and all other interested parties. For all public calls one of the
criteria that have remained unchanged for civil sector stations is contribution to exercising the right of national
minorities, religious communities or an organisation or citizen’s association on a specific area they deal with.
Namely, the Broadcasting Law (Article 95, Paragraph 4) envisages the civil sector stations to be set up only
for local territory and not paying for programme broadcasting licence, only for broadcasting station. In most
cases civil sector stations applied for licences with documentation stating that as citizen associations they
would broadcast the programme specific for national minorities, be it contents in minority languages or
broadcasting specific music in a national minority language. Besides civil sector stations, programmes in
national minority languages are broadcast by public media companies still owned by local assemblies.
As for the contradiction of provisions in certain laws pointed to by the Committee of Experts, the authorities
share the opinion that the given laws need to be mutually harmonised, so in the forthcoming period the efforts
toward that end will be reinforced. The authorities would like to use this opportunity to point to the Committee
of Experts to the fact that mentioning the Law on Illicit Concentration and Transparency of Ownership of
Public Media in the context of contradictions in legal provisions regulating media sphere is not well-founded,
because it is a draft law that is not in force and it cannot be taken as relevant.
Paragraph 218
However, the Committee of Experts has been informed that the process of privatisation has
significantly affected the broadcasting of programmes in regional or minority languages. Two of the
radio stations broadcasting in regional or minority languages in Vojvodina, Radio Subotica and
Radio Srbobran, were among the first to be included in privatisation and they had no licence to
broadcast during the whole process. Privatisation problems were also pointed out in case of Radio
Sombor and Radio Backa Topola. The case of Radio Subotica has drawn a special attention of both
local and provincial authorities, as well as of non-governmental organisations.

53

In Paragraph 308 of the Second Periodical Report on the Charter’s Implementation, there are detailed
reasons why privatisation process of broadcast media outlets founded by local assemblies were terminated.
Bearing in mind that the process of media privatisation in the Republic of Serbia has been subject of ongoing
debates, the authorities deem this issue possible to be resolved by implementation of the Strategy for
Development of Public Information System in the Republic of Serbia by 2016, the draft of which is undergoing
public hearing now. The Strategy is expected to determine the basic modes of state participation in equity of
media, as well as further courses of privatisation. This will decide on the position of national minorities in
public information sector, i.e. determine the modes through which national minorities will exercise their right
to full, timely and unbiased information in their native languages.
Paragraph 245
The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking fulfilled for Albanian, Bosnian, Hungarian,
Romany, Romanian, Ruthenian, Slovak and Ukrainian and not fulfilled for Croatian. It has not enough
information to conclude with respect to Bulgarian.
Paragraph 256
The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking fulfilled for Albanian, Bosnian, Hungarian,
Romany, Romanian, Ruthenian, Slovak, partly fulfilled for Croatian and Bulgarian and not fulfilled for
Ukrainian. It encourages the Serbian authorities to take measures to extend the broadcasting of
private TV programmes in Croatian and Bulgarian and to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting
of television programmes in Ukrainian on a regular basis.
The given positions of the Committee of Experts refer to the Republic of Serbia’s obligation to encourage or
facilitate regular broadcasting of radio (Paragraph 245) and TV (Paragraph 256) programmes in minority
languages, where only private radio and TV broadcasters were taken into consideration when regards
compliance with obligations. The reply to question 27 of the additional questionnaire contains also the
information on the types of broadcasters of radio and TV programme. As presented, in accordance with the
law, a broadcaster can produce and broadcast radio and TV programme, inter alia, as a commercial and/or
TV station.
Private radio and TV broadcasters work on market principles, which is not to say that they do not broadcast
programme in minority languages too, if they have a secure and steady source of funding for such
programme production and broadcasting. With measures of financial assistance, the state provides support
to such media, on condition that they submit a request in competition procedure for allocation of national or
provincial budgetary funds. For example, the Provincial Secretariat for Culture and Public Information of the
Autonomous Province of Vojvodina has not received a single competition application demanding funds for
radio programme in Croatian so far, possibly because programme in the Croatian language is broadcast
continuously by two local radio stations – Radio Subotica and Radio Bac, both publicly owned.
Regarding compliance with private TV channels obligations, the Committee of Experts has been informed
that not a single privately owned TV broadcaster does not broadcast programme in Ukrainian. The Provincial
Secretariat for Culture and Public Information so far has not received any application demanding funds for TV
programme in Ukrainian, while it has financially supported productions in Croatian, like Yu Eco broadcaster
from Subotica, in order to make news programme in Croatian regular. This programme was renounced after
a while, for reasons unknown to the authorities.
Paragraph 271
There are one fortnightly and two monthlies in Romany and two monthlies and one quarterly in
Ukrainian. However, the Committee of Experts underlines in this respect that a "newspaper" in
conformity with the present undertaking has to be published at least weekly.
The Republic of Serbia’s authorities share the opinion of the Committee of Experts that a monthly does not
constitute newspapers in terms of informative media outlet, so the note presented in its Second Report is
formally correct. However, it needs to be especially emphasised that these are monthlies that are the only
media published in the Romany and Ukrainian languages respectively that are financially supported and
encouraged by the government, which does not and cannot have any influence on the frequency of their
publication. As in any democratic society, all decisions on informative public media, including the frequency of
publication, depend on their founders, in this case the respective National Minority Councils of the Romany
and Ukrainian national minorities.

54

B.
Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on
the application of the Charter by Serbia
Recommendation CM/RecChL(2013)3
of the Committee of Ministers
on the application of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages by Serbia
(Adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 11 June 2013
at the 1173rd meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies)
The Committee of Ministers,
In accordance with Article 16 of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages;
Having regard to the instrument of ratification submitted by Serbia on 15 February 2006;
Having taken note of the evaluation made by the Committee of Experts on the Charter with respect to the
application of the Charter by Serbia;
Bearing in mind that this evaluation is based on information submitted by Serbia in its national report,
supplementary information provided by the Serbian authorities, information submitted by bodies and
associations legally established in Serbia and information obtained by the Committee of Experts during its onthe-spot visit;
Having taken note of the comments made by the Serbian authorities on the contents of the Committee of
Experts' report;
Recommends that the authorities of Serbia take account of all the observations and recommendations of the
Committee of Experts and, as a matter of priority:
1. strengthen teacher training and provide adequate teaching materials for all regional or minority languages;
2. provide teaching of/in the Part II languages within the models of minority language education at all
appropriate stages;
3. secure the implementation of Articles 9 and 10, in particular regarding Romani and Ukrainian;
4. take the necessary practical measures to ensure that personal names and place-names in the regional or
minority languages can be used officially in conformity with the tradition and orthography of the languages
concerned;
5. continue to promote awareness and tolerance in Serbian society at large vis-à-vis the regional or minority
languages and the cultures they represent.

