Strasbourg, 23 September 2010

MIN-LANG/PR (2010) 7

EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES

Second periodical report
presented to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe
in accordance with Article 15 of the Charter

SERBIA

The Republic of Serbia

The European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages

The Second Periodical Report
Submitted to the Secretary General
of the Council of Europe
Pursuant to Article 15 of the Charter

Belgrade, September 2010
2

CONTENTS
1. INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………………6
2. Part I …………………………………………………………………………………12
2.1. Legislative and institutional changes after the first cycle of monitoring of the
implementation of the Charter …………………………………………………….12
2.1.1. Legislative changes ……………………………………………………….12
2.1.2. The National Strategy for the Improvement of the Status of Roma ……..17
2.1.3. Judicial Reform …………………………………………………………...17
2.1.4. Establishment of the Ministry of Human and Minority Rights …………..23
2.2. Novelties expected during the next monitoring cycle of the implementation of the
Charter …………………………………………………………………………….24
2.2.1. The Census ………………………………………………………………..24
2.2.2. Election of the national councils of the national minorities ……………...26
2.3. Implementation of the recommendations of the Committee of Ministers of the
Council of Europe (RecChL(2009)2) 28) …………………………………………29
2.4. Activities for the implementation of the box-recommendation of the Committee of
Experts with regard to the implementation of the Charter ………………………...33
3. PART II Implementation of Article 7 of the Charter ……………………………..38
3.1. Information on the policy, legislation and practice in the implementation of Part II Article 7 of the Charter ……………………………………………………………..38
3.1.1. Recognition of minority languages as cultural wealth ……………………39
3.1.2. Respect for the geographical areas of minority languages ……………….40
3.1.3. Resolute action to promote minority languages …………………………..40
3.1.4. Provision of conditions to facilitate and promote the use of minority
languages ………………………………………………………………..41
3.1.5. Establishment of cultural links between the groups speaking minority
languages ………………………………………………………………...41
3.1.6. Provision of the study of minority languages …………………………….41
3.1.7. Facilitation of the study of minority languages …………………………..41
3.1.8. Promotion of the studies and research of minority languages
at universities ……………………………………………………………49
3.1.9. Promotion of trans-national exchange ……………………………………49
3.1.10. Elimination of unfavourable treatment of use of minority languages and
adoption of special measures in favour of minority languages …………52
3.1.11. Promotion of mutual understanding between all language groups ……..54
3.1.12. Advisory bodies …………………………………………………………54
3.2. Information on the implementation of the Charter for Minority Languages for which
obligations from Part III of the Charter are not taken over ……………………..54
3.2.1. Bunjevac speech …………………………………………………………..54
3.2.2. Vlach language ……………………………………………………………57
3.2.3. Macedonian language …………………………………………………….59
3.2.4. German language …………………………………………………………61
3.2.5. Czech language …………………………………………………………..63
3

3.3. Activities for the implementation of box-recommendation of the Committee of
Experts related to Article 7 of the Charter ………………………………………65
3.3.1. Information on the practical use of Czech language by the administrative
authorities and at the Municipal Court of Bela Crkva …………………..65
3.3.2. Information on the structured policy for the protection and promotion of
Vlach language …………………………………………………………..66
3.3.3. Information on the activities to provide for the teaching of PART II
languages of the Charter ………………………………………………..67
3.3.4. Information on the activities to promote awareness and tolerance vis-à-vis
the minority languages and the cultures they represent …………………67
3.3.5. Information on provision of a stable legal basis for the functioning of
national minority councils and magistrate meetings of the Republic of
Serbia Council for National Minorities ………………………………….72
4. PART III IMPLEMENTATION OF MEASURES TO PROMOTE USE OF
MINORITY LANGUAGES IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE OBLIGATIONS
CONTAINED IN ARTICLE 2 PARAGRAPH 2 OF THE CHARTER ……………75
4.1. Article 8 –Education ………………………………………………………………75
4.1.1. Legislative changes of relevance for the implementation of Article 8 of the
Charter …………………………………………………………………..76
4.1.2. Pre-School education …………………………………………………….79
4.1.3. Primary education - Practice …………………………………………..…83
4.1.4. Secondary education – Practice ………………………………………….89
4.1.5. Technical and vocational education – Practice …………………………..92
4.1.6. University education – Practice ………………………………………….94
4.1.7. Adult education –Practice ………………………………………………100
4.1.8. Activities for the implementation of box-recommendation of the Committee
of Experts concerning Article 8 of the Charter ………………………..100
4.2. Article 9 - Judicial Authorities ………………………………………………….102
4.2.1. Legislation relevant for the implementation of Article 9 of the Charter ..103
4.2.2. Criminal proceedings ……………………………………………………103
4.2.3. Civil proceedings ………………………………………………………..106
4.2.4. Administrative disputes …………………………………………………110
4.2.5. Activities for the implementation of box-recommendation of the Committee
of Experts concerning Article 9 of the Charter ………………………..111
4.2.5.1. Information to citizens about the possibility of using minority
languages in courts ……………………………………………………111
4.2.5.2. Availability of the most important statutory texts in minority
languages ………………………………………………………………112
4.3. Article 10 - Administrative Authorities and Public Services …………………113
4.3.1. Submission of applications in minority languages to the state administration
bodies …………………………………………………………………..114
4.3.2. Submission of applications in minority languages to local or regional
authorities ………………………………………………………………114
4.3.3. Publishing of regional documents in minority languages ……………….117
4.3.4. Publishing of local documents in minority languages ………………….118
4

4.3.5. Use of traditional forms of place names in minority languages ………..119
4.3.6. Submission of applications to public services in minority languages ….125
4.3.7. Engagement of speakers of minority languages in public services …….127
4.3.8. Use and adoption of family names in minority languages ……………..127
4.3.9. Activities for the implementation of box-recommendations of the
Committee of Experts concerning Article 10 of the Charter ………….129
4.3.9.1. Activities to ensure submission of oral and written applications to
State authorities in minority languages ………………………………..129
4.3.9.2. Activities to ensure the publication of official documents in
minority languages ……………………………………………………..129
4.4. Article 11 – Media ………………………………………………………………..131
4.4.1. Novelties after the first cycle of monitoring of the implementation of the
Charter …………………………………………………………………132
4.4.1.1. Broadcasting licences for radio and TV programmes …………132
4.4.1.2. Measures for resolution of media issues ………………………133
4.4.2. Public broadcasting agencies …………………………………………....134
4.4.3. Encouragement and facilitation of radio in minority languages…………137
4.4.4. Encouragement and facilitation of television programmes in minority
languages ……………………………………………………………….146
4.4.5. Encouragement and facilitation of production and distribution of audio and
audio-visual works in minority languages ……………………………..151
4.4.6. Encouragement or facilitation of establishment and preservation of at least
one newspaper in minority languages ………………………………….154
4.4.7. Representation of the interests of users of minority languages …………166
4.4.8. Activities for the implementation of box–recommendation of the
Committee of Experts concerning Article 11 of the Charter …………..167
4.5. Article 12 - Cultural Activities and Facilities …………………………………..169
4.5.1. Encouragement of expression and access to works in minority
languages ………………………………………………………………..169
4.5.1.1. Libraries ………………………………………………………171
4.5.1.2. Cultural clubs, cultural centres and cultural institutes ………..173
4.5.1.3. Protection of cultural goods (cultural monuments, museums and
archives) ………………………………………………………………..174
4.5.1.4. Theatres ………………………………………………………..176
4.5.1.5. Publishing (literary works) …………………………………....182
4.5.1.6. Cultural manifestations ……………………………………..…193
4.5.2. Encouragement of access to works produced in minority languages …...201
4.5.3. Promotion of access of minority languages to works produced in other
languages ………………………………………………………………203
4.5.4. Encouragement of direct participation of the users of minority languages in
provision of the conditions and planning of cultural activities ………..204
4.5.5. Encouragement and provision of cultural activities in the territories
different from those where minority languages are not
traditionally used ……………………………………………………….205
4.6. Article 14 – Trans-National Exchanges………………………………………....206
4.6.1. Application of bilateral and multilateral arrangements ………………....206
5

4.6.2. Facilitation and improvement of co-operation between regional and local
authorities ………………………………………………………………206
5. SUPPLEMENTS ……………………………………………………………….….209
5.1. Supplement of the National Council of the Bosniak National Minority ….209
5.2. Supplement of the National Council of the Bunjevac National Minority ..216
5.3. Supplement of the National Council of the Romanian National Minority ..219

6

1. INTRODUCTION
1.

Pursuant to the provision of Article 15 of the European Charter on Regional or
Minority Languages (hereinafter referred to as the Charter), which is ratified with
the Law on Ratification of European Charter on Regional or Minority Languages
(the Official bulletin of Serbia and Montenegro – International Treaties, no.
18/05), the Republic of Serbia submits the Second Periodical Report within the
period from 2007-2009, conducted in accordance with the Revised Draft for
Periodical Reports (МIN-LANG (2009) 8), which was adopted at the 1056th
meeting of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe held on 6 May
2009.

2.

The Second Periodical Report on the implementation of the Charter was prepared
by the Ministry of Human and Minority Rights. The following state bodies took
part in the development of the Report: the Ministry of Culture, the Ministry of
Education, the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Public Administration and
Local Self-Government, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Department for
Legislature, as well as the provincial authorities of the Autonomous Province of
Vojvodina: The Provincial Secretariat for Regulations, Administration and
National Minorities, the Provincial Secretariat of Information, the Provincial
Secretariat of Education and the Provincial Secretariat of Culture.

3.

The following institutions were consulted in the compilation of the Report: The
Jablanica Administrative District, the South Bačka Administrative District, the
South Banat Administrative District, the Pčinjski Administrative District, the
Pirot Administrative District, the Raška Administrative District, the North Bačka
Administrative District, the North Banat Administrative District, the Middle
Banat Administrative District, the Srem Administrative District, the West Bačka
Administrative District and the Zlatibor Administrative District. The following
local self-governments took part in the compilation of this Report - Ada,
Aleksinac, Alibunar, Apatin, Bačka Palanka, Belgrade, Bečej, Bujanovac,
Valjevo, Vladičin Han, Vlasotince, Vrbas, Dimitrovgrad, Doljevac, Žabalj,
Žitište, Zrenjanin, Kanjiža, Kikinda, Kovin, Kragujevac, Lebane, Leskovac,
Medveña, Niš, Novi Bečej, Novi Pazar, Novi Sad, Odžaci, Pančevo, Pirot,
Plandište, Požarevac, Preševo, Prijepolje, Senta, Sečanj, Sjenica, Smederevo,
Sremska Mitrovica, Subotica, Surdulica, Titel, Šabac and Šid and Telekom Srbija
a.d., Elektroprivreda Srbije and PTT Srbija public companies. The Statistical
Institute of the Republic of Serbia, the Republic Broadcasting Agency and the
Serbian Business Registers Agency participated and were consulted in the
compilation of this Report. The High Judicial Council and the following courts
took part in compilation of this Report: the Magistrate Courts in Vršac, Zrenjanin,
Leskovac, Pančevo, Pirot, Sombor and Subotica, the High Courts in Leskovac,
Novi Pazar, Novi Sad, Pančevo, Pirot, Sremska Mitrovica, Subotica, Užice and
the Administrative Court in Belgrade.

7

4.

Contribution to the compilation of the Report were given by the following cultural
institutions: the Institute of the Culture of the Hungarians of Vojvodina, the
Institute of the Culture of the Slovaks of Vojvodina and by the following libraries:
the Savraš Gabor Library in Ada, the Public Library in Apatin, the Public Library
in Babušnica, the Vuk Karadžić Public Library in Bač, the Veljko Petrović Public
Library in Bačka Palanka, the Public Library in Bačka Topola, the Štefan Homola
Library in Bečej, the Public Library in Bor, the Hristov Botev Public Library in
Bosilegrad, the 14th November Public Library in Bujanovac, the Danilo Kiš
Public Library in Vrbas, the Town Library in Vršac, the Detko Petrov Public
Library in Dimitrovgrad, the Public Library in Žagubica, the Branko Radičević in
Žitište, the Žarko Zrenjanin Town Library in Zrenjanin, the Dr.Đorñe Natošević
Public Library in Inñija, the Jožef Atila Library in Kanjiža, the Jovan Popović
Public Library in Kikinda, the Municipal Library in Kovačica, the Vuk Karadžić
Library in Kovin, the Public Library in Kula, the Petar Petrović Njegoš Municipal
Library in Medveñe, the Stevan Sremac Public Library in Niš, the Dositej
Obradović Public Library in Novi Pazar, the Town Library in Novi Sad, the
Library of Matica Srpska in Novi Sad, the Town Library in Pančevo, the Public
Library in Pirot, the Public Library in Plandište, the Town Library in Priboj, the
Vuk Karadžić Library in Prijepolje, the Town Library in Senta, the Karlo Bijelicki
Town Library in Sombor, the Gligorije Vozarević, Sremska Mitrovica, the Dositej
Obradović Public Library, Stara Pazova, the Sirmai Karolj Library in Temerin,
the Dr Ejup Mušović Public Library in Tutin and the Simeon Piščević Public
Library in Šid; the publishing houses – the Magyar Szó in Novi Sad, the Zenta in
Senta, the Ruske slovo in Novi Sad, the Hlas L´udu in Novi Sad, the Slovak
Publiching Centre in Backi Petrovac and the Hrvatska Riječ in Subotica; Media the Republic and Provincial Public Service, RTV Bujanovac, RTV Valjevo, RTV
Vrbas, RTV Viktorija, Vršac, RTV Caribrod, Dimitrovgrad, RTV Inñija, RTV
Kruševac, RTV Kovačica, RTV Krajina, Negotin, RTV Nišava, Niš, RTV
Pančevo, RTV Aldi,Preševo, RTV Panon, Subotica, RTV YU ECO, Subotica,
RTV Trstenik, Radio Ada,Radio Far, Alibunar, Radio Bačka, Bač, Radio Trend,
Bačka Topola, Radio Regije, Bačka Topola, Radio Bački Petrovac, Radio Bela
Crkva, Radio Bosilegrad, Radio Ema, Bujanovac, Radio Zrenjanin, Panda Radio,
Kanjiža, Radio Kikinda, Radio Bus, Kovin, RaDio Zenit, Kula, Radio Novi Bečej,
Radio Kisač, Novi Sad, Radio Blue, Odžaci, Radio BluePlus, Odžaci, RAdio
Odžaci, Radio Sečanj, Radio Sombor, Radio Srbobran, Radio Subotica, Radio
Stara Pazova, Radio Temerin, Bosniak Radio, Tutin, Radio Šid, TV Petrovac,
Bački Petrovac, Regional TV Novi Pazar, TV Mozaik, Novi Sad, TV Odžaci, TV
ForUM, Prijepolje, TV Tutin and Sremska TV, Šid.

5.

Although all national councils of the national minorities were invited to
participate in the compilation of this Report, the National Council of the Bosniak
National Minority, the National Council of the Bunjevac National Minority and
the National Council of the Romanian National Minority only responded and their
reports are presented in the supplements making an integral part of this Report.
Around thirty relevant minority NGO's were invited but only four of them
responded: the Paulj Matejić Vlach Community, the Vardar Civic Association of
8

the Macedonian National Minority of the South Banat District, the Association for
the Ruthenian Language, Literature and Culture and the Matica Češka.
6.

The following national regulations were used in this Report:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Constitutional law, criminal law, the judiciary, state and public administration
The Constitution of the Republic of Serbia (the Official Gazette of RS, no. 98/06)
The Statute of the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina (the Official Gazette of
APV, no. 17/91)
The Statute of the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina (the Official Gazette of
APV, no. 17/09)
The Law on the Establishment of Specific Competences of AP Vojvodina (the
Official Gazette of RS, nos. 6/02, 101/07 – other law, 51/09 – other law)
The Law on the Establishment of Specific Competences of AP Vojvodina (the
Official Gazette of RS, no. 99/09 - in force since 1 January 2010
The Law on Prohibition of Discrimination (the Official Gazette of the RS, no.
22/09)
The Law on Protection of Rights and Freedoms of National Minorities (the
Official Gazette of FRY, no.11/02 and the Official Gazette of RS, no. 72/09 –
other law)
The Law on the National Councils of the National Minorities (the Official
Gazette of the Republic of Serbia, no. 72/09)
The Decree on Establishment of the Council of National Minorities (the Official
Gazette of RS, no. 50/09)
The Law on Official Use of Languages and Scripts (the Official Gazette of RS,
nos. 45/91, 53/93 – other law, 67/93 – other law, 48/94 – other law, 101/05, –
other law and 30/10)
The Decision on More Specific Regulation of Certain Issues concerning Official
Use of Languages and Scripts of National Minorities in the Territory of the
Autonomous Province of Vojvodina (the Official Gazette of APV, nos. 8/03 and
9/03)
The Criminal Procedure Code (the Official Gazette of FRY, nos. 70/01 and 68/02,
the Official Gazette of RS, nos. 58/04, 85/05,115/05, 49/07, 122/08 – other law,
20/09 – other law and 72/09)
The Law on Litigation (the Official Gazette of RS, nos. 125/04 and 111/09)
The Law on General Administrative Procedure (the Official Gazette of FRY, nos.
33/97, 31/01 and the Official Gazette of RS, no. 30/10)
The Law on Administrative Disputes (the Official Gazette of RS, no. 111/09)
The Law on High Judicial Council, (the Official Gazette of the RS, no.116/08)
The Law on Organization of Courts (the Official Gazette of RS, nos. 116/08 and
104/09)
The Law on High Judicial Council (the Official Gazette of RS, no.116/08)
The Law on Judges (the Official Gazette of RS, nos. 116/08, 58/09 – US and
104/09)
9

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

•
•

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

The Law on Public Prosecutor (the Official Gazette of the RS, nos.116/08 and
104/09)
The Law on Seats and Territorial Jurisdiction of Courts and Public Prosecutor (the
Official Gazette of RS, no. 116/08
The Law on Territorial Organization of the Republic of Serbia (the Official
Gazette of RS, no. 129/07)
The Law on Local Self-Government (the Official Gazette of RS, no.129/07)
The Law on Registers of Births, Marriages and Deaths (the Official Gazette of
RS, no. 20/09)
Instruction on Administration and Forms of Registers of Births, Marriages and
Deaths (the Official Gazette of RS, nos. 109/09, 4/10 – correction and 10/10)
The Law on Political Parties (the Official Gazette of RS, no. 36/09)
The Law on Associations (the Official Gazette of RS, no. 51/09)
The Law on Ministries (the Official Gazette of the RS, nos. 65/08 and 36/09 –
other law)
The Law on Maximum Number of Employees in Local Administration (the
Official Gazette of the RS, no. 104/09)
The Law on Population Census, Households and Flats in 2011 (the Official
Gazette of the RS, no. 104/09)
The Decision on More Specific Regulation of Certain Issues concerning Official
Use of Languages and Scripts of National Minorities in the Territory of the
Autonomous Province of Vojvodina (the Official Gazette of APV, nos. 8/03, 9/03
and 18/09 - Documents Title Changes)
The Provincial Decision on the Provincial Administration of Vojvodina (the
Official Gazette of APV, no. 4/10)
The Provincial Decision on the Government of the Autonomous Province of
Vojvodina (the Official Gazette of APV, no. 4/10)
Education
The Law on Basic Principles of the Educational System (the Official Gazette of
RS, nos. 62/03, 64/03, 58/04, 62/04) - which was revoked on 11 September 2009
The Law on Basic Principles of the Educational System (the Official Gazette of
RS, no. 72/09)
The Law on Primary Education (the Official Gazette of RS, nos. 50/92 and 22/02)
The Law on Secondary Schools (the Official Gazette of RS, nos. 50/92, 24/96,
23/02 and 25/02)
The Law on Higher Education (the Official Gazette of RS, nos. 76/05 and 97/08)
The Law on Textbooks and Other Teaching Materials (the Official Gazette of RS,
no.72/09)
The Law on Pre-school Education (the Official Gazette of RS, no.18/10)
The Strategy of Professional Training Development in the Republic of Serbia (the
Official Gazette of RS, no.1/07)
Culture
10

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

•
•

•

•

•

•

•

The Law on Activities of the Public Interest in the Field of Culture (the Official
Gazette of RS, no. 49/92) - was revoked on 11 March 2010
The Law on Culture (the Official Gazette of the Republic of Serbia, no. 72/09) applied since 11 March 2010)
The Law on Librarianship (the Official Gazette of RS, no. 34/94)
The Decision on the Foundation of the Institute for the Culture of Vojvodina (the
Official Gazette of APV, nos. 10/03 and 8/06)
The Decision on the Foundation of the Institute for the Culture of Vojvodina
Hungarians (the Official Gazette of APV, no. 7/08)
The Decision on the Foundation of the Institute for the Culture of Vojvodina
Romanians (the Official Gazette of APV, nos. 7/08 and 3/10)
The Decision on the Foundation of the Institute for the Culture of Vojvodina
Ruthenians (the Official Gazette of APV, no. 7/08)
The Decision on the Foundation the Institute for the Culture of Vojvodina Slovaks
(the Official Gazette of APV, nos. 7/08 and 6/09)
The Decision on the Foundation the Institute for the Culture of Vojvodina Croats
(the Official Gazette of APV, nos. 7/08 and 6/09)
Media
The Public Information Law (the Official Gazette of RS, nos. 43/03, 61/05 and
71/09)
The Broadcasting Law (the Official Gazette of RS, nos. 42/02, 97/04, 76/05,
62/06, 85/06, 86/06 and 41/09)
Economic and Social Life
The Family Law (the Official Gazette of RS, no. 18/2005)
The Republic of Serbia is the successor to bilateral agreements on the protection
of national minorities, which also regulate the use of minority languages in part.
Agreement between Serbia and Montenegro and the Republic of Hungary on the
Protection of Rights of the Hungarian National Minority Living in Serbia and
Montenegro and of the Serbian National Minority Living in the Republic of
Hungary (the Official Bulletin of Serbia and Montenegro - International Treaties,
no. 14/04)
The Agreement between Serbia and Montenegro and the Republic of Macedonia
on the Protection of the Serbian and Montenegrin National Minorities in the
Republic of Macedonia and of the Macedonian National Minority in Serbia and
Montenegro (the Official Bulletin of Serbia and Montenegro - International
Treaties, no. 6/05)
The Agreement between the Federal Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the Government of Romania on Cooperation in the Field of the
Protection of National Minorities (the Official Gazette of FRY - International
Treaties , no. 14/04)
The Agreement between Serbia and Montenegro and the Republic of Croatia on
the Protection of Rights of the Serbian and Montenegrin Minorities in the
11

Republic of Croatia and the Croatian Minority in Serbia and Montenegro (the
Official Bulletin of Serbia and Montenegro - International Treaties, no. 3/05)

•
•
•
•

The Republic of Serbia is the successor to bilateral agreements on co-operation in
the fields of culture and education, which are of relevance to minority languages:
Agreement between Serbia and Montenegro and the Republic of Hungary on Cooperation in the Fields of Education, Culture, Youth and Sports (the Official
Gazette of RS - International Treaties, no. 38/09)
The Agreement on Co-operation in the Fields of Education, Culture and Sports
between the Federal Government of FR Yugoslavia and the Government of the
Slovak Republic( the Official Gazette of FRY - International Treaties, no. 4/96)
The Agreement on Co-operation in the Fields of Education, Culture and Sports
between the Federal Government of FR Yugoslavia and the Government of the
Ukrainian (the Official Gazette of FRY - International Treaties, no. 4/96)
The Agreement between the Federal Government of FR Yugoslavia and the
Government of the Republic of Croatia (the Official Gazette of FRY International Treaties, no. 12/02)

7.

In order to avoid unnecessary repetitions, the data on the financial support by the
state contained in the Tables of the Report relate to the period of three years
(2007-2009), unless indicated otherwise and these data are expressed in dinars.
For the purpose of harmonization of the terms used with the Charter, the
following expressions are used in the Report: minority language is the synonym
for national minority language and user or minority language speaker as the
synonym of a national minority member.

8.

All expressions used in this Report in male gender also include the same
expressions in female gender.

12

2. PART I
2.1. Legislative and institutional changes after the first cycle of monitoring of the
implementation of the Charter
2.1.1. Legislative changes
9.

Within the period after the first monitoring cycle of the implementation of the
Charter, a series of regulations containing the provisions of importance for the use
and protection of minority languages has been adopted in the Republic of Serbia.
The following paragraphs of this section give a review of those regulations,
whereas their contents shall be explained in details in certain parts of the Report.

10.

The Law on Prohibition of Discrimination, which was adopted in 2009, elaborates
in details the prohibition of discrimination by the constitution, prescribes general
prohibition of discrimination, forms and cases of discrimination, as well as the
procedures for protection against discrimination and establishment of the
Commissioner for protection of gender equality, as an independent state body,
which is independent in the performance of jobs established by this law. The Law
prescribes prohibition of discrimination of national minorities and the members of
national minorities based on language, whereas incitement and encouragement of
non-equality, hatred and intolerance are qualified as severe forms of
discrimination, inter alia, on language basis.

11.

The Law on the National Councils of the National Minorities, which was adopted
in 2009, represents further elaboration of the Law on Protection of the Rights and
Freedoms of National Minorities concerning the issues of competence and
election procedure of national councils of national minorities, through which
national minorities accomplish the right to self-government in the field of use of
language and script, education, information and culture. This Law governs the
competences of national councils of national minorities in the above mentioned
fields, the relation with state bodies, bodies of autonomous provinces and with
local self-government units, election procedure of national councils, financing of
activities of national councils and other issues of importance for the activities of
national councils.

12.

The Law on Local Self-Government, which was adopted in 2007, regulates the
units of local self-government, criteria of their establishment, competence, bodies,
supervision over their acts and activities, protection of local self-government and
other issues of importance for the accomplishment of rights and duties of the units
of local self-government. A municipality is the basic territorial unit in which local
self-government is accomplished, which is capable to exercise independently
through its bodies all the rights and duties within its competence and which has at
least 10,000 inhabitants (Article 18 of the Law). Article 20 prescribes
competences of a municipality, among which in item 33 of the same Article it is
prescribed that a municipality, through its bodies, in accordance with the
13

Constitution and law, shall establish minority languages and scripts in official use
in its territory, which are established in the statute of the municipality.
13.

The Law on Fundamentals of Educational System, which was adopted in 2009,
prescribes the bases of the system of pre-school, primary and secondary
education, prepares legal support to the reform of educational system together
with the reform of university education and introduces teaching assistants into the
educational system at all schools. The mission of the teaching assistant is to
render assistance and additional support to children and pupils, in compliance
with their requirements as well as to render assistance to teachers, child minders
and experts associates in order to promote their work with children and pupils
who need additional educational support (which is of particular significance for
the children and pupils of the Roma national minority). Article 9 paragraph 2
prescribes that education-teaching for the members of national minorities is
carried out in their mother tongue. In exceptional cases it may be carried out
bilingually or in Serbian language, in accordance with a special law.

14.

The Law on Culture, which was adopted in August 2009, has been in force since
11 March 2010. According to this law the national councils of national minorities
are given a possibility to take care of the implementation of the cultural policy of
national minorities and, pursuant to law, to participate in the decision making
process or to decide on their own on certain issues concerning their culture, to
establish cultural institutions and other legal entities in culture (Article 5).
Concerning the establishment of the National Council of Culture, which is
established as an expert-consulting body, for the purpose of provision of
permanent expert support to maintenance, development and spreading of culture
(Article 15), two members of national minorities are elected under the proposal of
national councils of national minorities (Article 16 Paragraph 2 Item 7). The
Republic of Serbia, the Autonomous Province and the unit of local selfgovernment may establish institutions to preserve, promote and develop cultural
specificies and to preserve national identity of national minorities, namely, they
may, under the proposal of the national council of national minority, by amending
the document on incorporation for certain existing institutions define that such
institutions are of particular importance for preservation, promotion and
development of cultural specificies and preservation of national identity of
national minorities (Article 24 Paragraph 1). Also, the board of directors of the
institution being established in accordance with the mentioned Article of this law,
must include at least one member of the board elected under the proposal of the
relevant national council of national minority. If several national councils of
national minorities propose some member of the board of directors, this proposal
is to be jointly submitted by all interested national councils of national minorities
(Article 42 Paragraph 3). If it is about the supervision board of the institution, at
least one member of the supervision board is to be elected under the proposal of
the relevant national council of national minority (Article 46 Paragraph 2). An
artist, namely an expert in culture who had supremely contributed to the national
culture by his/her activities in the field of culture, namely who had contributed to
14

culture of national minorities in the Republic of Serbia and who meets other
requirements prescribed by this law and regulations adopted to implement this
law, may gain the status of a distinguished artist, namely the status of a
distinguished expert in culture (Article 68).
15.

In the course of 2009 another two laws were also adopted, which forward and
affirm the use of minority languages. The Law on Political Parties defines the
notion of a political party of some national minority (Article 3), and pursuant to
this, the use of the name of a political party of some national minority in minority
language as well (Article 18 Paragraph 2). This Law prescribes that the name of a
political party of some national minority, if stipulated by the statute, may also be
in the minority language and script, and that it is to be entered in the Registry of
Political Parties after its name in Serbian and Cyrillic script. The Law on
Associations contains a provision prescribing that the name of an association, if
prescribed by the statute, may also be in minority language and script. The name
in minority language and script is entered in the Registry of Associations after its
name in Serbian and Cyrillic script (Article 13 Paragraph 4).

16.

The Law on the Establishment of Competence of the Autonomous Province of
Vojvodina, which was adopted in 2009, and has been in force since 1 January
2010, prescribes that the AP of Vojvodina, through its bodies, shall define in more
details and secure the accomplishment of the rights of national minorities in the
territory of AP of Vojvodina to education in mother tongue, at all educational
levels, in accordance with the Law (Article 38); it prescribes the needs and the
interest of national minorities in the field of culture and secures funds for their
accomplishment (Article 41 Item 2); it provides a part of funds or other conditions
for the operations of public media in minority languages in order that national
minorities accomplish their right to information in their mother tongue and
cherish their own cultures and identity (Article 62 Item 3); it prescribes in more
details the official use of minority languages and scripts in the territory of AP of
Vojvodina, pursuant to the law and also performs supervision (Article 76
Paragraphs 1 and 2).

17.

The Statute of the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina in Article 7 stipulates that
multi-linguistic, multi-cultural and multi-religious properties present a general
value of particular importance for AP of Vojvodina. All provincial bodies and
organizations have the duty, within the framework of their rights and obligations,
to encourage and help to maintain and develop multi-linguistic and cultural
heritage of national minorities traditionally living in AP of Vojvodina, as well as
to promote mutual respect and learning of different languages, cultures and
religions in AP of Vojvodina through special measures and activities. The Statute
expands the scope of languages in official use in the operations of bodies and
organizations of the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina for another language.
Namely,
Article
26
paragraph
1
http://www.puma.vojvodina.gov.rs/dokumenti/zakoni/Statut_APV_2009.pdfregul
ates that in addition to Serbian language and Cyrillic script, Hungarian, Slovak,
15

Romanian and Ruthenian languages and their scripts, which have already been
officially used, Croatian language is also officially used, which was only
officially used in the activities of the Assembly of the Autonomous Province of
Vojvodina. Paragraph 3 of this Article defines that the right to official use of
minority languages not stated otherwise, is accomplished in accordance with
ratified international treaties, laws and by the decision of the Provincial
Assembly.
18.

The Law on Amendments and Supplements to the Law on the Official Use of
Language and Script, which was adopted in 2010, made co-ordinations with the
Constitution, and it simultaneously made co-ordination with international treaties
and the Law on Protection of Rights and Freedoms of National Minorities. The
amendment of the provision of Article 1 of this Law prescribes, pursuant to
Article 10 paragraph 1 of the Constitution of the Republic of Serbia, that Serbian
language and Cyrillic script are in the official use in the Republic of Serbia. The
amendment of Article 7 and Article 11 of this Law, made the co-ordination of the
text of the law with the recognized Framework Convention on Protection of
Rights of National Minorities (Article 11 paragraph 3). In this sense, the provision
of Article 7 paragraph 3 of this Law was deleted, according to which geographic
names and personal names contained in public notifications could not be replaced
with other names, and they were written in the language of national minorities in
compliance with the spelling of the language concerned. By amending Article 11
of this Law and by adding new Article 18а, the text of the law was also coordinated with the Law on Protection of Rights and Freedoms of National
Minorities (the provisions of Articles 9 and 11), as well as with the Constitution
of the Republic of Serbia (the provision of Article 79 paragraph 1). The new text
of the provision of Article 11 paragraph 1 defines that in the territory of the unit
of local self-government where the members of national minorities traditionally
live, their language and script may be equally officially used, and it shall by all
means be introduced by the unit of self-government by its statute, if the
percentage of the members of the national minority concerned in the total number
of population in its territory reaches 15% according to the results of the last
census (paragraph 2). Paragraph 3 of this Article defines what the official use of
some national minority language implies in particular (use of languages of
national minorities in administrative and court proceedings and conduct of
administrative and court proceedings in the language of national minorities; use of
the language of national minorities in communications of the bodies having public
powers with citizens; issuance of public documents and keeping official records
and personal data basis in the languages of national minorities and acceptance of
documents in those languages as valid documents; use of the languages of
national minorities in election lists and election materials; use of the languages of
national minorities in the activities of representation bodies, and paragraph 4
prescribes that in the units of local self-government where a minority language
had been introduced into official use, this national minority language and script is
also used to write, according to the tradition of the speaker of the language
concerned, the names of bodies exercising public powers, names of the units of
16

local self-government, names of dwelling areas, squares and streets and other
topographic signs. Minority languages in official use in the activities of the bodies
of the autonomous province are specified in its statute (paragraph 5), and laws and
regulations are also published in minority languages, in accordance with special
law (paragraph 6). Amendments and supplements to the Law on the Official Use
of Language and Script in Article 11 paragraphs 7 and 8 define the right of
members of national minorities whose number in the total population of the
Republic of Serbia reaches at least 2% according to the latest census to refer to
the republic bodies in their languages and the right to get a reply in the language
concerned, namely the right of the members of national minorities whose number
in the total population of the Republic of Serbia does not reach 2% to refer to the
republic bodies in their languages and the right to get a reply in the language
concerned through the unit of local self-government where the language of the
national minority concerned is in official use, whereas the unit of local selfgovernment shall provide translations and bear the costs of translation of a letter
addressed to the republic body and of the reply to it. By adding new Article 18а it
is prescribed that the members of national minorities have the right to free choice
and use of personal names and names of their children, as well as to entering these
personal names in all public books, public records and personal data basis
according to the minority language and spelling, which does not exclude that
those names are also parallelly written according to Serbian language and
spelling. The amendments and supplements of the Law on Official Use of
Language and Script regulate that in the unit of local self-government where the
national minority was in official use on the date of this law entering into force, the
language concerned remains in official use, in accordance with the provision of
Article 20 paragraph 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of Serbia, which
establishes that the achieved level of human and minority rights may not be
decreased.
19.

The Decree on the Council of National Minorities of the Republic of Serbia,
which was adopted by the Government in 2009, prescribes that Council shall
preserve, improve and protect national, ethnic, religious, linguistic and cultural
specific properties of the members of the national minorities in the Republic of
Serbia. Its competences are: affirmation of national symbols and national minority
holidays under the proposal of the councils of national minorities; consideration
of bills and other regulations of significance for the fulfilment of national
minority rights and the submission of its opinions to the Government; monitoring
and consideration of achievements of the rights of the national minorities in the
Republic of Serbia and the status of relations between the national minorities in
the Republic of Serbia; proposals of measures for the promotion of the full and
effective equality of the members of the national minorities and consideration of
measures proposed for these purposes by other bodies and authorities; monitoring
of achievement of co-operation of national councils with the competent
authorities of the Republic of Serbia, autonomous provinces, municipalities,
towns and the city of Belgrade; consideration of conditions for the activities of
national councils; consideration of accomplishment of international obligations in
17

respect of the achievement of the rights of the members of national minorities in
the Republic of Serbia and accomplishment of international co-operation of the
national councils; consideration of the list of candidates for the National
Educational Council in accordance with Article 11 of the Law on Fundamentals
of Educational System, and consideration of international or regional agreements
related to the status of national minorities and protection of their rights in the
process of conclusion of such agreements. The members of the Council are: the
Prime Minister of the Government of the Republic of Serbia, who is also the
President of the Council, the ministers of human and minority rights, state
administration and local self-government, culture, education, youth and sports,
religion, justice and internal affairs as the representatives of the Government, and
the presidents of national councils of national minorities and the president of the
Federation of Jewish Communities in Serbia whose position is equal to the
position of the presidents of national councils. The Decree prescribes that that the
National Council shall meet when necessary, however at least four times per year.
The National Council enacts decisions by the majority of votes of all the
representatives of the Government and the majority of votes of all presidents of
national councils. At the request of the presidents of at least half of the presidents
of national councils, the President of the National Council has a duty to call for a
meeting not later than 30 days. Experts and administrative-technical support to the
National Council is provided by the Ministry of Human and Minority Rights.
2.1.2. The National Strategy for the Improvement of the Status of the Roma
20.

With the aim to improve the status of the Roma national minority, which is
characterized as the most vulnerable minority group in the Republic of Serbia and
its integration in public, economic, cultural and political life, in 2009 the
Government of the Republic of Serbia adopted the Strategy for the Improvement
of the Status of the Roma and the Action Plan for its implementation with the
projection of budgetary funds for the implementation of planned measures and
activities for the period 2009-2011. Beside this aim, the Strategy gives the basis
for identification and implementation of affirmative action, primarily in the field
of education, health, employment and housing. The Acton Plan, which presents
operationalisation of the priorities and recommendations of the Strategy, includes
13 fields in total: in addition to action plans in four priority fields (the Roma
Decade, employment, housing, education and health, adopted in 2005, which
had been revised, the Action Plan also prescribes measures and activities in the
field of social care, internally displaced persons, returnees pursuant to the readmission agreements and it also covers the field of improvement of the status of
women, than the field of media, culture and information in mother tongue as well
as in the fields of discriminations and political participation

2.1.3. Judicial reform
21.

Since the establishment of the Government of the Republic of Serbia in 2008, the
Ministry of Justice started root reforms with the aim to recover the obsolete and
18

non-functional judicial system. In this respect, a large number of researches and
analyses on the conditions and problems of the judiciary sector has been carried
out. The necessity to carry out the reform is caused by the fact that the judicial
system did not function in accordance with the European standards and the needs
of the citizens of the Republic of Serbia in a longer period of time, in spite of
numerous legal amendments made since 2000. The necessity to carry out the
reform is also caused by numerous complaints by citizens related to the
proceedings not conducted within reasonable time, impossibility of execution of
judgements, as well as to corruption. Some of the failures found are: excessively
complex and wide system of courts, unclear election standards, discharge from
duty, results of activities and progress of judges, lack of capacities for integrated
budget planning and definition and measuring of the system results, obsolete
models of functioning of judiciary administration, as well as the lack of
continuing training of judges and other holders of judiciary positions. The reform
of the judiciary has the aim to provide fair and just trials, facilitate access to
justice, proceedings in the language of the party in the place of residence,
responsibility of judges for unprofessional and unconscious work, closure of
proceedings within reasonable time, as well as efficient execution of final court
decisions. The members of national minorities are enabled to have an easier
access to justice and to accomplish their rights before courts in accordance with
the European standards. In December 2008, the National Assembly of the
Republic of Serbia adopted a package of laws on judiciary, which included the
following laws: the Law on High Judicial Council, the Law on the State Council
of Prosecutors, the Law on Judges, the Law on Public Prosecutor’s Office, the
Law on Organization of Courts, the Law on Seats and Territorial Jurisdiction of
Courts and Public Prosecutor’s Offices, the Law on Amendments and
Supplements to the Law on Torts. The judicial laws organize the judicial network
in an entirely new way, including new institutions to guarantee independence and
numerous mechanisms that should enable higher efficiency and better functioning
of the system. These laws establish the High Judicial Council and the State
Council of Prosecutors as new institutions of judiciary and a new network of
judicial institutions that should considerably contribute to the improvement of
efficiency and decrease the workload of the existing network of courts. The new
laws also prescribe the establishment of an independent judiciary budget, as well
as the elaboration of clear and measurable criteria for the election, progress,
disciplinary procedure and discharge from duty of judges and prosecutors, to be
managed by the High Judicial Council and the State Council of Prosecutors on
the occasion of assessment of the work of judges and prosecutors.
22.

The new legal solutions have also amended the competence and the organization
of courts. Article 11 of the Law on Organization of Courts establishes that judicial
power in the Republic of Serbia belongs to courts of general and special
jurisdiction. The courts of general jurisdiction are magistrate courts, high courts,
appellate courts and the High Court of Cassation, whereas the courts of special
jurisdiction are commercial courts, the Commercial Appellate Court,
misdemeanour courts, the High Misdemeanour Court and the Administrative
19

Court. The introduced appellate courts adopt decisions on appeals against the
decisions of the magistrate and the high courts. The High Court of Cassation is
the highest court in the Republic of Serbia.
23.

The Law on Seats and Regions of Courts and Public Prosecution Offices has been
in force since 1 January 2010, which establishes, inter alia, magistrate and high
courts, defines their seats and regions where they have jurisdiction and specify the
departments of the Administrative Court and the regions where they exercise
jurisdiction1. The new organization of the judicial network enables the citizens of
the Republic of Serbia to have access to justice in the same places where they had
accomplished this right before, and it should also considerably contribute to more
efficient, impartial and objective trials. The 138 existing municipal courts have
been reorganized into 34 magistrate courts, of which each one has court units.
Specialization within the framework of municipal courts has also been foreseen to
contribute to considerably higher efficiency and quality of judgements. Article 3
of this Law prescribes the following magistrate courts: 1) The First Magistrate
Court in Belgrade, for the territory of the municipalities of Vrčar, Voždovac,
Zvezdara, Zemun, Novi Beograd, Palilula, Rakovica, Savksi venac, Stari grad and
Čukarica; 2) The Second Magistrate Court in Belgrade for the territory of the
municipalities of Barajevo, Grocka, Lazarevac, Mladenovac, Obrenovac, Sopot
and Surčin, with court units in Lazarevac, Mladenovac, Obrenovac and Sopot; 3)
The Magistrate Court in Bor, for the territory of the municipality of Bor; 4) The
Magistrate Court in Valjevo, for the territory of the municipalities of Lajkovac,
Ljig, Mionica, Osečina and Ub and for the town of Valjevo, with court units in
Lajkovac, Ljig, Mionica, Osečina and Ub; 5) The Magistrate Court in Vranje, for
the territory of the municipalities of Bosilegrad, Bujanovac, Vladičin Han,
Preševo, Surdulica and Trgovište and for the town of Vranje, with the court units
in Bosilegrad, Bujanovac, Vladičin Han, Preševo and Surdulica; 6) The
Magistrate Court in Vršac, for the territory of the municipalities of Bela Crkva,
Vršac and Plandište, with the court units in Bela Crkva and Plandište; 7) The
Magistrate Court in Zaječar, for the territory of the municipalities of Boljevac,
Knjaževac and Sokobanja and for the town of Zaječar, with the court units in
Boljevac, Knjaževac and Sokobanja; 8) The Magistrate Court in Zrenjanin, for the
territory of the municipalities Žitište, Novi Bečej and Sečanj and for the town of
Zrenjanin, with the court units in Novi Bečej and Sečanj; 9) The Magistrate Court
in Jagodina, for the territory of the municipalities of Rekovac and Svilajnac and
for the town of Jagodina, with the court units in Rekovac and Svilajnac; 10) The
Magistrate Court in Kikinda, for the territory of the municipalities of Kikinda,
Nova Crnja, Novi Kneževac and Čoka, with the court units in Nova Crnja and
Novi Kneževac, 11) The Magistrate Court in Kosovska Mitrovica, for the territory
of the Autonomous Province Kosovo and Metohija, with the court units in
Goraždevac, Gračanica, Ranilug and Štrpac; 12) The Magistrate Court in
Крагујевцу, for the territory of the municipalities of Aranñelovac, Batočina,
Knić, Lapovo, Rača and Topola and for the town of Kragujevac, with the court

1

The newly organized judicial network shows only the types of courts of relevance for the implementation
of the Charter.

20

units in Aranñelovac, Batočina, Rača and Topola; 13) The Magistrate Court in
Kraljevo, for the territory of the municipalities of Vrnjačka Banja and Raška and
for the town of Kraljevo, with the court units in Vrnjačka Banja and Raška; 14)
The Magistrate Court in Kruševac, for the territory of the municipalities of
Aleksandrovac, Brus, Varvarin, Ćićevac and Trstenik and for the town of
Kruševac, with court units in Aleksandrovac, Brus, Varvarin and Trstenik; 15)
The Magistrate Court in Leskovac, for the territory of the municipalities of
Bojnik, Vlasotince, Lebane, Medveña and Crna Trava and for the town of
Leskovac, with court units in Vlasotince and Lebane; 16) The Magistrate Court in
Loznica, for the territory of the municipalities of Krupanj, Ljubovija and Mali
Zvornik and for the town of Loznica, with court units in Krupanj and Ljubovija;
17) The Magistrate Court in Negotin, for the territory of the municipalities of
Kladovo, Majdanpek and Negotin, with court units in Kladovo and Majdanpek;
18) The Magistrate Court in Niš, for the territory of the municipalities of
Aleksinac, Gadžin Han, Doljevac, Ražanj and Svrljig and for the town of Niš,
with court units in Aleksinac, Ražanj and Svrljig; 19) The Magistrate Court in
Novi Pazar, for the territory of the municipalities of Sjenica and Tutin and for the
town of Novi Pazar, with court units in Sjenica and Tutin; 20) The Magistrate
Court in Novi Sad, for the territory of the municipalities of Bač, Bačka Palanka,
Bački Petrovac, Beočin, Bečej, Vrbas, Žabalj, Srbobran, Sremski Karlovci,
Temerin and Titel and for the town of Novi Sad, with court units in Bač, Bačka
Palanka, Bački Petrovac, Beočin, Bečej, Vrbas, Žabalj, Srbobran, Temerin and
Titel; 21) The Magistrate Court in Pančevo, for the territory of the municipalities
of Alibunar, Kovačica, Kovin and Opovo and for the town of Pančevo, with court
units in Alibunar, Kovačica and Kovin; 22) The Magistrate Court in Paraćin, for
the territory of the municipalities of Despotovac, Paraćin and Ćuprija, with court
units in Despotovac and Ćuprija; 23) The Magistrate Court in Pirot, for the
territory of the municipalities of Babušnica, Bela Palanka, Dimitrovgrad and
Pirot, with court units in Babušnica, Bela Palanka and Dimitrovgrad; 24) The
Magistrate Court in Požarevac, for the territory of the municipalities of Veliko
Gradište, Golubac, Žabari, Žagubica, Kučevo, Malo Crniće and Petrovac na
Mlavi and for the town of Požarevac, with court units in Veliko Gradište, Žabari,
Žagubica, Kučevo and Petrovac na Mlavi; 25) The Magistrate Court in Požega,
for the territory of the municipalities of Arilje, Ivanjica Kosjerić and Požega, with
court units in Arilje, Ivanjica and Kosjerić; 26) The Magistrate Court in
Prijepolje, for the territory of the municipalities of Nova Varoš, Priboj and
Prijepolje, with court units in Nova Varoš and Priboj; 27) The Magistrate Court in
Prokuplje, for the territory of the municipalities of Blace, Žitoraña, Kuršumlija,
Merošina and Prokuplje, with court units in Blace and Kuršumlija; 28) The
Magistrate Court in Smederevo, for the territory of the municipalities of Velika
Plana and Smederevska Palanka and for the town of Smederevo, with court units
in Velika Plana and Smederevska Palanka; 29) The Magistrate Court in Sombor,
for the territory of the municipalities of Apatin, Kula and Odžaci and for the town
of Sombor, with court units in Apatin, Kula and Odžaci; 30) The Magistrate Court
in Sremska Mitrovica, for the territory of the municipalities of Inñija, Irig,
Pećinci, Ruma, Stara Pazova and Šid and for the town of Sremska Mitrovica, with
21

court units in Inñija, Irig, Pećinci, Ruma, Stra Pazova and Šid; 31) The Magistrate
Court in Subotica, for the territory of the municipalities of Ada, Bačka Topola,
Kanjiža, Mali Iñoš and Senta and for the town of Subotica, with court units in
Ada, Bačka Topola, Kanjiža and Senta; 32) The Magistrate Court in Užice, for the
territory of the municipalities of Bajina Bašta and Čajetina and for the town of
Užice, with court units in Bajina Bašta and Čajetina; 33) The Magistrate Court in
Čačak, for the territory of the municipalities of Gornji Milanovac and Lučani and
for the town of Čačak, with court units in Gornji Milanovac and Guča; 34) The
Magistrate Court in Šabac, for the territory of the municipalities of Bogatić,
Vladimirci and Koceljeva and for the town of Šabac, with court units in Bogatić,
Vladimirci and Koceljeva. Article 4 of the Law prescribes that high courts are: 1)
the High Court in Belgrade, for the territory of the First and the Second
Magistrate Courts in Belgrade; 2) the High Court in Valjevo, for the territory of
the Magistrate Court in Valjevo; 3) the High Court in Vranje, for the territory of
the magistrate Court in Vranje; 4) the High Court in Zaječar, for the territory of
the Magistrate Court in Bor and for the territory of the Magistrate Court in
Zaječar; 5) the High Court in Zrenjanin, for the territory of the Magistrate Court
in Zrenjanin and for the territory of the Magistrate Court in Kikinda; 6) the High
Court in Jagodina, for the territory of the Magistrate Court in Jagodina and for the
territory of the Magistrate Court in Paraćin; 7) the High Court in Kosovska
Mitrovica, for the territory of the Magistrate Court in Kosovska Mitrovica; 8) the
High Court in Kragujevac, for the territory of the Magistrate Court in Kragujevac;
9) the High Court in Kraljevo, for the territory of the Magistrate Court in
Kraljevo; 10) the High Court in Kruševac, for the territory of the Magistrate Court
in Kruševac; 11) the High Court in Leskovac, for the territory of the Magistrate
Court in Leskovac; 12) the High Court in Negotin, for the territory of the
Magistrate Court in Negotin; 13) the High Court in Niš, for the territory of the
Magistrate Court in Niš; 14) the High Court in Novi Pazar, for the territory of the
Magistrate Court in Novi Pazar; 15) the High Court in Novi Sad, for the territory
of the Magistrate Court in Novi Sad; 16) the High Court in Pančevo, for the
territory of the Magistrate Court in Vršac and for the territory of the Magistrate
Court in Pančevo; 17) the High Court in Pirot, for the territory of the Magistrate
Court in Pirot; 18) the High Court in Požarevac, for the territory of the Magistrate
Court in Požarevac; 19) the High Court in Prokuplje, for the territory of the
Magistrate Court in Prokuplje; 20) the High Court in Smederevo, for the territory
of the Magistrate Court in Smederevo; 21) the High Court in Sombor, for the
territory of the Magistrate Court in Sombor; 22) the High Court in Sremska
Mitrovica, for the territory of the Magistrate Court in Sremska Mitrovica; 23) the
High Court in Subotica, for the territory of the Magistrate Court in Subotica; 24)
the High Court in Užice, for the territory of the Magistrate Court in Požega, the
Magistrate Court in Prijepolje and the Magistrate Court in Užice; 25) the High
Court in Čačak, for the territory of the Magistrate Court in Čačak; 26) the High
Court in Šabac, for the territory of the Magistrate Court in Loznica and for the
territory of the Magistrate Court in Šabac. Article 8 of this Law prescribes the
following departments of the Administrative Court, which has been established
for the territory of the Republic of Serbia, with the seat in Belgrade: 1)
22

Department in Kragujevac, for the territories of the high courts in Jagodina,
Kragujevac, Kruševac, Kraljevo, Novi Pazar, Užice and Čačak; 2) Department in
Niš, for the territory of the high courts in Vranje, Kosovska Mitrovica, Leskovac,
Niš, Prokuplje and Pirot; 3) Department in Novi Sad, for the territory of the high
courts in Zrenjanin, Novi Sad, Pančevo, Sombor, Sremska Mitrovica and
Subotica.
24.

Minority languages have been in official use at the following magistrate
courts:

The Magistrate Courts
Magistrate Court in Vranje
Magistrate Court in Vrsac
Magistrate Court in Zrenjanin
Magistrate Court in Kikinda
Magistrate Court in Leskovac
Magistrate Court in Novi Pazar
Magistrate Court in Novi Sad
Magistrate Court in Pancevo
Magistrate Court in Pirot
Magistrate Court in Prijepolje
Magistrate Court in Sombor
Magistrate Court in Sremska Mitrovica
Magistrate Court in Subotica

Minority languages in official use
Albanian; Bulgarian
Hungarian, Romanian, Slovak and Czech
Hungarian, Romanian, Slovak
Hungarian
Albanian
Bosniak
Hungarian, Ruthenian, Slovak
Hungarian, Romanian, Slovak
Bulgarian
Bosniak
Hungarian, Ruthenian, Slovak
Ruthenian, Slovak
Hungarian, Croatian

Minority languages have been in official use at the following high courts:
The High Courts
High Court in Vranje
High Court in Zrenjanin
High Court in Leskovac
High Court in Novi Pazar
High Court in Novi Sad
High Court in Pancevo
High Court in Pirot
High Court in Sombor
High Court in Sremska Mitrovica
High Court in Subotica
High Court in Užice

25.

Minority languages in official use
Albanian; Bulgarian
Hungarian, Romanian, Slovak
Albanian
Bosniak
Hungarian, Ruthenian, Slovak
Hungarian, Romanian, Slovak and Czech
Bulgarian
Hungarian, Ruthenian, Slovak
Ruthenian, Slovak
Hungarian, Croatian
Bosniak

Minority languages have been in official use at the following departments of
the Administrative Court:

Administrative court units
Units in Kragujevac
Units in Niš
Units in Novi Sad

Minority languages in official use
Bosniak
Albanian; Bulgarian
Hungarian, Romanian, Ruthenian, Slovak,
Croatian and Czech

23

26.

The set of judicial laws prescribes novelties related to election of judges and
prosecutors being the members of national minorities. For example, in Article 46
the Law on Judges prescribes that on the occasion of election and proposals for
election of judges discrimination on any grounds is prohibited, that care should be
taken of the national composition of population, adequate representation of the
members of national minorities and of the knowledge of professional legal
terminology in minority languages, which is in official use at court. The election
procedure has entirely been transferred to the new body, the High Judicial
Council, which had adopted the Rules on the Criteria and Norms for Assessment
of Qualifications, Skills and Adequacy of Judges. The Law on Public Prosecution
Offices prescribes in Article 182, which relates to the proposal and election of
candidates for the position of public prosecutors, that the new body, the State
Council of Prosecutors, on the occasion of proposals and election, shall take into
account qualifications, skills and adequacy of candidates, according to the criteria
and norms for the assessment of qualifications, skills and adequacy prescribed by
this body in accordance with the law. On the occasion of election and proposal of
candidates for the position of public prosecutor, any discrimination on any
grounds is prohibited, and care shall be taken of the national composition of
population, adequate representation of the members of national minorities and
knowledge of professional legal terminology in the minority language in official
use at court. The similar rule also applies to prosecution apprentices. Namely,
Article 122 of the Law on Public Prosecution Offices prescribes that on the
occasion of employment of prosecution apprentices special care shall be taken of
the national composition of population, adequate representation of the members
of national minorities and knowledge of professional legal terminology in the
minority language in official use at court.

2.1.4. Establishment of the Ministry of Human and Minority Rights
27.

The establishment of the Government of Republic of Serbia in July 2008 also
included the establishment of the Ministry for Human and Minority. Article
26 of the Law on Ministries prescribes that the Ministry for Human and
Minority Rights shall perform the jobs of state administration related to: the
general issues of the status of the members of the national minorities, keeping
the registry of the national councils of the national minorities, election of the
national councils of the national minorities, protection and promotion of
human and minority rights, preparation of regulations on human and minority
rights, monitoring of harmonization of the national regulations with the
international treaties and other international legal documents on human and
minority rights, representation of the Republic of Serbia before the European
Court of Human Rights, the status of the members of the national minorities
living in the territory of the Republic of Serbia and accomplishment of
minority rights, accomplishment of contacts of the national minorities with
their native countries,
policy against discrimination, the status and
accomplishment of competence of the national councils of the national
minorities, co-ordination of activities of the state administration bodies in the
24

areas of protection of human rights and other activities prescribed by law. The
establishment of the Ministry of Human and Minority Rights, which also
includes the Sector for Improvement and Protection of Rights of National
Minorities, the institutional bases for a comprehensive and entire approach in
protection, affirmation and improvement of minority rights in the Republic of
Serbia in accordance with the Constitution, positive regulations and the
ratified international treaties in this field.
2.2. Novelties expected during the next monitoring cycle of the implementation of
the Charter
2.2.1. The Census
28.

The last population census in the Republic of Serbia was conducted in 2002, and
the new population census shall be conducted in 2011. The Law on Census of
Population, Households and Flats prescribes that the census shall include the
following: citizens of the Republic of Serbia, foreign citizens and stateless
persons who have residence in the Republic of Serbia, whether at the time of the
census they shall be in the Republic of Serbia or abroad, households of the
mentioned persons and flats and other dwelling premises. The census shall also
include the citizens of the Republic of Serbia, foreign citizens and stateless
persons who have residence abroad who shall be living in the Republic of Serbia
at the time of the census for at least one year. The following data shall be
collected about the persons to be covered by the census: name and surname, sex,
date of birth and personal identification number of citizens, place of birth, place
of residence of the mother at the time of the person's birth, dwelling area from
which the person had moved in and the year of moving in, state from which the
person moved in, year of moving in and the main reason of moving in, marital
status, number of live-born children and years of their birth, citizenship, national
affiliation, mother tongue, religion, literacy, education, title, school attendance,
activity, profession, employment status, activity, sources of income, capacity of
supporting person, place of work, namely, place of school attendance and
frequency of return to place of permanent residence, functional capacity of
persons to perform everyday actions, relation with the person the household is
registered with and the reason of absence, namely, presence in the place of
census. The Law on Census prescribes the role and the jobs of the Republic
Statistical Institute, census commissions and units of local self-government in the
performance of census, the jobs of ministries and special organizations, as well as
the role of the Republic Geodetic Institute. Also, this Law prescribes the
obligations and duties of the person providing such data and of the persons
performing jobs related to the census. The census officials, instructors, controllers
and other persons performing jobs related to the census are obliged to take strict
care of the precision of entered data, namely, of the precise data processing
provided by the persons giving such data. Since this Law prescribes the protection
of the collected data, persons performing jobs related to the census are obliged to
keep the data collected from the persons subject to the census as confidential,
25

whereas the data collected in the census shall be explicitly used for statistical
purposes. Any person included in the census is obliged to provide the data
required from him/her in the census and to provide exact and complete replies in
the census forms. The data about the absent members of households shall be
provided by the person who knows such data best, and for children younger than
fifteen years, such data shall be provided by parent, adopter parent or custodian.
29.

Within the framework of ethnic properties of the population, the census shall
collect the data about national affiliation, religion and mother tongue (mother
tongue means the language the person learned in the earliest childhood, namely,
the language the person concerned finds to be his/her mother tongue, if several
languages are spoken within the household; for dumb and deaf persons, it is
prescribed to enter the language mainly spoken at their home as a reply to this
question). It has been foreseen that the question concerning national affiliation
and mother tongue shall be designed as an open reply (Article 27 of this Law).
The methodological instructions specify that the person performing the census is
obliged to enter the exact reply of the person being asked to the question
concerning ethnic properties. In case some person shall not wish to declare
himself/herself about national affiliation, the person performing the census shall
write as a reply to this question: „Not declare“. The very Census Form contains
legal remedy that pursuant to Article 47 of the Constitution of the Republic of
Serbia a citizen is not obliged to declare himself/herself about his/her national
affiliation. The Law on the Census (Article 30) prescribes penalty provisions in
case the persons performing the jobs related to the census, contrary to the will of
the person included in the census, require that such a person declares
himself/herself about his/her national affiliation or religion. The basic census
forms shall be printed in Serbian in Cyrillic script. To enter the replies, the
persons performing the census may use both Cyrillic and Latin scripts. The basic
census forms shall be translated into the language of 6 mostly represented national
minorities (according to the results of the 2002 Census), as well as in English. The
persons performing the census shall use these forms only as samples. In view of
extraordinary delicacy of the questions concerning ethnic characteristics of the
population, the methodological instructions strictly prescribe that in case the
person performing the census makes an error when entering the replies to these
questions, even if a letter is wrong, no corrections are permitted. In such cases, the
person performing the census is obliged to fill in a new Census Form, whereas the
Census containing an error must be cancelled and returned to the instructor. The
instructor shall keep records of each person performing the census within his/her
competence (in average from 8 to 10 persons performing the census) concerning
the total number of forms he/she had received, the number of filled in forms, the
number of returned forms having an error and the number of returned –empty
forms.

30.

Intensive methodological-organizational preparations for the forthcoming census
have been in progress at the Republic Institute of Statistics, which relate to:
preparation of final content of basic census forms (Questionnaire or Question List
26

and Questionnaire for Households and Flats), preparation of methodological
instructions, definitions of programme how to make tables of census results,
preparation of media campaign, co-operation with ministries, which have,
according to the Law on Census, obligations in preparation and implementation of
the census of specific categories of persons, such as listing of persons assigned to
diplomatic-consular and other representative institutions of the Republic of Serbia
and who work with commercial companies abroad, listing of military and civil
persons living at the time of the census at military camps, military schools and
similar military institutions, etc. Preparation of classification of national
affiliation, mother tongue and religion has been in progress. Before the adoption
of the final decision on modalities of these categories, the classification shall be
forwarded to the competent institutions for verification (the Ministry of Human
and Minority Rights, the Ministry of Religions, the Ombudsman, etc.).
31.

The new population census shall also provide the statistical data on ethnic
characteristics, which are the base for the continuation of the policy of
affirmation, as well as undertaking of measures for further promotion of minority
rights in the Republic of Serbia, including the right to use minority languages, too.

2.2.2. Election of the national councils of the national minorities
32.

The elections of the members of all national councils were held simultaneously on
6 June 2010. Bearing in mind the assessments and opinions of the Committee of
Experts, stated in its first report, that the national councils of national minorities
present a particularly suitable method of taking into accounts the needs and
wishes of the groups using regional or minority languages, and that additional
efforts must be made in order that the speakers of the Albanian and Czech
languages also have representatives in the form of such bodies, the Ministry of
Human and Minority Rights had held meetings with the representatives of the
interested national minorities, especially with the representatives of the Albanian
national minority, at which the Law and the obligations to be fulfilled by them
were presented in order to be able to establish their national councils. During the
elections for the national councils of the national minorities, 436,334 members of
16 national minorities (Albanian, Ashkali, Bosnian, Bunjevac, Bulgarian, Vlach,
Greek, Egyptian, Hungarian, German, Romani, Romanian, Ruthenian, Slovak,
Ukrainian and Czech national minorities) registered in the special election list
before 21 May 2010, when the election list was closed, had opportunities to vote
directly for the members of the national councils of the national minorities. Direct
elections were carried out at 858 polling stations. Three national minorities
(Macedonian, Slovak and Croatian) elected their national councils the same day
through the electronic assembly. The entire election material was available in
bilingual forms, Serbian and minority language and script in the official use in the
unit of local self-government where the election took place.

33.

By the election of their national councils, national minorities get legitimate
representatives for protection, maintenance, fostering and improvement of the
27

rights to their identity and their own language and script, as guaranteed by the
Constitution and the national regulations, as well as the international treaties on
human and minority rights signed by the Republic of Serbia. Since the national
councils of national minorities are also advisory bodies to the state authorities, by
the election of minority representatives as their members, the state gets the
partners in creation and implementation of minority policy the final strategic goal
is the integration of national minorities into all spheres of social life of the
Republic of Serbia.
34.

In the Section 2.12. of the First Periodic Report on the implementation of the
Charter it is explained that the national councils of national minorities are a form
of cultural autonomy of national minorities and functional decentralization
introduced into the legal system in 2002, by the adoption of the Law on Protection
of Rights and Freedoms of National Minorities. The elaboration of this Law on
the issues of competences and procedure of election of national councils of
national minorities, through which the members of national minorities accomplish
the right to self-government in the field of official use of language and script,
education, information and culture, is the Law on the National Councils of the
National Minorities. Article 10 of this Law prescribes general competences of
national councils. National councils adopt and amend their statutes, financial
plans and statements, they dispose of their own property, decide on the names,
symbols and seals of national councils, establish national symbols, signs and
holidays of national minorities, establish institutions, associations, foundations
and commercial companies in the field of culture, education, information and
official use of language and script, propose representatives of national minorities
in the council of ethnic relations in the units of local self-government and
establish and grant recognitions. The power of national councils to initiate
adoption of laws and other regulations in the field of education, culture,
information and official use of language and script is of particular importance, as
well as the power to monitor their implementation in practice. In addition to the
above mentioned powers, national councils also have the right to initiate before
the Constitutional Court, the Ombudsman, the provincial and local ombudsmen,
under certain conditions, the procedure of decision making on protection of
individual and collective rights of national minorities.

35.

The competences of the national councils in the field of education are prescribed
in the provisions of Articles 12-15 of the Law. The national councils may, in
accordance with the law, establish institutions for education and up-bringing,
accommodation of pupils and students and exercise the rights of founders. The
Republic, the Autonomous Province and the units of local self-government may
either entirely or partially transfer the founders' rights in respect of these
institutions to the national councils. The national councils have special powers at
the educational institutions where the teaching is also carried out in minority
languages or where speech, language or culture of national minority is studied as
a special subject. The national council shall propose to the National Educational
Council general guidelines of pre-school programmes, curricula and the
28

programmes of primary and secondary education and up-bringing, the programme
of primary and secondary education and up-bringing for minority languages and
shall give the opinion to the National Educational Council on the curricula for
Serbian language as a non-mother tongue. The National Educational Council may,
only under the previous approval of the national council, propose to the ministry
in charge of educational affairs to approve the use of textbooks and teaching aids
the contents of which express specific properties of the national minorities
concerned. The Minister shall approve the use of domestic or imported textbooks
in the language of national minority under the proposal of the national council.
The national councils also have other powers in the field of education.
36.

In the field of culture (Article 16-18 of the Law), the competences of the national
councils are defined in a similar way as the competences in the field of education.
The national councils shall establish cultural institutions to preserve cultural
specific properties and national identity of national minorities and shall exercise
the rights and obligations of founders. The Republic, the Autonomous Province
and the units of local self-government may either entirely or partially transfer the
founders' rights to the national councils. The national councils have the power to
appoint a member of the board of directors of the institution concerned, give
opinions on the proposed members of the board of directors and give opinion in
the procedure of appointment of the director of the institution that the national
council had established to be of special importance for preservation of identity of
national minority. The national councils shall establish the strategy of cultural
development of national minority, define which institutions and manifestations in
the field of culture are of special importance for preservation, promotion and
development of specific properties and national identity of a certain national
minority, propose at least one candidate for the joint list of candidates for the
election of the National Council for Culture and also have other competences in
the field of culture.

37.

In the field of information (Article 19-21 of the Law), the national councils may
either independently or together with other legal entities establish the institutions
and commercial companies to perform newspaper-publishing and radio-television
activities, printing and reproducing of media programmes and exercise the rights
and duties of founders. The founder’s rights in the public companies and
institutions in the field of public information, which had been established by the
Republic, the Autonomous Province or the unit of local self-government may be
transferred to the national councils. The Law prescribes that the national councils
shall participate in the management of the relevant institutions, give opinions in
the procedure of appointment of the members of the board of directors, the
programme board and the managing director of the Radio-Broadcasting Agency
of Serbia, give opinions in the procedure of appointment of the members of the
board of directors, the programme board and the managing director of the RadioBroadcasting Agency of Vojvodina, establish the criteria for the election of the
editor in charge of the programme in minority language at the public service
institution, etc. The national council shall adopt the strategy of information
29

development in minority language and give proposals to the Republic RadioBroadcasting Agency on the occasion of preparation of the strategy of radiobroadcasting development.
38.

In respect of the competences in the field of the official use of language and
script, (Article 22 of the Law), the national councils shall establish the traditional
names of the units of local self-government, settlements and other geographic
names in minority languages if some minority language is in the official use in
such areas, propose to the competent authority to display the names of the units of
local self-government, settlements and other geographic names in minority
languages, propose to establish minority language and script as the official
language and script in the unit of local self-government, propose to amend the
names of streets, squares and other parts of settlements that had been established
to be of special importance for the national minority concerned, propose to the
competent authority to supervise the official use of minority language and script,
etc..

2.3. Implementation of the recommendations of the Committee of Ministers of the
Council of Europe (RecChL(2009)2)
39.

On the occasion of assessment of the First Period Report on the implementation
of the Charter, the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
recommended to the authorities of the Republic of Serbia to take into account all
observations of the Committee and stressed the following recommendations as
priorities:
Recommendation 1: promote awareness and tolerance in Serbian society at large
vis-à-vis the regional or minority languages and the cultures they represent.

40.

Chapters 3.3.4, 4.4. and 4.5. of this Report contain detailed information on
awareness and tolerance raising activities in the Serbian society concerning
regional or minority languages and the cultures they represent.
Recommendation 2: clarify the status of Bunjevac and Vlach in consultation with
representatives of all speakers.

41.

In the Section 3.3.2. of the First Periodic Report on the implementation of the
Charter, the languages in the Republic of Serbia the Charter is applied to are
precisely stated, not including the Bunjevac language, explaining that the
language concerned has not been standardized yet. It is stressed in the mentioned
Report that the State does not deny the possibility that the Bunjevac language
shall be treated as minority language as long as standardization is not a condition
for the application of certain measures. In view of the efforts being made by the
National Council of the Bunjevac National Minority in order to have the Bunjevac
language standardized, as well as in view of the measures undertaken by the State
with the aim to preserve it, which had been assessed in the first report by the
Committee of Experts to be relevant for the application of the Charter to the
30

Bunjevac language and in which it had expressed its appraisal for such activities
of the State, after having consultations with the Bunjevac speakers, it was decided
that in the Second Report Part II of the Charter would be applied to the Bunjevac
language. A detailed report on the Bunjevac language is contained in Section
3.2.1. of the Report.
42.

In the same Section (3.3.2) of the First Periodic Report on the implementation of
the Charter, the Vlach language is also stated as the language the Charter is
applied to, and in Section 4.2. this language is mentioned as the language for
which no obligations contained in Part III of the Charter were taken over. The
Republic of Serbia applies Part II of the Charter to the Vlach language, treating it
as a special language, which is considered to be their mother tongue by 54,818
persons (according to the 2002 Population census). The National Council of the
Vlach National Minority, as the institution in charge of cultural autonomy,
regulated by the Statute that the Romanian literature language was the mother
tongue of the Vlachs and requested that it was introduced into the official use and
into the educational system in the territories where the Vlachs traditionally lived –
in the East of Serbia. In essence, such a request reflects the debates present in the
Republic of Serbia lately concerning the national identity of the Vlach, the
relation between the Romanian and the Vlach national minorities and the
accomplishment of the rights of the Vlach national minority in the Republic of
Serbia. In their activities up to now the competent state authorities have not been
included in the debates on the national affiliation of the Vlach, having the
standpoint that the authorities in the Republic of Serbia may not and must not
interfere into the debates on national identity, that they must not arbitrate in
disputes on national identity of certain national communities, nor impose national
identity to any national community. Any support to the activities in this context
would mean imposition of national identity to certain communities, which is
contrary to the Constitution and the positive legal regulations in the Republic of
Serbia, and also contrary to the international treaties signed by the State. It is also
stressed this time that the authorities of the Republic of Serbia had explicitly
decided not to take part in the debates on ethnic affiliation of any national
minorities, including the Vlach and the Romanian national minority. Proceeding
from the constitutional solutions (Article 47) and the Law on Protection of Rights
and Freedoms of National Minorities (Article 5), the State also applies in practice
the basic principle of freedom of national affiliation and expression and treats the
Vlach and the Romanian minorities as equal and separate identities. The fact that
the National Council of the Vlach national minority established the Romanian
language to be the mother tongue of the Vlach national minority thus ignoring,
during the 2002 census, freely expressed will of persons related to their national
identity and the language they speak, is of no importance for the State. Namely,
according to the Constitution and the laws of the Republic of Serbia, the national
councils have no competences to establish or proclaim what language the
members of the national minority they represent speak. The policy of the State
towards national minorities is explicitly based on self-identification and selfdetermination of persons belonging to national minorities, namely on the
31

individual right. All activities of the national councils, as legitimate
representatives of the communities and the holders of cultural rights, which do not
comply with them, in the opinion of the State, are not only contrary to the
provisions of the Constitution, the national laws and the international treaties, but
they would also present elusion of the right through disclaiming individual rights
based on the alleged accomplishment of collective rights. Moreover, once elected,
the national councils have the duty to exercise their competences, namely to
participate in the decision making process or adopt decisions on their own, in fact
to protect the identity of their minority. To conclude, neither the National Council
of the Vlach national minority, as long as there are persons who do not declare
themselves to be the Vlachs during the census and as long as there is expressed
care of such persons to preserve their common identity, not only through the
National Council, but also through other forms of organization and activities,
could disclaim the Vlach specific properties or the Vlach language. In this
context, it is important to mention that by the recognition of the right to form two
separate national councils, the Vlach and the Romanian, the State also accepted
all those specific properties implying identity of national minority, including also,
in this case, based on the will expressed in the census, the language they speak. In
consultations for the purpose of clarification of the status of the Vlach language
according to the Charter, the representatives of the National Council of the Vlach
national minority regained their opinions that the Romanian language is the
language of the Vlach national minority and that it should be introduced into the
official use and into the educational system in the Republic of Serbia, in spite of
the fact they said themselves that the Romanian language is not spoken, read and
written by over 98% of the Vlachs. Proceedings from the above mentioned and in
view of the fact that a certain group of citizens in the territory of the Republic of
Serbia use the Vlach language, in the opinion of the State, make this language a
minority language as defined within the framework of the Charter, and
accordingly, Part II of the Charter is applied to the Vlach language. A detailed
report on the Vlach language is contained in the Section 3.2.2. of this Report.
Recommendation 3: introduce teaching of/in Part II languages at primary and
secondary levels.
43.

The information on the activities for the provision of teaching of languages from
Part II at primary and secondary schools are contained in chapter 3.3.3. of this
Report.
Recommendation 4: strengthen teacher training and provide adequate teaching
materials for all regional or minority languages.

44.

The information on the activities for the improvement of training of teachers and
provision of adequate teaching materials for all regional and minority languages
contained 4.1.8. of this Report.
Recommendation 5: secure the implementation of Articles 9 and 10, in particular
regarding Romani and Ukrainian, and ensure that the Part III languages can be
32

used in relations with local branches of the State authorities.
45.

The legal regulations of the Republic of Serbia ensure in full the implementation
of selected paragraphs and sub-paragraphs of Article 9 of the Charter. As stated in
the Section 4.2. of the Report, in the proceedings before the courts of the Republic
of Serbia, all participants have the right to use their language through interpreters
and learn the facts in their language, which primarily relates to the speakers of
minority languages, but to the speakers of other languages as well. The right of
speakers of minority languages to use their minority languages through court-tosworn translators and interpreters, if the proceedings are not held in their
language, is strictly complied with, and the costs of translations and
interpretations are on the account of courts. The problem of use of Romani and
Ukrainian languages in the proceedings before the courts has been noticed in
practice. With the aim to ensure and accomplish the rights of the members of all
national minorities to use their languages in the proceedings before the courts,
measures have been undertaken in order to increase the number of sworn-to-court
interpreters for the Romani and the Ukrainian languages and to increase the
number of lay-judges who are the members of the Romani and the Ukrainian
nationalities, namely, the speakers of those languages. In this sense, in 2007 the
Ministry of Justice issued advertisements for sworn-to-court interpreters with
permanent commission on the grounds of previously established needs of
municipal and district courts in the Central Serbia and for the sworn-to-court
interpreters for the Ukrainian language in the territory of AP of Vojvodina. On the
grounds of this advertisement, two sworn-to-court interpreters for the Romani
language for the courts in Belgrade have been employed and one for the territory
of courts in Vranje. No persons applied for the job of a sworn-to-court interpreter
for the Ukrainian language. The High Judicial Council, under the proposal of the
ministry in charge of judiciary, shall appoint lay-judges. A certain number of layjudges who are the members of the Romani and the Ukrainian national minorities
has also been appointed lay-judges at the following courts: the Magistrate Court
in Vranje - 2, the Magistrate Court in Leskovac - 1, the High Court in Leskovac 2 and the High Court in Niš - 2 lay-judges of the Romani nationality; the
Magistrate Court in Sremska Mitrovica – one lay-judge of the Ukrainian
nationality. The Section 2.4. of the Report contains the reasons of non-existence
of any unit of local self-government in the Republic of Serbia in the territory of
which the Romani and the Ukrainian languages are in the official use. Since the
implementation of the Charter is considered to be an on-going process promoting
the forms of use of minority languages, in the forthcoming period, as signified by
the Provincial Secretariat for Regulations, Administration and National Minorities
of AP of Vojvodina, a co-ordinated initiative of the ministries and the provincial
bodies in charge of administration and local self-government and national
minorities, should follow, as well as by the national councils of the Romani and
the Ukrainian minorities, towards the units of local self-government where a
considerable number of the members of the Ukrainian and the Romani national
communities live, under the conditions of formal-legal and economic feasibility,
to start the procedures to introduce these languages into the official use.
33

46.

All Part III languages of the Charter, which are in the official use, may be used in
the relations with the offices of the state authorities in the administrative districts.
However, this right has not been accomplished in practice due to the lack of
applications by the speakers of minority languages who are the holders of this
right. For example, on the grounds of the information obtained from all
administrative districts in the territories where minority languages are in some
form of official use, no application had been filed, which means that no
administrative proceedings had been carried out in any of the minority languages.
Recommendation 6: take the necessary legal and practical measures to ensure
that personal names and place names in the regional or minority languages can
be used officially in conformity with the tradition and orthography of the
languages concerned.

47.

The information on legal and practical measures to ensure that personal names
and place names in the regional or minority languages can be used officially in
conformity with the tradition and orthography of the languages concerned are
contained in the Sections 4.3.8. and 4.3.5. of this Report.

2.4. Activities for the implementation of the box-recommendation of the Committee
of Experts with regard to the implementation of the Charter
48.

In the Report on the implementation of the Charter in the first cycle of reporting,
the Committee of Experts stated the following recommendation:
The Committee of Experts encourages the Serbian authorities to take steps to
secure the implementation of the Charter in all municipal territories where the
regional or minority languages are present in sufficient numbers for the
application of provisions of the Charter, including where necessary changes to
statutes of municipalities.

49.

The regulations of the Republic of Serbia establish only the conditions in percents
for the compulsory introduction into an equal use of some minority language and
script in the unit of local self-government. Namely, the established percentage
wise participation of 15%, namely of 25% of the members of the national
minorities in the total number of inhabitants in the territory of the unit of local
self-government where some minority language and script is introduced into an
equal use, namely in the territory of the settlement or local office in the territory
of AP of Vojvodina, presents the bottom limit when the unit of local selfgovernment must introduce some minority language and script into an equal use
according to the statute. However, numerous examples from practice the
Committee of Experts also knows of, indicate that the condition of percentage
wise participation of the members of national minorities in the units of local selfgovernment is not crucial for the introduction of some minority language and
script into an equal use.
34

50.

Within the period after the first cycle of monitoring of the implementation of the
Charter, by their statutes some units of local self-government established the new
official use of minority languages, thus increasing the number of the units of local
self-governments, namely the number of settlements or local communities where
some of the minority languages is in the official use. The following paragraphs of
the report contain the data on the official use of minority languages in the units of
local self-government in the territory of the Republic of Serbia.

51.

Albanian language and script are in official use in 3 municipalities: Bujanovac,
Medveña and Preševo.

52.

Bosniak language and script are officially used in 4 units of local self-government
in the town of Novi Pazar and in the municipalities of Prijepolje, Sjenica and
Tutin. After the first cycle of monitoring of the implementation of the Charter, it
was established that Bosniak language and script are officially used in the
municipality of Prijepolje.

53.

Bulgarian language and script are officially used in the municipalities of
Bosilegrad and Dimitrovgrad. The Statute of the town of Pančevo prescribes the
official use of Bulgarian language and script in the village of Ivanovo. After the
first cycle of monitoring of the implementation of the Charter, it was established
that Bulgarian language and script are officially used in Ivanovo.

54.

Hungarian language and script are in official use in the entire territory of 28 towns
and municipalities, such as: Ada, Bač, Bačka Topola, Bela Crkva, Bečej, Vrbas,
Vršac, Žitište, Zrenjanin, Kanjiža, Kovačica, Kovin, Kula, Mali Iñoš, Nova Crnja,
Novi Bečej, Novi Kneževac, Novi Sad, Odžaci, Plandište, Senta, Sečanj, Sombor,
Srbobran, Subotica, Temerin, Titel and Čoka. In addition, Hungarian language is
also in the official use in four settlements in the municipality of Kikinda
(Banatska Topola, Kikinda, Rusko Selo and Sajan, two settlements in the
municipality of Apatin (Kupusina, Svilojevo), as well as in the town of Pančevo
in the cadastre municipality of Vojlovica and in the village of Ivanovo. After the
first cycle of monitoring of the implementation of the Charter, the municipality of
Vršac, through the amendments of the statute of the municipality, brought back
Hungarian language and script into official use in the entire territory of the
municipality at the beginning of 2008, which was officially used in certain
dwelling areas until then, and it was also established to use Hungarian language
and script in Vojlovica and Ivanovo.

55.

Macedonian language is officially used in the settlement of Jabuka in the town of
Pančevo and in the settlement of Dužine in the municipality of Plandište, which
were introduced in the official use after the first cycle of monitoring of the
implementation of the Charter.

56.

Romanian language is officially used in the following nine towns and
municipalities: Alibunar, Bela Crkva, Vršac, Žitište, Zrenjanin, Kovačica, Kovin,
35

Plandište, Sečanj, as well as in the town of Pančevo, in the settlement of Banatsko
Novo Selo. After the first cycle of monitoring of the implementation of the
Charter, it was established that Romanian language and script are officially used
in Banatsko Novo Selo, and the municipality of Vršac, through the amendments
of its statute at the beginning of 2008 brought back Romanian language and script
into the official use in the entire territory of the municipality, which was officially
used in certain settlements until then.
57.

Ruthenian language is in official use in Vrbas, Žabalj, Kula, Novi Sad and in Šid.
In addition, this language is in official use in the settlement of Novo Orahovo in
the municipality of Bačka Topola.

58.

Slovak language is officially used in the entire territory of 10 towns and
municipalities, as follows: Alibunar, Bač, Bačka Palanka, Bački Petrovac,
Zrenjanin, Kovačica, Novi Sad, Odžaci, Plandište and Šid. This language is also
officially used in the settlement of Stara Pazova (the municipality of Stara
Pazova), in the settlements of Bajša (the municipality of Bačka Topola) and Lug
(the municipality of Beočin).

59.

Croatian language is officially used in the town of Subotica, as well as in the
territory of the settlement of Stara Bingula (the town of Sremska Mitrovica), the
settlements of Bački Breg and Bački Monoštor (the town of Sombor) and Sonta
(the municipality of Apatin). After the first cycle of monitoring of the
implementation of the Charter, it was established that Croat language and script
are officially used in Bački Breg and Bački Monoštor.

60.

Czech language is officially used in the municipality of Bela Crkva.

61.

Romani and Ukrainian languages and scripts are not officially used in any unit of
local self-government in the territory of the Republic of Serbia, namely in no
settlement or local community in AP of Vojvodina, because they do not meet the
requirements of percentage wise participation of the members of those national
minorities in the total number of population of local communities. Namely, in the
territory of the Republic of Serbia, according to the last 2002 census, there is no
unit of local self-government where the number of the members of Romani and
Ukrainian national minorities reaches 15 % of the total number of population of
unit of local self-government, and in the territory of AP of Vojvodina there is no
settlement or local community where the number of members of Romani or
Ukrainian national minority reaches 25 % of the total number of population of
settlement or local community. Although the national legislation prescribes the
opportunity for the bodies of local self-government to introduce minority
language and script into official use by means of their statutes, even if they do not
meet the above mentioned requirement, according to the information provided by
the state and the provincial bodies, there have been no concrete initiatives so far
by the legitimate representative bodies of Romani and Ukrainian national
minorities to introduce Romani and Ukrainian into official use, and units of local
36

self-government, where there could be any sense to introduce these languages into
official use, have not recognized on their own that it was justified to introduce
them into official use. The newly elected national councils, as legitimate
representatives of national minorities and holders of cultural autonomy, have the
key role in making those initiatives, since the Law on the National Councils of the
National Minorities also specifies competences of national councils in the
proposals for establishing minority language and script as the official language in
the units of local self-government (Article 22 item 3 of the Law).
62.

However, it should be stressed that almost all bodies ensuring the right to the
official use of minority language face financial problems, because it presents
additional costs on their account, whereas this fact is not taken into account when
planning the funds necessary for their activities. The method of financing of the
bodies is the same in both the territory of those units of local self-government
where no minority language is in the official use and the territory of those units
where some minority language, or even several minority languages are introduced
in the official use for which reason they have increased expenditures for
translations, installation of adequate computer programmes, provision of forms,
professional training of employees and similar activities. In order to mitigate
financial difficulties of those units of local self-government providing the right to
the official use of minority language, with the aim to improve multi-linguistics
and for more efficient accomplishment of the right of citizens to use their
languages, the Provincial Secretariat for Regulations, Administration and National
Minorities of AP of Vojvodina issues tenders to finance, namely to participate in
financing of training of employees with the bodies and organizations where they
use minority language established to be officially used language, especially for
training of those employees who make contacts with customers (attending
courses, seminars and in other ways foreseen for the same purpose) and for the
development of the system of electronic administration for activities under the
conditions of multi-linguistics; costs of preparation and erection of boards with
names of bodies and organizations, names of dwelling areas on roads, names of
streets and squares written also in minority languages officially used in town,
municipality or dwelling area, and for printing of bi-lingual and multi-lingual
forms, as well as for printing of official gazettes and other public printed matter.
The bodies of towns and municipalities explicitly in the territory of AP of
Vojvodina could participate in the tender, where the official use of minority
language and script is established by the statute in the entire territory of town,
municipality or certain dwelling areas in their territory; local self-governments in
the territory of towns and municipalities; other bodies, organizations, services and
institutions in the territory of towns and municipalities. On the grounds of the
relevant criteria, in 2008 the funds were transferred pursuant to 78 applications
and in 2009 (in two tender cycles) the funds were transferred pursuant to 187
applications in the total amount of 22,650,000.00 dinars. It is necessary to stress
that the method of preparation and acting according to the tender documentation
until now show the importance and contribution of multi-linguistics. Namely, the
text of the tender and the application forms for the tender are prepared and
37

published in Serbian language and Cyrillic script, then in Hungarian, Slovak,
Croat, Romanian and Ruthenian languages and scripts. The tender documentation
in those languages could be found on the official website of the Secretariat for
regulations, Administration and National Minorities, a copy of the tender
documentation is also sent to all town and municipal administration in AP of
Vojvodina where some minority language is officially used (39 of 45
administrations), which further deliver it to the local self-governments in their
territory. The tender is also published in the newspapers published in minority
languages. The national councils of the Hungarian, Slovak, Croat, Romanian and
Ruthenian national minorities are informed about the tender including
documentation. The tender applications and the documentation for the tender
issued in 2008 were mainly in Serbian language. In the meantime there has been
noticeable progress so that for the latest tender half of the received applications
were in Hungarian language from the communities where Hungarian is officially
used and there were several applications in Croat language. It is also noticed that
there is an increased number of reports on the funds spent (although only in
Hungarian language and script).

38

3. PART II. IMPLEMENTATION OF ARTICLE 7 OF THE CHARTER
3.1. Information on the policy, legislation and practice in the implementation of Part
II – Article 7 of the Charter
Article 7
Objectives and principles
1. In respect of regional or minority languages, within the territories in which such
languages are used and according to the situation of each language, the Parties shall
base their policies, legislation and practice on the following objectives and principles:
a) the recognition of the regional or minority languages as an expression of
cultural wealth;
b) the respect for the geographical area of each regional or minority language in
order to ensure that existing or new administrative divisions do not constitute an
obstacle to the promotion of the regional or minority language in question;
c) the need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in order
to safeguard them;
d) the facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of regional or minority
languages, in speech and writing, in public and private life;
e) the maintenance and development of links, in the fields covered by this
Charter, between groups using a regional or minority language and other groups
in the State employing a language used in identical or similar form, as well as the
establishment of cultural relations with other groups in the State using different
languages;
f) the provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of
regional or minority languages at all appropriate stages;
g) the provision of facilities enabling non-speakers of a regional or minority
language living in the area where it is used to learn it if they so desire;
h) the promotion of study and research on regional or minority languages at
universities or equivalent institutions;
i) the promotion of appropriate types of transnational exchanges, in the fields
covered by this Charter, for regional or minority languages used in identical or
similar form in two or more States.
2. The Parties undertake to eliminate, if they have not yet done so, any unjustified
39

distinction exclusion, restriction or preference relating to the use of a regional or
minority language and intended to discourage or endanger the maintenance or
development of it. The adoption of special measures in favour of regional or minority
languages aimed at promoting equality between the users of these languages and the rest
of the population or which take due account of their specific conditions is not considered
to be an act of discrimination against the users of more widely-used languages.
3. The Parties undertake to promote, by appropriate measures, mutual understanding
between all the linguistic groups of the country and in particular the inclusion of respect,
understanding and tolerance in relation to regional or minority languages among the
objectives of education and training provided within their countries and encouragement
of the mass media to pursue the same objective.
4. In determining their policy with regard to regional or minority languages, the Parties
shall take into consideration the needs and wishes expressed by the groups which use
such languages. They are encouraged to establish bodies, if necessary, for the purpose of
advising the authorities on all matters pertaining to regional or minority languages.
5. The Parties undertake to apply, mutatis mutandis, the principles listed in paragraphs 1
to 4 above to non-territorial languages. However, as far as these languages are
concerned, the nature and scope of the measures to be taken to give effect to this Charter
shall be determined in a flexible manner, bearing in mind the needs and wishes, and
respecting the traditions and characteristics, of the groups which use the languages
concerned.
3.1.1. Recognition of minority language as cultural wealth
63.

The most significant measures recognizing minority languages as an expression of
cultural wealth in the Republic of Serbia have the aim to preserve minority
languages, and they consist of studying minority languages, promotion of their
use, as well as of financial support and other forms of support to information and
works in minority languages. Such measures are explained in the Sections 3.2.
and 4.1, 4.4. and 4.5. of the Report.

64.

In the Republic of Serbia special manifestations are also organized presenting
minority languages explicitly as an expression of cultural wealth. Every year, an
increasingly larger number of organizations, schools, competent state and
provincial bodies, as well as of units of local self-governments, especially those
having mixed national composition, mark through different manifestations the
International Day of Mother Tongue – 21 February. The aim of these
manifestations is to show that there are linguistic differences and to improve
awareness and tolerance in the society related to minority languages on one side
and to preserve and develop minority languages, as the most powerful instrument
for the protection of identity and culture of those who use then, on the other side.
Since 2009 the Ministry of Human and Minority Rights has joined the celebration
40

of the International Day of Mother Tongue, which is marked in co-operation with
the national councils of national minorities.
3.1.2. Respect for the geographical areas of minority languages
65.

Respect for geographic areas of certain minority languages has also been regained
in the new Law on Territorial Organization of the Republic of Serbia, which was
adopted in 2007. The adoption of this Law was the base for the establishment of
the new system of provincial autonomy and local self-government, and no new
territorial units were established in the new legal solutions, but the existing ones
were kept, whereas it is prescribed that also those units of local self-government
that do not meet the criteria in respect of minimum number of population still
exist as municipalities, provided they were formed before this Law enter into
force. The basic solutions of this Law define territorial organization of the
Republic of Serbia, the notion of municipal territory, town and city of Belgrade
and their borders. This Law also defines the grounds for establishment of new
units of local self-government, merger, cancellation and change of territory of the
existing ones, whereas an essential novelty is that the establishment of new units
of local self-government, cancellation and change of territory of the existing ones
is only possible according to the previously held referendum in the territory of the
unit of the local self-government concerned. The Law prescribes that the
procedure of establishment, merger and cancellation of municipalities, as well as
the changes of their territory, pursuant to the Constitution, must be preceded by
referendum, which is of advisory character. The change of territorial organization
may be initiated by assemblies of municipalities or 10% of voters who have
residence in the territory of the municipality the change relates to, and it may also
be proposed by the authorized proposers of the law.

66.

As stated in the Section 4.1.2.1. of the First Periodic Report on the
implementation of the Charter, in the Republic of Serbia there is no policy with
the aim to create obstacles for the promotion of minority languages and,
according to the opinion of the power, the existing division of powers does not
present an obstacle for the promotion of minority languages, either. The new Law
on Territorial Organization of the Republic of Serbia does not form new territorial
units, and there is no change of the territory of the existing units of local selfgovernment, either. Also, during the implementation of previous law, and during
the implementation of the law in force, none of the national minorities, including
also the Bulgarian, made initiative to change the territory of municipalities.

3.1.3. Resolute action to promote minority languages
67.

Action to promote minority languages with the aim to protect them includes the
application of measures to promote full and effective equality based on the
constitutional and legal provisions specified in the statement-of-reasons for the
application of Article 7 paragraph 2 of the Charter. Creation and application of
41

such measures should be carried out in co-operation with the relevant bodies the
competences of which are explained in the Section 2.2.2. of this Report.
3.1.4. Provision of conditions to facilitate and/or promote the use of minority
languages
68.

The Republic of Serbia, aware of importance of preservation and development of
minority languages as a segment of its minority policy, whose final aim is the
integration of national minorities in social life, together with further preservation
and development of their national and cultural specificies, pays particular
attention to the provision of conditions to facilitate and/or encourage the use of
minority languages. It is achieved by continuous monitoring of legal regulations
and by elimination of observed deficiencies aggravating their application.

69.

A series of system laws, which regulate the method of achievement of the right
guaranteed by the Constitution to use minority languages, is explained in the
relevant parts of the Report.

3.1.5. Establishment of cultural links between the groups speaking minority
languages
70.
The establishment of cultural links between the groups speaking minority
languages is explained in the comment on the implementation of Article 1, sub-Article g
and paragraph 3.
3.1.6. Provision of the study of minority languages
71.

The data on the practice of study of minority languages of Part III of the Charter
at adequate levels and academic bodies, which ensure their studying at the level of
university education, are contained in the Section 4.1 of this Report. The data on
the practice of study of other minority languages and about academic bodies
ensuring their study at the level of university education, are contained in the
Section 3.2. of this Report.

3.1.7. Facilitation of the study of minority languages
72.

In the Section 4.1.7. of the First Periodic Report on the implementation of the
Charter, the legislative framework for the implementation of the curricula in
minority language is stated, as well as the legislative framework for the provision
of the curricula of mother tongue with elements of national culture during primary
and secondary education. Such solutions created the possibilities for those who do
not speak minority languages but live in the area where these languages are
spoken, to learn them, if they wish to do so. The questionnaire conducted by the
Provincial Secretariat of Education of AP of Vojvodina on national affiliation of
children/pupils and the progress of their education and up-brining in certain
minority languages shows that the number of pupils studying minority languages
42

does not coincide with the national structure and that there are cases of studying
of minority languages by those who do not use them as mother tongue, namely by
those who do not speak them. On the grounds of this questionnaire it is possible to
monitor availability of education in certain minority languages in the territory of
AP of Vojvodina to those who are not native speakers of such languages as well.
The following tables contain the data on national affiliation of children /pupils
who attend school in certain minority languages in the territory of AP of
Vojvodina.
National affiliation of the children attending preparatory pre-school programme
conducted in minority languages in the 2009/2010 school year

Serbs

Montenegrins

Hungarians

Slovaks

Romanian

Ruthenians

Croats

Yugoslavians

Bunjevac

Backa Croats

Romani

Albanians

Ukrainians

Macedonians

Slovenians

Germans

Czechs

Bosniaks/Mu
slims

Uncommitted

Others

TOTAL

EDUCATION IN HUNGARIAN LANGUAGE

35

0

1,918

0

0

0

4

3

0

0

58

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

17

1

2,037

Serbs

Montenegrins

Hungarians

Slovaks

Romanian

Ruthenians

Croats

Yugoslavians

Bunjevac

Backa Croats

Romani

Albanian

Ukrainians

Macedonians

Slovenians

Germans

Czechs

Bosniaks/Mu
slims

Uncommitted

Others

Total

EDUCATION IN SERBIAN AND HUNGARIAN LANGUAGES

54

1

98

0

0

1

1

1

2

0

2

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

5

0

165

Serbs

Montenegrins

Hungarians

Slovaks

Romanian

Ruthenians

Croats

Yugoslavians

Bunjevac

Backa Croats

Romani

Albanian

Ukrainians

Macedonians

Slovenians

Germans

Czechs

Bosniaks/Mu
slims

Uncommitted

Others

Total

EDUCATION IN UNGARIAN AND GERMAN LANGUAGES

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

0

3

43

Serbs

Montenegrins

Hungarians

Slovaks

Romanian

Ruthenians
Croats

Yugoslavians

Bunjevac

Backa Croats

Romani

Albanian

Ukrainians

Macedonians

Slovenians

Germans

Czechs

Bosniaks/Mu
slims

Uncommitted
Others
Total

Serbs
Montenegrins
Hungarians
Slovaks
Romanian
Ruthenians
Croats
Yugoslavians
Bunjevac
Backa Croats
Romani
Albanian
Ukrainians
Macedonians
Slovenians
Germans
Czechs
Bosniaks/Mu
slims
Uncommitted
Others
Total

Serbs
Montenegrins
Hungarians
Slovaks
Romanian
Ruthenians
Croats
Yugoslavians
Bunjevac
Backa Croats
Romani
Albanian
Ukrainians
Macedonians
Slovenians
Germans
Czechs
Bosniaks/Mu
slims
Uncommitted
Others
Total

Serbs
Montenegrins
Hungarians
Slovaks
Romanian
Ruthenians
Croats
Yugoslavians
Bunjevac
Backa Croats
Romani
Albanian
Ukrainians
Macedonians
Slovenians
Germans
Czechs
Bosniaks/Mu
slims
Uncommitted
Others
Total

EDUCATION IN ROMANIAN LANGUAGE

0
0
0
0
120
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
120

EDUCATION IN SERBIAN AND ROMANIAN LANGUAGES

40
0
1
1
40
0
0
0
0
0
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
86

EDUCATION IN RUTHENIAN LANGUAGE

3
0
0
0
0
87
0
0
0
0
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
95

EDUCATION IN SLOVAK LANGUAGE

18

0

0

378

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

4

0

401

18

0

0

378

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

4

0

401

EDUCATION IN SERBIAN AND SLOVAK LANGUAGES

44

Serbs

Montenegrins

Hungarians

Slovaks

Romanian

Ruthenians

Croats

Bunjevac

Backa Croats

Romani

Albanians

Ukrainians

Macedonians

Slovenians

Germans

Czechs

Bosniaks

Bulgarians

Others

TOTAl

Serbs
Montenegrins
Hungarians
Slovaks
Romanian
Ruthenians
Croats
Yugoslavians
Bunjevac
Backa Croats
Romani
Albanian
Ukrainians
Macedonians
Slovenians
Germans
Czechs
Bosniaks/Mu
slims
Uncommitted
Others
Total

Serbs
Montenegrins
Hungarians
Slovaks
Romanian
Ruthenians
Croats
Yugoslavians
Bunjevac
Backa Croats
Romani
Albanian
Ukrainians
Macedonians
Slovenians
Germans
Czechs
Bosniaks/Mu
slims
Uncommitted
Others
Total

Serbs
Montenegrins
Hungarians
Slovaks
Romanian
Ruthenians
Croats
Yugoslavians
Bunjevac
Backa Croats
Romani
Albanian
Ukrainians
Macedonians
Slovenians
Germans
Czechs
Bosniaks/Mu
slims
Uncommitted
Others
Total

23
0
0
15
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
38

EDUCATION IN CROATIAN LANGUAGE

0
0
0
0
0
0
25
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
27

EDUCATION IN SERBIAN AND GERMAN LANGUAGES

6
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
8

73.
The possibility of studying minority languages also exists at primary and
secondary schools. The following Tables contain the data about national
affiliation of pupils(students) whose primary education is conducted in the
following minority languages in the territory of AP of Vojvodina

National affiliation of pupils attending primary schools
in the minority languages in the 2009/2010 school year

EDUCATION IN HUNGARIAN LANGUAGE

56

1

15,516

16

0

0

25

18

0

379

5

2

1

1

0

0

0

1

147

16,168

EDUCATION IN ROMANIAN LANGUAGE

45

Serbs

Montenegrins

Hungarians
Slovaks

Romanian

Ruthenians
Croats
Bunjevac

Backa Croats
Romani
Albanian

Ukrainians

Macedonians

Slovenians
Germans
Czechs
Bosniaks

Bulgarians
Others
Total

Serbs
Montenegrins
Hungarians
Slovaks
Romanian
Ruthenians
Croats
Bunjevac
Backa Croats
Romani
Albanian
Ukrainians
Macedonians
Slovenians
Germans
Czechs
Bosniaks
Bulgarians
Others
Total

Serbs
Montenegrins
Hungarians
Slovaks
Romanian
Ruthenians
Croats
Bunjevac
Backa Croats
Romani
Albanian
Ukrainians
Macedonians
Slovenians
Germans
Czechs
Bosniaks
Bulgarians
Others
Total

Serbs
Montenegrins
Hungarians
Slovaks
Romanian
Ruthenians
Croats
Bunjevac
Backa Croats
Romani
Albanian
Ukrainians
Macedonians
Slovenians
Germans
Czechs
Bosniaks
Bulgarians
Others
TOTAl

21
0
3
0
1,092
0
0
0
0
133
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
7
1,258

EDUCATION IN RUTHENIAN LANGUAGE

28
1
16
4
0
446
3
0
0
18
2
2
0
0
0
0
1
0
2
523

EDUCATION IN SLOVAK LANGUAGE

31
3
3
3,062
0
2
3
0
0
32
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
41
3,178

EDUCATION IN CROATIAN LANGUAGE
(The data refer to the 2008/2009 school year)

1

0

3

0

0

0

311

3

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

319

Primary school pupils according to national affiliation and language of
instruction in the 2009/2010 school year

Number of Hungarian pupils who are educated in:

TOTAL
number of
Hungarian

Total
number of
pupils who
are
educated
in the

Number of
pupils who
are
educated in
Hungarian
language
and did not

46

Total

pupils

Hungarian
language

Serbian
language

Slovak
language

Romanian
language

Ruthenian
language

Croatian
language

Hungarian
language

cite
Hungarian
as their
nationality

19,435

15,516

3,894

3

3

16

3

16,168

652

Number of Romanian pupils who are educated in:
TOTAL
number of
Romanian
pupils

Total

2.008

Hungarian
language

Serbian
language

0

916

Slovak
language

0

Romanian
language

1.092

Ruthenian
language

0

Croatian
language

0

Total

1,010

Hungarian
language

Serbian
language

Slovak
language

Romanian
language

Ruthenian
language

Croatian
language

0

562

2

0

446

0

523

Number of Slovak pupils who are educated in:

Total

TOTAL
number
of
Slovak
pupils

Hungarian
language

Serbian
language

Slovak
language

Romanian
language

Ruthenian
language

Croatian
language

4,167

16

1,085

3,062

0

4

0

Number of
pupils who
are
educated in
Romanian
language
and did not
cite
Romanian
as their
nationality

1.258
Total
number of
pupils who
are
educated
in
Ruthenian
language

Number of Ruthenian pupils who are educated in:
TOTAL
number of
Ruthenian
pupils

Total
number of
pupils who
are
educated in
the
Romanian
language

Total
number of
pupils who
are
educated
in Slovak
language

3,178

166
Number of
pupils who
are
educated in
Ruthenian
language
and did not
cite
Ruthenian
as their
nationality

77
Total
number of
pupils who
are
educated in
Slovak
language
and did not
cite Slovak
as their
nationality

116
Total
number of
pupils who
are
educated in
Croatian
language
and did not
cite Croat
as their
nationality

TOTAL
number
of
Croatian
pupils

Hungarian
language

Serbian
language

Slovak
language

Romanian
language

Ruthenian
language

Croatian
language

Total
number of
pupils
who are
educated
in
Croatian
language

Total

3,394

25

3,052

3

0

3

311

319

74.

The Provincial Secretariat of Education of AP of Vojvodina made a proposal to
include in the Rules on the Curricula for the second cycle of primary education all
minority languages officially used– as a compulsory optional teaching subject.
This proposal was addressed to the Minister of Education for approval. A
proposal was also made to introduce teaching subject of Social Environment
Language into the list of teaching subjects in the first and the second cycles of
47

The number of Croat pupils who are educated in:

8

primary education and up-bringing including curricula proposals, in order to
enable the pupils living in the area where there is a large number of members of
the national minorities and in the classes where teaching is conducted in Serbian
language to study minority languages.
75.

There is also a possibility to study minority languages at the level of secondary
school. The following tables contain the data on national affiliation of pupils
attending secondary schools entirely in certain minority languages in the territory
of AP of Vojvodina in the 2009/2010 school year.

National structure of pupils attending secondary schools where education is conducted
in one of the minority languages in the 2009/2010 school year

Serbs

Montenegrins

Hungarians

Slovaks

Romanians

Ruthenians

Croats

Bunjevac

Backa Croats

Romani

Albanians

Ukrainians

Macedonians

Slovenians

Germans

Czechs

Bosniaks

Yugoslavians

Others

Total

Hungarian language

37

0

6,406

1

0

1

21

6

0

22

1

0

1

2

1

0

0

28

52

6,579

Serbs

Montenegrins

Hungarians

Slovaks

Romanians

Ruthenians

Croats

Bunjevac

Backa Croats

Romani

Albanians

Ukrainians

Macedonians

Slovenians

Germans

Czechs

Bosniaks

Yugoslavians

Others

Total

Romanian language

0

0

0

0

240

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

240

Serbs

Montenegrins

Hungarians

Slovaks

Romanians

Ruthenians

Croats

Bunjevac

Backa Croats

Romani

Albanians

Ukrainians

Macedonians

Slovenians

Germans

Czechs

Bosniaks

Yugoslavians

Others

Total

RUTHENIAN LANGUAGE

4

1

1

0

1

55

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

63

48

Serbs

Montenegrins

Hungarians

Slovaks

Romanians

Ruthenians

Croats

Bunjevac

Backa Croats

Romani

Albanians

Ukrainians

Macedonians

Slovenians

Germans

Czechs

Bosniaks

Yugoslavians

Others

Total

SLOVAK LANGUAGE

2

0

0

338

0

1

2

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

345

Serbs

Montenegrins

Hungarians

Slovaks

Romanians

Ruthenians

Croats

Bunjevac

Backa Croats

Romani

Albanians

Ukrainians

Macedonians

Slovenians

Germans

Czechs

Bosniaks

Yugoslavians

Others

Total

CROATIAN LANGUAGE

2

0

0

0

0

0

59

4

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

3

69

76.

In the Republic of Serbia there is a possibility to learn German language as a
foreign language at primary and secondary schools. German language, as the first
foreign language was introduced into the educational system in Serbia already in
1808. Depending on the economic-political circumstances in the country, German
language had a different status at educational institutions– from studying it as the
first or the second foreign language to exclusion from teaching within the period
after the World War II. At present German is taught at primary and secondary
schools as the first or the second foreign language. According to the information
of the Ministry of Education, about 5% of pupils is currently studying this
language at primary and secondary schools in the Central Serbia. For illustration
purposes, the table below contains the data on the number of pupils at primary
schools who studied German as a foreign language in the 2007/2008 school year.
GRADE

Total Number of
Pupils

German Language

1 GRADE
2nd GRADE
3rd GRADE
4th GRADE

52,591
50,271
51,398
56,910

TOTAL
586
824
901
879

TOTAL

211,170

3,190

1.51

5th GRADE
6th GRADE
7th GRADE

57,896
58,455
58,310

5,424
3,110
2,728

9.37
5.32
4.68

st

%
1.11
1.64
1.75
1.54

49

77.

8th GRADE

58,416

2,316

3.96

TOTAL

233,077

13,578

5.83

According to the information of the Provincial Secretariat of Education of AP of
Vojvodina, at primary schools in the territory of AP of Vojvodina, German is
studied as the first and the second foreign language by the following number of
pupils:
School year
2006.2007
2007/2008
2008/2009

78.

Number of Local SelfGovernments
36
40
41

NUMBER OF
SCHOOLS
141
227
231

Number of Pupils
25,131
33,084
42,011

The table below contains the data on the number of pupils at secondary schools in
the territory of AP of Vojvodina, who selected to study German as a foreign
language in the 2009/2010 school year.

Study of German
Language
First foreign language
Second foreign language
Total

Number of Pupils in 3 years
of education
1,853
500
2,353

Number of pupils in 4
years of education
4,308
9,902
14, 210

Total
6,161
10,402
16,563

3.1.8. Promotion of the study and research of minority languages at universities
79.

The data on the practice in study and research of minority languages at
universities are contained in the Section 3.2 and in the Section 4.1.6. of this
Report.

3.1.9. Promotion of trans-national exchange
80.

As stated in the Section 4.1.9. of the First Periodic Report on the implementation
of the Charter, promotion of adequate forms of trans-national exchanges in the
fields of social life the Charter addresses, is regulated in the provisions of the
Constitution of the Republic of Serbia, laws and the provisions of international
treaties governing the protection of national minorities. The Republic of Serbia is
a contracting party to several bilateral agreements on protection of national
minorities, as well as to several agreements on co-operation in the field of
education, culture and other fields, which also contain the provisions of
importance for trans-national co-operation in the fields of social life a minority
language is used in.

81.

Within the period after the first cycle of monitoring of the implementation of the
Charter, the activities of inter-governmental mixed commissions were activated
again, namely of minority committees with Hungary and Croatia, which had been
50

established in accordance with the agreements on protection of the rights of the
Serbian national minority in these countries and of the Hungarian, namely of the
Croatian national minorities in Serbia. The third meeting of the InterGovernmental Mixed Commission for Minorities with Hungary was held on 21
and 22 May 2009 in Novi Sad and the third meeting of the Inter-Governmental
Mixed Committee for Minorities with the Republic of Croatia was held on 14 and
15 October 2009 in Belgrade and Subotica. Both these meetings were held to
consider on-going and current issues related to the Serbian minority in Hungary
and Croatia, namely to Hungarian and Croatian minorities in Serbia, to examine
the fulfilment of obligations resulting from the mentioned agreements,
implementation of recommendations adopted at previous meetings and giving of
new recommendations to the governments of the contracting parties in respect of
the implementation of the agreements. The fourth meeting of the InterGovernmental Mixed Committee for Minorities, monitoring the implementation
of the provisions of the Agreement between the Republic of Serbia and the
Republic of Croatia on protection of minority rights was held on 17 and 18 June
2010 in Zagreb and in Vukovar, respectively. In addition to consideration of
implementation of recommendations adopted at the previous meeting and
establishment of the new ones, the current state of affairs in the two minority
communities was also discussed. The first meeting of the Inter-Governmental
Mixed Commission for Minorities with Romania was held on 23 November 2009
in Bucharest (Romania). The text of the Rules of the Commission was
consolidated and signed at this meeting, as well as the text of the Minutes of the
first meeting. It was agreed that the degree of fulfilment of obligations undertaken
by the states in respect of protection of the rights of minorities shall be analyzed
at the next meeting and to adopt concrete recommendations with the aim to
improve the fulfilment of such obligations. It is expected that in the forthcoming
period the first meeting of the Inter-Governmental Mixed Commission with
Macedonia shall be also held.
82.

In the middle of 2009, as the legal successor of the State Union of Serbia and
Montenegro, the National Assembly of the Republic of Serbia upheld the
Agreement between the Ministers of Serbia and Montenegro and the Government
of the Republic of Hungary on co-operation in the field of education, science,
culture, youth and sports, which was signed on 13 March 2006. It is prescribed in
Article 2 of this Agreement that the contracting parties shall take special care of
the support to be rendered by the institutions and experts who deal with
languages, history, culture and art of the other contracting party, as well as about
linguistic and professional education and advancement of interpreters. After this
Agreement had entered into force on 5 June 2009, the Ministry of Education and
Culture of the Republic of Hungary submitted its draft of the Co-operation
Programme in the field of culture between the Ministry of Education and Culture
of the Republic of Hungary and the Ministry of Culture of the republic of Serbia
on 18 February 2010 for the period 2010 - 2011. The texts of the Programme shall
be conformed in the forthcoming period, which are to be signed by the Ministers
of Culture of the two countries concerned. The Programme shall define in more
51

details all the actions and activities in all fields of culture and the financial
conditions for their implementation. In spite of the lack of the relevant
programme, co-operation with Hungary is achieved in culture in all fields.
83.

Based on the Agreement between the Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the Government of the Republic of Macedonia in the field of
education, culture and sports, which was signed in 1997 and entered into force in
1998, the Co-operation Programme in the field of culture was signed on 22 July
2009 between the Ministry of Culture of the Republic of Serbia and the Ministry
of Culture of the Republic of Macedonia for 2009, 2010 and 2011.The
Programme prescribes co-operation in various fields of culture (music, theatre,
painting, cultural heritage, archives and libraries, literature and publishing, film,
public information means). In the past period several significant actions were
performed (the Cultural days of Serbia in Macedonia in November 2009) and the
direct co-operation of theatres from the two countries should be stressed in
particular.

84.

Based on the Agreement between the Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the Government of the Republic of Slovakia in the field of
education, culture and sports, which was signed in 1996 and entered into force the
same year, the Co-operation Programme in the field of culture was signed on 26
February 2010 between the Ministry of Culture of the Republic of Serbia and the
Ministry of Culture of the Republic of Slovakia for the period 2010-2013. The
Programme prescribes co-operation in various fields of culture. Special attention
is paid to participation of music and theatre groups at the international music and
theatre festivals that are held in the two countries, direct co-operation between
museums and galleries, protection of monuments of culture, co-operation in the
field of literature and publishing, co-operation between libraries, co-operation in
the field of film.

85.

The Co-operation Programme in the field of culture between the Ministry of
Culture of the Republic of Serbia and the Ministry of Culture and Tourism of
Ukraine for 2009, 2010 and 2011 was signed in Kiev on 7 April 2009. On the
grounds of this Programme the Cultural Days of Serbia were implemented in
Ukraine in April 2009, and the representatives of the Ukrainian national minority
in Serbia also took part at this manifestation.

86.

The Agreement between the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and the Government of the Republic of Macedonia on co-operation in the field of
culture and education was signed in 2002 and entered into force in 2003. In
March 2003, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs initiated the procedure for the
preparation of the Co-operation Programme in the field of education, culture and
sports between the Council of Ministers of Serbia and Montenegro and the
Government of the Republic of Croatia for the period 2004-2006. On two
occasions the Ministry of Culture submitted its supplements, objections and
suggestions in respect of the proposed document. The Croatian party showed no
52

interest to continue the programme making. The co-operation with Croatia in the
field of modern art is satisfactory, in spite of the fact that no Co-operation
Programme in the field of culture had been concluded. After the democratic
changes in the Republic of Serbia in 2000, it may be noticed that groups and
artists from the two countries visit the countries concerned more frequently, and
the largest scope of co-operation was achieved between theatre groups from both
the countries concerned.
3.1.10. Elimination of unfavourable treatment of use of minority languages and
adoption of special measures in favour of minority languages
87.

The legal ground for elimination of any unjustified distinction exclusion,
restriction or preference relating to the use of a regional or minority language and
intended to discourage or endanger the maintenance or development of it is
contained in the provisions of the Constitution on equality, as well as in the
provisions of laws legally protecting the use and the right to use of minority
languages, which was contained in the Section 3.4. of the First Periodic Report on
implementation of the Charter. Within the period after the first cycle of
monitoring of implementation of the Charter, in 2003 the National Assembly of
the Republic of Serbia adopted the Law on Prohibition of Discrimination, thus
creating a general anti-discrimination standardized and institutional framework
that define in an uniform way the field of anti-discrimination in one place and in a
comprehensive way. The Law on Prohibition of Discrimination, as a general law,
shall provide general definition of discrimination and affirmative actions;
establish the definitions of discrimination against certain categories of persons
and in certain cases; prescribe the forms of discrimination; prescribe a special
body or authority to co-ordinate actions related to prohibition of discrimination,
which shall have different options in relation to the bodies and persons violating
prohibition of discrimination; prescribe special civil proceedings for protection
against discrimination, establish tortuous liability and prescribe offences for
discriminatory behaviour, and it shall also resolve other issues that should render,
as a general framework, sufficient institutional guarantees to prevent
discrimination. Supervision over its implementation is carried out by the ministry
in charge of human and minority rights. The adoption of this Law does not mean
any obstacle to adopt in future other special laws in this field because the general
anti-discrimination law provides uniform and efficient system guarantees for
prevention of discrimination, and adopt possibly other laws and regulations for
special fields and for special categories of persons. In this sense, legally
established independent and impartial body for protection of equality – the
Commissioner for Protection of Equality, has a particular importance for it is the
very body that should encourage and ensure future development of legislation in
this field. The Commissioner for Protection of Equality receives and examines the
complaints because of violations of the provisions of the law and adopts
sanctions. The Commissioner has also been granted legal capacity to sue, namely,
it has the right to file actions. This independent body should have the role of a coordinator in establishing the future uniform system of prohibition of
53

discrimination. Since the budget for 2010 also includes the necessary financial
means for the activities of the Commissioner and its professional services, as well
as for the exercise of its competences, material assumptions for its activities have
been created. On 5 May 2010 the National Assembly of the Republic of Serbia
elected the Commissioner for Protection of Equality.
88.

The Law on Prohibition of Discrimination prescribes that causing and incitement
of inequality, hate and intolerance on the grounds of minority languages are
severe forms of discrimination, which results in the initiation of a trial and
ordering of sanctions to responsible subjects, according to the seriousness of the
form of committed discrimination. Severe forms of discrimination are defined in
respect of the position of the offender or in respect of the way discrimination is
committed – public position (public authority or in the proceedings before the
public authority and the method in which the act of discrimination is committed
(through the media). The Law on Protection of Minority Languages included in
the wider context prohibitions of discrimination against national minorities and
their members on the grounds of national affiliation, ethnic origin, religious
beliefs and language. The legal ground of prohibition of discrimination is the
principle of equality because discrimination exists if citizens are placed in an
unequal position due to some personal characteristic, because of the language in
in this case. The Law prescribes that everyone enjoys equal position and equal
legal protection, regardless of his/her personal properties.

89.

In the Section 4.1.10.2. of the First Periodic Report on the implementation of the
Charter, as a special example of adoption of measures in favour of minority
languages, which would have the aim to improve equality among those who use
the languages concerned and the rest of the population or which take into account
their specific conditions, the measures such as the introduction of so-called
Romani assistants in the teaching process are mentioned. In the meantime, this
measure has become a system measure because the new Law on Fundamentals of
Educational and Up-bringing System prescribes the existence of assistants at
schools, whose task is to render assistance and additional support to children and
pupils, in accordance with their needs, as well as assistance to teachers, child
minders and expert associates with the aim to improve their activities with
children and pupils who need additional educational support. For the work with
pupils of Romani nationality who need additional support and assistance 61
pedagogue assistants are engaged at primary schools in 28 units of local selfgovernment (Aleksinac, Alibunar, Bačка Palanka, Bela Palanka, Belgrade,
Beočin, Bor, Bujanovac, Valjevo, Vladičin Han, Vranje, Jagodina, Kikinda,
Kostolac, Koceljeva, Kragujevac, Kraljevo, Kruševac, Leskovac, Mol, Niš, Novi
Sad, Odžaci, Prokuplje, Subotica, Surdulica, Čurug and Šabac). It has been
planned that another 128 pedagogue assistants at 80 primary schools and 48 preschool institutions in the territory of the Republic of Serbia shall be engaged as
from the next school year.

54

3.1.11. Promotion of mutual understanding between all language groups
90.

Within the period after the first cycle of monitoring of the implementation of the
Charter, laws encouraging the spirit of tolerance and inter-cultural dialogue (see
Section 2.1.1.) between all language groups were adopted, which contribute to the
improvement of mutual respect, understanding and co-operation between all
people living in the territory of the Republic of Serbia, regardless of their ethnic,
cultural, linguistic or religious identity. The activities for the improvement of
mutual understanding between all language groups are contained in the Section
3.3.4. of this Report.

3.1.12. Advisory bodies
91.

National councils of national minorities, according to the constitutional and legal
solutions, are special bodies that are also competent to advise the authorities in
respect of minority languages. The competences of national councils of national
minorities are contained in the Section 2.2.2. of this Report. The presidents of the
national councils of national minorities are the members of the Council of the
Republic of Serbia for National Minorities, which, inter alia, takes care of
preservation, improvement and protection of linguistic and cultural specificies of
the members of national minorities in the Republic of Serbia (see Section 2.1.1.)

3.2. Information on the implementation of the Charter for Minority Languages for
which obligations from Part III of the Charter are not taken over
92.

In the First Periodic Report on the Implementation of the Charter, the republic of
Serbia precisely stated that the following languages are minority languages in the
Republic of Serbia: Albanian, Bosniak, Bulgarian, Vlach, Hungarian,
Macedonian, German, Romani, Romanian, Ruthenian, Slovak, Ukrainian,
Croatian and Czech, as well as that Bunjevac will be treated as a minority
language as long as the standardization is not a condition for the implementation
of certain measures. In view of the fact that the Republic of Serbia took over the
obligations from Part III of the Charter concerning Albanian, Bosniak, Bulgarian,
Hungarian, Romani, Romanian, Ruthenian, Slovak, Ukrainian and Croatian
languages, it is necessary to examine the data on the state of other minority
languages, including Bunjevac, too, which it decided to treat as a minority
language of Part II of the Charter after consultations with the speakers of this
language.

3.2.1. Bunjevac speech
93.

Bunjevac is not officially used in any unit of local self-government because it has
not been standardized yet.

94.

According to the information obtained from the National Council of the Bunjevac
national minority, the standardization process has been in progress, and its more
55

serious stage started in 2009 by the implementation of the project for the
preparation of grammar of Bunjevac language, which also included, in addition to
the National Council, the Faculty of Philosophy in Novi sad and the Balkan
Institute of the Serbian Academy of Science and Art from Belgrade. After the
field researches of Bunjevac speech in Subotica, Sombor and in the surroundings
of these two towns, which are considered to be cultural and historic centres by the
Bunjevac people, a lot of documentation was collected. It is planned that this
project will be completed in 2012 and the grammar and spelling rules of Bunjevac
will follow, and this whole process should be completed by ratification of
Bunjevac language as a standard language of the Bunjevac national minority.
95.

Although Bunjevac language is not standardized, the Republic of Serbia
encourages or facilitates its use by undertaking measures in certain fields where
standardization of a language is not a condition of its use.

96.

There is no pre-school education in Bunjevac speech at any pre-school institution
or school in the Republic of Serbia. According to the information of the
Provincial Secretariat of Education of AP of Vojvodina, in the territory of AP of
Vojvodina, in two local self-governments, in Subotica and Sombor, there are 87
children in total of pre-school age of the Bunjevac nationality. Out of this number,
for 83 children pre-school education is arranged in Serbian language, for 2
children in Croatian language and for 2 children it is arranged bilingually, in
Serbian and Hungarian languages. There is no comprehensive teaching in
Bunjevac speech at primary and secondary schools. At primary schools in
Subotica and since 2009/2010 school year at one primary school in Sombor
Bunjevac speech with elements of national culture is taught as a school subject.
The Table below shows the number of pupils studying this subject.
School
Year
2007/2008)
2008/2009
2009/2010

97.

Number of Local
Self-Governments
1
1
2

NUMBER OF
SCHOOLS
9
10
12

The Table below shows the number of pupils who are the members of the
Bunjevac national minority who attend primary schools in the territory of AP of
Vojvodina.
School Year

Level of Education
Primary education

98.

Number of
Pupils
81
138
171

2006/2007

2007/2008

2008/2009

926

908

933

According to the information of the Provincial Secretariat of Education of AP of
Vojvodina, there is no teaching of Bunjevac language with elements of national
culture in the 2009/2010 school year at secondary schools, since no pupils
expressed such wishes. The Table below shows the number of pupils who are the
56

members of the Bunjevac national minority who attend secondary schools in the
territory of AP of Vojvodina.

School Year

Level of Education
Secondary education

99.

2006/2007

2007/2008

2008/2009

402

344

403

In the sphere of public information in the Republic of Serbia Bunjevac speech is
represented in radio programme. In addition to programme broadcasting within
the Public Broadcasting Agency of Vojvodina, on the Novi Sad Radio, weekly
programmes in Bunjevac of half an hour are broadcast on the Trend Radio from
Bačкa Topola, the Radio Subotica and the Radio Sombor. At the tender for cofinancing of projects/programmes in the field of public information in minority
languages, the Ministry of Culture – Media Sector awarded 257,000.00 dinars in
2007 for the Bunjevačka rič radio programme. The National Council of the
Bunjevac national minority is the founder of the Bunjevački informativni centar
newspaper publishing institution in Subotica, which publishes the Bunjevačke
novine information-political monthly of the Bunjevac national minority and the
Tandrčak children's newspapers, which is written in štokavian ikavian dialect,
namely speech, before the language is standardized. The Provincial Secretariat of
Information of AP of Vojvodina financially supports publishing of these printed
media, and the data on subsidies are shown in the Table below.
Paper
The Bunjevačke novine
The Tandrčak

100.

Subsidy
14,634,000.00
4,549,000.00

In 2008 the Ministry of Culture also co-financed periodical publications in
Bunjevac – the Bunjevački kalendar za 2009 (almanac) with 150,000.00 dinars.
The Bunjevački informativni centar is the main publisher of books in Bunjevac. In
the course of 2008 and 2009 it published 5 books, of which one in co-operation
with the Matica srpska. Publishing of books in Bunjevac is co-financed by the
funds from the republic and provincial budgets on tender basis. The tables below
show examples of such co-financing:

Funds awarded by the Ministry of Culture for projects/programmes whose quality contributes to
development and presentation of art and culture of national minorities in the field of publishing
Beneficiary

Project

The Bunjevačka Matica,Subotica
The Bunjevac Information Centre,
Subotica

Granted funds

Dida,pripovidaj mi
The Tandrčak i njegovo blago 2
children’s book

80,000.00
150,000.00

Funds awarded by the Provincial Secretariat of Culture of
AP of Vojvodina for publishing of books in Bunjevac

57

Publisher

Author and Book's Title

The Matica Srpska,
Novi Sad
The Bunjevačka
Matica, Subotica
The Bunjevac
Information Centre,
Subotica

Granted Funds

Dragoljub Petrović, Rečnik Bačkih Bunjevaca

40,000.00

Group of authors, Lipota naših riči
Tamara Baić, Muzička baština Bunjevaca
Gabrijela Diklić, Snaš Kata na mrginju
Marija Horvat, Promaja kroz pendžere rimena
Saša Marković, Politička istorija Bunjevaca 1918-1941

35,000.00
50,000.00
50,000.00
34,000.00
20,000.00

101.

For fostering of language and culture they represent, cultural manifestations of
speakers of such languages are of importance. Cultural manifestations related to
Bunjevac are co-financed on tender basis from the republic and provincial
budgets. The tables below show examples of such co-financing:

Funds awarded by the Ministry of Culture for projects/programmes whose quality contributes to
development and presentation of art and culture of national minorities to hold cultural
manifestations related to Bunjevac
Beneficiary

Project

The Bunjevačko Kolo, Sombor
The Bunjevka, Subotica
The Bunjevačka Matica, Subotica

Granted Funds

Dužionica 2007, 2008
9th , 10th and 11th Festival of Bunjevac
Traditional Works
Bunjevačka lipa rič, 1st and 2nd Festival
of Literature Works of Young People in
Bunjevac

270,000.00
310,000.00
100,000.00

Funds awarded by the Provincial Secretariat of Culture of
AP of Vojvodina to hold cultural manifestations related to Bunjevac
Place
Sombor

Beneficiary

Subotica

The Bunjevačko Kolo,
Association of Citizens
The Bunjevka

Subotica

The Bunjevačka Matica

Purpose

Amount

Dužionica 2007, 2008

250,000.00

9th , 10th and 11th Festival of
Bunjevac Traditional Works
Tuesday Evenings

245,000.00
45,000.00

3.2.2. Vlach language
102.

Vlach is not officially used in any unit of local self-government because it has not
been standardized yet. Although there is no agreement among the speakers of this
language about the standardization of the language, according to the information
obtained from the Zajednica Vlaha P. Matejić, an association of citizens, in 2008
this association made an initiative to standardize Vlach script and formed the
initiative committee and informed the authorities of the Republic of Serbia
accordingly.
58

103.

104.

Since Vlach language is not standardized, there is no teaching of the members of
the Vlach national minority at any level of education. Vlach language with
elements of national culture is not taught as the school subject at primary and
secondary schools. The National Council of the Vlach National Minority, as the
institution in charge of cultural autonomy and the holder of the initiative to
provide education in mother tongue, established by its statute Romanian language
to be mother tongue of this national minority and addressed a request to the
Ministry of Education to introduce Romanian language with elements of national
culture as the school subject, although, according to the allegations of the very
National Council, over 98% of speakers of Vlach language do not either
understand or speak Romanian.
In spite of the fact that Vlach language is not standardized, there are certain
measures by the state encouraging or facilitating the use of Vlach language in the
field of public information and culture. The Ministry of Culture granted funds for
the projects in Vlach language within the tenders for co-financing of projects
/programmes in the field of public information in minority languages, as shown in
the Table below.

Project Applicant

Project Title

RTV Zaječar,
Zaječar
Radio Magnum,
Zaječar

TV Journal in Vlach language

357,000.00

Da se ne zaboravi – informative
programme in Vlach and series of
programmes on life and customs of
Vlach
Series of TV programmes in Vlach and
Romanian languages
Buna zia prieteni – aici radio Djerdap

480,000.00

Život i običaji Vlaha u Ključu

742,600.00

News in the Vlach language

387,600.00

Programmes in Vlach – documentary
stories
Informative programme in Vlach
language

400,000.00

3A Media
Zaječar
Radio Djerdap,
Kladovo
RTV Kladovo,
Kladovo
STV Negotin,
Negotin
RTV Krajina,
Negotin

105.

Granted Funds

641,250.00
409,000.00

276,000.00

The Ministry of Culture also co-financed three projects whose quality contributes
to development and presentation of art and culture of speakers of Vlach language.
On tender basis, the funds were awarded to co-finance the projects shown in the
Table below.
Beneficiary

Paun es Durlić
Balkankult fondacija, Belgrade

Project
Poslednji orfeji Balkana,
Collection, processing and bilingual
publishing of Vlach oral and music
works

Granted Funds
160,000.00

59

The National Council of the Vlach
National Minority, Bor
Izvor Cultural Art Club, Laznica

Muma Paduri
Priveg i rajska sreća – sačuvano od
zaborava

340,000.00
80,000.00

3.2.3. Macedonian language
106.

Macedonian language is not officially used in any unit of local self-government
because in the territory of the Republic of Serbia there is no unit of local selfgovernment where the number of the members of the Macedonian national
minority reaches 15% of the total number of population according to the last
census, which represents a condition for compulsory introduction into equal
official use of a minority language and script, pursuant to the Law on Protection
of Rights and Freedoms of National Minorities (Article 11 paragraph 2), namely
pursuant to the amended and supplemented Law on Official Use of Language and
Script (Article 11 paragraph 2). However, on the grounds of the provisions of the
decision on more precise resolution of certain issues of official use of language and
script of national minorities in the territory of AP of Vojvodina, which prescribe
that the language and script of a national minority shall be introduced into the
official use in the settlement or local community in the unit of local selfgovernment where the language and script concerned are not officially used in the
entire territory, if the percentage of the members of certain national minority,
according to the results of the last census reaches 25% of the total number of
inhabitants of the settlement or local community concerned, Macedonian
language was introduced into official use in Pančevo, in the territory of Jabuka
and Plandište settlements, in the territory of Dužine settlement. Although it is a
certain progress for the Vardar association of Macedonians from the South Banat
District from Pančevo, it has the standpoint that on the occasion of adoption of
decisions on introduction of the language concerned into the official use, local
self-government were explicitly lead by the numerical quantitative principle (legal
threshold of 25%) „not taking into account the needs of Macedonian community
from neighbouring villages and at the level of the entire municipality, to enjoy,
foster and develop the right to use mother tongue in public life. This has the
consequence that only 38.91% of the members of the Macedonian community in
Pančevo enjoy the right of use Macedonian language and script officially, while
the major part (61.8%), in the same town, has nothing of this benefit“.

107.

In the educational system of the Republic of Serbia, at pre-school level, at
primary and secondary schools there is no teaching in Macedonian language
arranged. Study of Macedonian language with elements of national culture as the
school subject at primary and secondary schools is not arranged, because there
were no requests by any pupils to do so according to the information of the
Provincial Secretariat of Education. The number of pupils of Macedonian
nationality attending primary and secondary schools in the territory of AP of
Vojvodina is shown in the Table below:

60

School Year

Level of Education
2006/2007

2007/2008

2008/2009

Primary education

696

755

682

Secondary education

301

291

308

108.

The National Council of the Macedonian National Minority has prepared the
curricula for Macedonian language with elements of national culture to be taught
from the first to the fourth grade of primary school. After the provision of the
positive opinion from the Ministry of Education, teaching of Macedonian
language with elements of national culture will be introduced into primary
schools in settlements where a larger number of the members of the Macedonian
national minority live (Jabuka, Kačarevo, Plandište, Hajdučica, Gudurica), if the
pupils express interest to study this subject. Macedonian language is studied at
three faculties in the Republic of Serbia. At the Faculty of Philology in Belgrade,
Department of Serbian Language and South Slav Languages, Macedonian is
studied as an optional subject. Study is arranged at the level of foreign-language
instructorship and takes place at the third year within two semesters. 10 students
enrolled to study Macedonian language in 2009/2010 school year. At the Faculty
of Philosophy in Novi Sad, Macedonian language is studied as an optional subject
at the Department of Serbian Language, Department of Serbian Literature and
Department of Russian Language and Literature. The study of this subject takes
place at the fourth year and lasts for two semesters. 57 students enrolled to study
Macedonian language at all three departments in the 2009/2010 school year. At
the Faculty of Philosophy in Niš, Macedonian is studied as an optional language
within the Study programme of Serbian Language and Literature. The study of
this subject takes place at the first year and lasts for two semesters. 48 students
enrolled to study Macedonian language in the 2009/2010 school year.

109.

In the sphere of public information in the Republic of Serbia Macedonian
language is represented in electronic and printed media. In addition to half an
hour programmes broadcast once a week with the Public Broadcasting Agency of
Vojvodina, the Novi Sad Radio and the RTV Vojvodina, Pančevo TV broadcasts
half an hour programme in Macedonian language once a week. The National
Council of the Macedonian National Minority is the founder of the Macedonian
Information and Publishing Centre, which is the publisher of the Makedonska
videlina, also including the Sunica (Rainbow) children's newspaper. Subsidies of
the Provincial Secretariat of Information of AP of Vojvodina for this magazine
amounted to 12,490,000.00 dinars. In 2008 the Ministry of Culture also cofinanced periodical publications in the field of art and culture in Macedonian
language. The Videlo, magazine for literature, art and culture was co-financed
with 50,000.00 dinars, which is published by the Macedonian Information and
Cultural Centre. This Centre is also the main publisher of books in Macedonian
language, which, in addition to books in Macedonian language, also publishes
translations of the books written by Macedonian authors into Serbian language
61

and translations of the books written by Serbian authors into Macedonian
language. Five books were published within the previous two years.
110.

For fostering of language and culture they represent, cultural manifestations of
speakers of such languages are of importance. Cultural manifestations related to
Macedonian language are co-financed on tender basis from the republic and
provincial budgets. The tables below show examples of such co-financing:

Funds awarded by the Ministry of Culture for projects/programmes whose quality contributes to
development and presentation of art and culture of national minorities to hold cultural
manifestations related to Macedonian language
Beneficiary

Project

The Kiril i Metodije, Association of
Citizens of Macedonian National
Minority in the South Bačka District,
Novi Sad
The National Council of the
Macedonian National Minority,
Pančevo
Macedonian Information and
Publishing Centre, Pančevo

Granted Funds

Days of Macedonian Culture in Novi
Sad

200,000.00

Денови на македонското творештво
во Република Србија - Кон себе бо
поход /Sebi u pohode
Second Days of Macedonian Culture in
Serbia - Себи у походе

150,000.00

450,000.00

Funds awarded by the Provincial Secretariat of Culture of
AP of Vojvodina to hold cultural manifestations related to Macedonian language
Beneficiary
Place
Jabuka

The Kosta Racin, Culture Club

Pančevo

The National Council of the
Macedonian National Minority

Purpose
4th, 5th and 6th Theatre Festival for
Children
Days of Macedonian Tradition – Sebi
u pohode

Amount
80,000.00

105,000.00

3.2.4. German language
111.

German language is not officially used in any unit of local self-government
because it does not meet legal requirements for compulsory introduction into
equal official use for in the territory of the Republic of Serbia there is no unit of
local self-government, namely in the territory of AP of Vojvodina there is no
settlement or local community where the number of the members of the German
national minority reaches 15%, namely 25 % of the total number of inhabitants of
the unit of local self-government concerned, namely of the settlement or local
community.

112.

For children of pre-school age at a pre-school institution in Subotica bilingual
teaching is arranged in Serbian and German languages.
62

School Year

Number of Local SelfGovernments

Number of Pre-School
Institutions

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

1
1
1

1
1
1

113.

Number of Local SelfGovernments

Number of Pre-School
Institutions

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

1
1
1

1
1
1

Number
of
Groups
1
1
1

Number
of
Children
18
22
23

In the educational system the Republic of Serbia at primary and secondary
schools there is no teaching in German language or study of German language
with elements of national culture as the school subject. Study of German language
with elements of national culture at primary and secondary schools is not arranged
since the pupils did not express wishes to do so. Nevertheless, thanks to the fact
that German language is one of the world languages, it is present as one of foreign
languages at schools and faculties in Serbia. It is a good opportunity for children
of the German national minority to learn and improve their mother tongue at
school during classes of German language as a foreign language subject. The
number of pupils of the German nationality attending primary and secondary
schools in the territory of AP of Vojvodina is contained in the Table below:
School Year

Level of Education
2006/2007

2007/2008

2008/2009

Primary

111

90

99

Secondary

63

58

54

115.

Number
of
Children
22
43
50

Teaching in German and Hungarian languages is carried out at a pre-school
institution in Subotica.

School Year

114.

Number
of
Groups
1
2
2

In the Republic of Serbia, German language and literature are studied at the
Faculty of Philology in Belgrade, Department of German Language and
Literature, the Faculty of Philosophy in Novi Sad, Department of German
Language and Literature and at the Faculty of Philology in Kragujevac,
Department of German Studies, Section of German Language and Literature. The
Table below contains the data about the number of students studying German
language and literature at the above mentioned university institutions.

School Year
2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

Faculty of Philology in
Belgrade
384
375
306

Faculty of Philosophy in
Novi Sad
231
254
248

Faculty of Philology in in
Kragujevac
27
30
30

63

116.

In the sphere of public information in the Republic of Serbia, German language is
represented in the programme of Radio Subotica, with 0.5 hours weekly, and the
programme on Radio Odžaci is also being prepared, which shall be broadcasted
weekly for up to 2 hours. Until March 2010, TV Panonija from Novi Sad also
broadcasted supplements in German language within the weekly programme of
Multietnik in co-operation with the National Council of the German National
Minority. All supplements within this programme were broadcasted in minority
languages with dubbing in Serbian language, which contributes to learning of the
majority population about minority languages and cultures thy represent.

117.

The cultural days of the German national minority were held for the first time in
June 2008 in Novi Sad and then in October the same year in Subotica. This
manifestation was supported by the Ministry of Culture with 200,000.00 dinars,
based on the tender for co-financing of projects/programmes whose quality
contributes to development and presentation of art and culture of national
minorities. On tender basis, the Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of
Vojvodina supported the following cultural manifestations related to German
language:

Place

Beneficiary
The Karlovic, German
Association for Good
Neighbourhood Relations

Sremski
Karlovci

Sremska
Mitrovica

Gete, German Cultural Centre

Purpose

Amount

Gathering of Publicists

44,000.00

Festival of Reciters

20,000.00

Two theatre performances
Fostering of tradition and culture

80,000.00
50,000.00

3.2.5. Czech language
118.

In addition to Serbian language and Cyrillic script, Hungarian, Romanian and
Czech languages and scripts are officially used in the territory of Bela Crkva.
Within the last three years, in the territory of the municipality of Bela Crkva no
certificate from the registry books was issued in Serbian-Czech form and no
administrative proceedings were held in Czech language because no application
was submitted in this respect. It is similar in respect of the use of Czech language
at courts. Although necessary legal conditions to accomplish the right to use of
Czech language are fulfilled, this right is not accomplished in practice in full
because there are no requests by the holders of such right. The Matica Češka from
Bela Crkva stresses that „the members of the Czech national community are not
in the position to use mother tongue in curt and administrative proceedings,
primarily because of the lack of personnel to perform those jobs“.

119.

At primary and secondary schools in the educational system of the Republic of
Serbia there is no entire teaching in Czech and there is no teaching of Czech
language with elements of national culture. The curricula for 2007/2008 school
64

year provided introduction of the second foreign language as an optional subject,
but the Matica Češka stressed that „the members of this national minority could
not win that Czech language is equal with other languages in official use in
primary education“, and it expects that the things in respect of education in
minority languages, as well as in other fields, will be improved and the requests
by the speakers of Czech language be strengthened by the election of the National
Council of the Czech National Minority. The number of pupils of the Czech
nationality attending primary and secondary schools in the territory of AP of
Vojvodina is contained in the Table below:
School Year

Level of Education
2006/2007

2007/2008

2008/2009

Primary

133

120

104

Secondary

38

46

51

120.

121.

In the Republic of Serbia Czech language and literature are studied at the Faculty
of Philology in Belgrade, Department of Czech Language and Literature. The
Table below shows the number of students studying this language.
School Year

Number of Enrolled
Students at First Year

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

24
23
15

Total Number of
Students in All
Four Years
82
82
55

In the sphere of public information, Czech is only represented on Radio Bela
Crkva, with one hour programme weekly. The Ministry of Culture – Media
Sector, on tender basis for co-financing of projects/programmes in the field of
public information in minority languages, awarded the funds for projects in Czech
language as shown in the Table below.

Project Applicant

Project Title

Lui Studio– Radio sunce, Bela Crkva

Initiation of Programmes in Czech
Language for Young People
Preservation of Czech Cultural
Heritage in the Municipality of Bela
Crkva

The BC info, Bela Crkva

122.

Granted Funds
120,000.00
253,346.00

In order to promote and preserve Czech language and culture it represents,
cultural manifestations on tender basis from the republic and provincial budgets
were also co-financed. Examples of such financing are shown in the Table below:

Funds awarded by the Ministry of Culture for projects/programmes whose quality contributes to
development and presentation of art and culture of national minorities to hold cultural
manifestations related to Czech language

65

Beneficiary

Project

The Matica Češka, Bela Crkva
Radio Sunce – Glas južnog Banata,
Bela Crkva
Češka beseda, Kruščica

Granted Funds

Presentation of monography –
Kolonizacija Čeha u Banatu
Pričam ti priču
Folklore Festival of Czechia in Serbia

50,000.00
100,000.00
50,000.00

Funds awarded by the Provincial Secretariat of Culture of
AP of Vojvodina to hold cultural manifestations related to Czech language
Place
Bela Crkva
Bela Crkva

Beneficiary
KPU Česi Južnog Banata
The Dositej Obradović School
Plus

Намена
Days of Czech Culture
Traditional Works of Czechs in the
South Banat

Amount
128,000.00
35,000.00

3.3. Activities for the implementation of box-recommendation of the Committee of
Experts related to Article 7 of the Charter
123.

In the Report on the Implementation of the Charter in the first reporting cycle, the
Committee of Experts established five box-recommendations related to Article 7
of the Charter. The following paragraphs contain the information on the activities
undertaken by the state for their implementation.

3.3.1. Information on the practical use of Czech language by the administrative
authorities and at the Municipal Court of Bela Crkva
The Committee of Experts encourages the Serbian authorities to take measures to
facilitate the practical use of Czech by the administrative authorities and the
municipal court of Bela Crkva.
124.

The Statute of the municipality of Bela Crkva establishes that Czech language and
script are officially used in the territory of the municipality. The official use of
language and script of national minorities implies in particular: use of minority
languages in administrative and court proceedings and conduct of administrative
and court proceedings in minority languages, use of minority language in
communications of bodies having public powers with citizens; issuance of public
documents and keeping of official records and collections of personal data in
minority languages and acceptance of such documents in minority languages as
valid, use of language in election lists and election materials, use of language in
the activities of representation bodies. In addition, the employees of the body
issuing public documents are obliged to notify to the member of national minority
his/her right to request that public document is issued in two languages – in
Serbian and in minority language and script, in the form published in two
languages. Certificates of education, if teaching was carried out in minority
language, other public documents, as well as other documents of interest for the
accomplishment of the rights of citizens prescribed by law and other regulations,
66

which are issued based on records, at the request of members of national
minorities, are also issued in his/her language. The forms of public documents, as
well as the forms of records for the requirements of the area where minority
languages are officially used, are printed in two languages, in Serbian and in
minority language officially used. A member of the national minority has the right
to provide oral, namely written reply in the language he/she referred to the body.
Therefore, the introduction of Czech language and script into the official use in
the territory of Bela Crkva, provided assumptions that citizens may use their
rights resulting from it, but so far there has been interest for the concrete
accomplishment of that established right by the citizens of the municipality of
Bela Crkva. At the municipal administration and related local offices there was
supervision related to the official use of language and script, and accordingly, in
the places where irregularities were noticed, orders were issued to eliminate them.
The Government of AP of Vojvodina considered in June 2010 the information on
the implementation of the Provincial Assembly decision in multi-lingual forms of
certificates from registry books and on the method of entry of data into them, and
on this occasion it adopted conclusions charging, inter alia, the Provincial
Secretariat for Regulations, Administration and National Minorities to supervise
continually the implementation of the mentioned decision in the units of local
self-government, especially in the municipalities where no certificate from the
registry books in two languages was issued, then in the municipalities where no
certificate from the registry books in two languages was issued, namely certificate
of citizenship in two languages or no administrative proceedings conducted in
minority languages, also indicating the municipality of Bela Crkva.
125.

Although there was an option to use Czech language at the Municipal Court in
Bela Crkva, according to the information obtained from the Magistrate Court in
Vršac (to which, according to the new network of courts of 1 January 2010, the
competences of the Municipal Court in Bela Crkva were transferred), no court
proceedings were held in this language, and the accused and the witnesses did not
use their right to use this minority language. The Magistrate Court in Vršac has a
court unit in Bela Crkva, where there is only one judge in charge of civil cases,
while criminal proceedings are held in Vršac. After the re-organization of courts
and the introduction of the new system, in the forthcoming period the Ministry of
Justice intends to pay more attention to the creation of positive measures to
facilitate practical use of minority languages at courts, including Czech as well.

3.3.2. Information on the structured policy for the protection and promotion of
Vlach language
The Committee of Experts encourages the Serbian authorities to adopt a
structured policy for the protection and promotion of Vlach and to strengthen its
use in public life.
126.

As stated in the Section 3.2.2. of the Report, Vlach language is not standardized
and the speakers of this language do not agree about its standardization. The very
67

example of Vlach language shows that the lack of standardized language
represents the basic obstacle for its introduction into public life. Namely, since
Vlach language is not standardized the state is not in the position to undertake the
activities and measures to organize education in this language, through opening of
university institutions where teaching of this language would be organized, which
would contribute to the provision of teaching personnel for the performance of
teaching in Vlach language in the educational system of the Republic of Serbia.
The lack of study of Vlach language further results in the impossibility of use of
this language in all spheres of public life, and it generally disables the state to
adopt structured policy for the protection and promotion of Vlach language. That
is why the standardization of Vlach language is the most important prerequisite
for the approach of the state to the issues of full protection of this language.
Standardization of Vlach language must be initiated and performed within the
framework of Vlach national minority, without interference of the state and the
state authorities. In spite of the lack of standardization of this language, in certain
spheres which do not require standardization of language there are certain
encouragements by the state in using Vlach language, e. g. in information or
culture, affirming and promoting this language.
3.3.3. Information on the activities to provide for the teaching of Part II languages
of the Charter
The Committee of Experts encourages the Serbian authorities to provide for the
teaching of/in Part II languages within the 3 models of regional or minority
language education at all appropriate stages.
127.

In relation to the First Periodic Report on the Implementation of the Charter,
certain steps forward are reported in the Republic of Serbia in provision for the
teaching of Part II languages of the Charter. The section 3.2. contains a review of
teaching of these languages at all levels of education, as well as the reasons
preventing the organization of teaching in certain languages or their teaching
within the school subject of mother tongue with elements of national culture. The
adoption of the new Law on Fundamentals of Educational System, as well as the
election of national councils of national minorities, which also prescribe the
formation of educational boards, will enable essentially new approach to the
issues of education in minority languages, too. The Republic of Serbia is willing
to support and encourage any initiative in the field of education in minority
languages, which would make them an integral part of its educational system.
Parallelly to this process, the assumptions to perform education in minority
languages must also be ensured in co-operation with all interested social factors,
primarily to resolve the issue of deficit of teaching staff by securing continuing
education in minority languages.

3.3.4. Information on the activities to promote awareness and tolerance vis-à-vis the
minority languages and the cultures they represent
68

The Committee of Experts encourages the Serbian authorities to continue their
efforts to promote awareness and tolerance vis-à-vis the regional or minority
languages and the cultures they represent as an integral part of the cultural
heritage of Serbia, both in the general curriculum at all stages of education and
in the media.
128.

Encouragement and fostering of the spirit of tolerance and inter-cultural dialogue
is of priceless importance in multi-ethnic, multi-linguistic and multi-cultural
societies such as the society of the Republic of Serbia. The Republic of Serbia
undertakes considerable measures at various levels in the development of the
spirit of tolerance and inter-cultural dialogue. The implementation of Articles 11
and 12 of the Charter includes the measures of the state and provincial authorities
to raise awareness in respect of minority languages and cultures they represent,
through co-financing of projects affirming minority languages and developing
awareness on the existence of diversities in the Serbian society.

129.

The programmes/projects of promotion of multi-cultural and inter-cultural
dialogue and better knowledge and understanding between various communities
also contribute to the development of the spirit of tolerance, which are cofinanced by the Ministry of Culture – Media Sector. For example, in 2007, out of
the totally disbursed sum at the tender (11,170,245.00 dinars), almost two million
dinars were awarded to multi-cultural and inter-cultural projects, in 2008 –
6,029,772.00 dinars out of 23,527,056 dinars in total, and at the tender in 2009 in
the total sum of 18,118,604.00 dinars, these projects participated with
3,850,000.00 dinars. In addition to continuing subsidies to minority media and the
support to information in minority languages, since 2009 the Provincial
Secretariat of Information of AP of Vojvodina has been issuing the tender for cofinancing projects affirming multi-culture and development of multi-linguistics
and inter-culturalism in public media. The amount of funds awarded or this
purpose amounted to 3,500,000.00 dinars.

130.

In co-operation between the Ministry of State Administration and Local SelfGovernment and the UNDP, the preparation processes of the projects of
Promotion of Peace Keeping in the South Serbia and Strengthening of Capacities
for Inclusive Local Development in the South Serbia were completed, the
implementation of which started at the end of 2009. These two projects are aimed
at rendering support to the activities for the maintenance of stability in the South
Serbia, and the employees of local self-government and specialized institutions,
vulnerable communities, the young and women are the target group. The projects
will contribute to the improvement of interethnic understanding and respect for
diversities through strengthening of local institutions, improvement of public
services rendering and encouragement of economic development. Both the
projects are aimed at: improvement of co-living of all nations in the South Serbia;
further development of relations between the local population of different
nationalities, mainly the Serbs, the Albanians and the Roma through strengthening
of local community and institutions in charge of peace making; training of local
69

officials, media and the young with the aim to qualify them to mediate and hold
dialogues, as well as to raise awareness of gender equality, national tolerance and
respect for diversities; promotion of active participation of women, the young and
the members of national minorities in political, economic and cultural life;
improvement of access to state/local administration bodies for women and the
members of national minorities as well as encouragement of equality in power;
incitement of economic development and employment; implementation of priority
regional development projects and building of capacities of units of local selggovernment to manage migrations. The implementation of the project of
Promotion of Peace Keeping in the South Serbia is planned within the period of
2.5 years and the funds had been provided from the Fund for Encouragement of
Millennium Development Goals of the Kingdom of Spain (MDGF), while the
implementation of the project of Strengthening of Capacities for Inclusive Local
Development in the South Serbia is planned within the period of 3 years, while the
funds had been provided by the development agencies: SIDA from Sweden, SDC
from Switzerland, NOK from Norway, UNDP, BCPR. In addition to the Ministry
of State Administration and Local Self-Government, other partners at the national,
namely local level are: the Ministry of Youth and Sports, the Ministry of
Economy and Regional Development, the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of
Health, the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy – Directorate of Gender
Equality, the Ministry of Human and Minority Rights, the Office of the
Commissioner for refugees, the Co-ordinating Body of the Government of the
Republic of Serbia for the Municipalities of Preševo, Bujanovac and Medveña,
the office of the Ombudsman, municipalities and youth offices.
131.

The project of the Government of the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina of
Affirmation of Multiculturalism and Tolerance in Vojvodina, whose primary goal
is to foster cultural diversities and development of the spirit of inter-ethnic
tolerance among the citizens of Vojvodina has been successfully implemented
since 2005. The main project partner is the Provincial Secretariat for Regulations,
Administration and National Minorities. The project has been designed as the
complex multi-thematic and multi-cultural programme, aimed at the idea of
strengthening of inter-ethnic confidence among the young in Vojvodina. The
long-term basic aim of this project is to develop the spirit of tolerance, mutual
respect and confidence among the citizens of Vojvodina, with the engagement of
all relevant stakeholders. At present, the project is in its fifth stage of
implementation. It includes several sub-projects.
● The sub-project of Sports Competitions with an additional content of Tolerance
Cup represents organization of sports competitions with additional cultural
contents by pupils of primary and secondary schools in five popular team sports,
according to the cup system, in 7 towns of Vojvodina. The attention is primarily
directed towards the young, as the main target group, and through the cooperation with educational institutions from the whole of Vojvodina a large
number of participants has been achieved thus enabling the main message of the
project to reach a large number of young people. Together with sports
70

competitions, whole day accompanying cultural-entertainment programme is
organized for all participants of competitions. The teams are formed as multiethnic teams, and all competitions are covered by multi-lingual signs and referral
in the languages of the environments the competitions take place in. Cultural
programmes are designed to reflect representation of all communities in the
territory of Vojvodina.
● The sub-project of How We Know Each Other includes several activities:
1) The television quiz competition of secondary school pupils in history and
culture of national communities from the territory of Vojvodina. The goal of the
sub-project is to educate the population, primarily the young, about the common
history and culture of various national communities living in Vojvodina. The
documentation for the preparation of competitors had been translated into the
languages officially used in the territory of AP of Vojvodina, in order to achieve
linguistic equality of competitors.
2) How We Know Each Other – Send SMS, a quiz radio version, is designed as a
contact programme in the form of a quiz with historical and cultural topics related
to national minorities of Vojvodina, where the replies are provided by sending
SMS messages for which listeners get awards.
3) We also know it is the competition of disabled persons in knowledge of history
and culture of national minorities of Vojvodina.
4) How We Know Each Other – the Book about Vojvodina, is aimed at
preparation and publishing of handbooks about Vojvodina, in which relevant
experts are included, stressing multi-perspective approach to this issue and
promotion of the publication as an additional teaching aid and secondary
literature. This project is also partly aimed at education of teaching staff of higher
levels of primary and secondary schools, in the sense of improvement of
knowledge about the events from common history, cultural and other links of the
nations in the territory of Vojvodina. It is planned to print this publication in all
officially used languages in AP of Vojvodina, and in English, too.
● The sub-project of Living Together also includes several activities:
1) Homeland on the Danube – Co-living of Germans and Serbs in Vojvodina,
implies the preparation of museum exhibition and organization of visits to several
towns in Europe (Ulm, Brussels...) and Vojvodina. The goals of these activities
are affirmation of positive values from the common history of the two nations,
cross-cuttings and cultural influences between the Serbs and the Germans, as a
considerable contribution to historic and European experiences in the
development of multi-culturalism and multi-ethnic tolerance.
2) Living Together – Co-Living of the Serbs and the Hungarians – Mobile Form,
implies the implementation of an exhibition that in an original, modern and multimedia manner presents the topics from the common history and culture and the
resulting cross-cutting and influences of the members of the Serbian and the
Hungarian community in Vojvodina. The exhibition has been prepared in two
languages (Serbian and Hungarian), it is accompanied by catalogues and
71

explanations in two languages provided by the custodians who speak both Serbian
and Hungarian.
3) Wealth of Diversities prescribes that a tender shall be issued for the best
amateurish photograph on the subject of multi-culturalism of Vojvodina, the
selection of the best photographs by the expert jury and organization of
exhibitions of received photographs in several places in Vojvodina. The direct
goal of these activities is to draw the attention of the public to the goals of the
project through information about the tender and announcement of the exhibition,
namely visits to different places and thus direct promotion of multi-culturalism as
the value of Vojvodina through a modern artistic expression.
4) Together is a documentary TV series, which treats and presents diversities of
Vojvodina in an original way, as well as the common living and customs of its
population. Common history, cross-cuttings and influences, differences and
similarities, multi-ethnicity of Vojvodina are presented by means of film and
music records. Its television presentation should considerably contribute to system
education of population, especially of the young, to better learning about each
other, understanding, common living and more tolerant relations. The series is
made and broadcasted in the language of the environment where the programmes
had been recorded with subsequent dubbing (in several languages officially used
in AP of Vojvodina) in order to make it suitable to the large public.
● The sub-project of Media Campaign – Multiculturalism of Vojvodina represents
a media promotion and stressing of ideas of multi-culturalism and tolerance as
universal values of each society by means of various forms of media presentation,
through short messages related to the mentioned topics. It is implemented through
print campaign (making of promotional printed matter), television and radio
campaign and activities concerning promotion and information to the public about
the activities in the implementation of the project.
● The sub-project of Ethno Day implies the creation and organization of the series
of presentations of national communities living in Vojvodina with all linguistic,
dance, cultural, historic, gastronomic and other characteristics, which are
performed by the pupils of primary schools in Vojvodina and training of teaching
staff to implement the presentations on their own. The goals of the sub-project are
the improvement of awareness and knowledge of different properties of culture,
dance, history, etc. of various national communities living in Vojvodina and
acceptance of diversities as advantages and wealth of this region.
● The sub-project of Interetno Festival includes arrangement of exhibitions stands
– exhibitions of craftsmen works, mixed programmes, ethno concerts, dance and
music groups from Vojvodina and abroad, in the form of permanent programmes
and programmes of variable contents. It is held every year in Subotica in August.
The goal of the project is to provide conditions to learn about the tradition of folk
art and cultures of other nations, through participation of the largest possible
number of citizens, especially the young, which shall result in direct better
72

learning of Vojvodina cultural heritage and contribute to the level of knowledge
about multi-cultural Vojvodina.
● The sub-project of Evaluation of State of Inter-Ethnic Relations among the
Young in Vojvodina is implemented through expert and system monitoring and
evaluation of the present state of inter-ethnic relations among the young in
Vojvodina, and through the introduction of the mechanism of monitoring of the
state of affairs at educational institutions and training of staff for independent
evaluation of state of affairs.
132.

All the above mentioned sub-projects and activities deal with the subject of multiculturalism as the value of importance for cultural identity of Vojvodina including
respect and affirmation of multi-ethnicity and multi-linguistics in various forms
by means of publishing the project documentation in several languages, by
providing display and boards in several languages for manifestations, use of
traditional names of places at manifestations related to the projects, by applying
the criteria of multi-ethnicity when appointing and forming teams of participants
in certain project activities, by broadcasting the contents of the project in several
languages.

3.3.5. Information on provision of a stable legal basis for the functioning of national
minority councils and magistrate meetings of the Republic of Serbia Council for
National Minorities
The Committee of Experts encourages the Serbian authorities to secure a stable
legal basis for the functioning of national minority councils and ensure
magistrate meetings of the Republic of Serbia Council for National Minorities.
133.

The adoption of the Law on the National Councils of the National Minorities,
which rounded the legislative framework for promotion and protection of the
rights of national minorities in the Republic of Serbia, also including the rights to
use minority languages, and the elections for national councils of national
minorities as explained in the Section 2.2.2. of the Report., stable legal basis were
secured for the functioning of national councils of national minorities in the
Republic of Serbia.

134.

The funds for the functioning of national councils of national minorities are
provided from the budget of the Republic of Serbia, the budget of the
Autonomous Province and the budgets of units of local self-governments, from
donations and other income. The Table below contains the data on financing of
the functioning of national councils of national minorities from the republic and
provincial budgets, which, in the opinion of the authorities of the Republic of
Serbia represent a stable financial support for the performance of their activities.

Subsidies from the republic budget for the financing of the functioning of national councils of
national minorities, paid through the Ministry of Human and Minority Rights

73

NATIONAL COUNCIL
the Hungarian National Minority
the Bosniak National Minority
the Romani National Minority
the Croatian National Minority
the Slovak National Minority
the Vlach National Minority
the Romanian National Minority
the Macedonian National Minority
the Bulgarian National Minority
the Bunjevac National Minority
the Ruthenian National Minority
the Ukrainian National Minority
the German National Minority
the Union of Jewish Municipalities of
Serbia
the Egyptian National Minority
the Greek National Minority
TOTAL

Subsidies During 2008

Subsidies During 2009:2

21,097,566.00
15,060,516.00
12,982,716.00
11,334,666.00
10,176,666.00
8,478,216.00
8,238,066.00
7,854,966.00
7,620,819.00
7,599,516.00
7,094,316.00
6,631,866.00
6,568,116.00
6,407,010.00

19,797,776.00
14,104,854.00
12,150,567.00
10,592,802.00
9,559,013.00
8,029,570.00
7,802,987.00
7,434,787.00
7,222,365.00
7,194,042.00
6,755,036.00
6,316,029.00
6,259,383.00
6,146,091.00

6,432,816.00
6,422,166.00
150,000,000.00

6,131,930.00
6,117,768.00
141,615,000.00

Co-financing of costs for the regular functioning of national councils of national minorities having
the seat in the territory of AP of Vojvodina, from the budgetary funds of the Provincial Secretariat
for Regulations, Administration and National Minorities

NATIONAL COUNCIL
the Hungarian National Minority
the Slovak National Minority
the Croatian National Minority
the Romanian National Minority
the Bunjevac National Minority
the Ruthenian National Minority
the Macedonian National Minority
the Ukrainian National Minority
the German National Minority
TOTAL

2008
11,880,000.00
3,375,000.00
3,375,000.00
2,415,000.00
2,030,000.00
1,880,000.00
1,740,000.00
1,480,000.00
1,425,000.00
29,600,000.00

2009 3
4,617,500.00
1,332,500.00
1,331,500.00
962,500.00
799,000.00
743,000.00
689,000.00
586,500.00
563,500.00
11,625,000.00

135.

The new decree on the Council of the Republic of Serbia for National Minorities
secured magistrate meetings of this body. Article 5 of the decree prescribes that
the Council shall meet as required, however, at least four times a year. At the
request of at least half of the national councils, the president of the Council is
obliged to summons a meeting within the period not longer than 30 days.

136.

The first meeting of the Council of the Republic of Serbia for National Minorities
was held on 30 October 2009, when this body was constituted, the secretary of the

2

Due to the economic crisis, the budget re-balance for 2009 reduced the amount of originally planned
funds for financing of the activities of the national councils.
3
Ibid.

74

Council was appointed and the Rules of Procedure were adopted. At the request
of national councils, the Council recognized the symbols (court of arms and flag)
and the national holidays of the Bulgarian, Vlach, Macedonian, Romanian,
Ruthenian and Ukrainian national minorities, while for the German and Slovak
national minorities it recognized court of arms and flag. The members of the
Council agreed that they will discuss the information concerning the state of
national minorities in Serbia at the next meeting.

75

4. PART III IMPLEMENTATION OF MEASURES TO PROMOTE USE OF
MINORITY LANGUAGES IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE OBLIGATIONS
CONTAINED IN ARTICLE 2 PARAGRAPH 2 OF THE CHARTER
4.1.

Article 8
Education
Selected paragraphs and sub-paragraphs

1. With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such
languages are used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without
prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
a)
(iii) to apply one of the measures provided for under (i) and (ii) above at least to
those pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient;
or
(iv) if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of pre-school
education, to favour and/or encourage the application of the measures referred to
under (i) to (iii) above;
b)
(iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under (i) to (iii) above at least to
those pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient;
c)
(iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under (i) to (iii) above at least
those pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number
considered sufficient;
d)
(iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under (i) to (iii) above at least to
those pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number
considered sufficient;
e)
(ii) to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher
education subjects; or
f)
(iii) if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult
education, to favour and/or encourage the offering of such languages as subjects
of adult and continuing education;
g) to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture
which is reflected by the regional or minority language;
76

4.1.1. Legislative changes of relevance for the implementation of Article 8 of the
Charter
137.

The Law on Fundamentals of Educational System governs the grounds of preschool, primary and secondary education and up-brining. The provision of Article
4 paragraph 1 item 14 of this Law prescribes, inter alia, that the goal of education
and up-brining is also to respect and foster tradition and culture of national
minorities and ethnic communities, as well as that the educational and up-brining
activities are carried out in mother tongue, bilingually or in Serbian language, in
accordance with another law. The provision of Article 9 paragraph 2 of this Law
prescribes that education and up-brining for the members of national minorities is
to be performed in their mother tongue. In exceptional cases, they may also be
performed bilingually or in Serbian language, in accordance with another law. In
the units of local self-government where the language and script of some national
minority is officially used, the document on the network of pre-school institutions
and primary schools shall be adopted after previously obtained opinion of the
national council of the national minority concerned, the language and script are
officially used, namely the language and script are in use in educational and upbrining activities (Article 29 paragraph 4). Article 54 of this Law prescribes that
the management bodies of pre-school institutions and schools, consisting of three
representatives of each employees, parents and unit of local self-government,
shall be appointed and discharged by the assembly of the unit of local selfgovernment. Article 58 paragraph 3 of this Law prescribes that the representatives
of national minorities shall be proportionally represented in the council of parents
at the institutions where the speakers of minority languages are educated and the
representatives of ethnic groups, respectively. At the institutions where
educational and up-bringing activities are also carried out in minority language,
the members of the management bodies – the representatives of the unit of local
self-government will be appointed after the opinion of the relevant national
council of national minority had been obtained. At an institution where in the
majority of classes education and up-brining are performed in some minority
language or if it had been established according to the law governing the
competences of national councils of national minorities that they are of particular
importance for the national minority concerned, the national council of the
national minority shall propose at least one member of the unit of local selfgovernment in the management body (Article 54 paragraphs 4 and 5). At such
institutions the management body shall, pursuant to Article 60 paragraph 2,
appoint the manager after the opinion of the relevant national council of national
minority had been obtained. In Article 69 this Law gives an opportunity to
primary and secondary schools to accomplish individual educational programme
for minority languages, too for pupils who do not know the language of teaching.
The provision of Article 74 paragraph 1 item 4 of this Law prescribes that the
curriculum for primary and secondary education shall be adopted in accordance
with the established general and special standards and it shall include, inter alia,
the recommended method of adjustment of the curriculum of subjects of
importance for the national minority concerned and bilingual education. The
77

Minister in charge of education shall adopt the curricula for primary and
secondary education for the members of national minorities at the proposal of the
national council of national minority and the opinion of the National Educational
Council (Article 79 paragraph 4). At the proposal of the national council of
national minority, the school shall engage an interpreter if there is no other way to
test a child in mother tongue enrolled into primary school by the psychologist and
the pedagogue, pursuant to the provisions of Article 98 paragraph 4. This Law
also prescribes the conditions for the performance of educational and up-brining
activities in mother tongue at educational institutions. The provisions of Article
121 paragraphs 6-8 prescribe that the jobs of child minder at pre-school
institutions and class teachers, if education and up-bringing are performed in
minority language, except for Romani language, may also be performed by a
person that had obtained adequate knowledge in the language the education is
carried out or passed an exam including methodics, according to the curriculum of
an adequate university institution, whereas the jobs of a teacher and expert
associate at school may be performed by a person that had obtained secondary,
higher or university education in minority language or passed an exam in the
language concerned according to the programme of an adequate university
institution. A teacher and a teaching assistant shall evidence the knowledge of
Romani language before the commission to be established by the Minister also
including a proposal of the national council elected for the Romani national
minority.
138.

The Law on Textbooks and Other Teaching Aids governs preparations, approvals,
publishing and selection of textbooks and textbook sets for primary and secondary
schools, as well as their monitoring and assessment during the use in educational
and up-bringing activities. Article 3 paragraph 2 of this Law prescribes that a
textbook shall be printed in minority languages and scripts for pupils for whom
education and up-brining are performed in the language concerned. The National
Educational Council shall, at the proposal of the Institute for the Promotion of
Education and Up-Bringing and the national councils of national minorities,
establish the necessity of textbooks in minority language and textbooks in
subjects of interest for national minorities (Article 9 paragraph 2). Preparations of
textbooks shall be carried out according to the procedure established by this Law,
and the Minister in charge of education shall approve textbooks for minority
languages and for certain subjects of interest for national minorities at the
proposal of the National Educational Council and on the grounds of positive
opinion of the national council of national minority. The textbooks approved by
the Minister for publishing in Serbian language − after the translation into
minority language and script, shall be approved after the expert opinion on the
quality of the manuscript of the textbook had been obtained from the Institute for
the Promotion of Education and Up-Bringing (Article 20 paragraphs 3 and 4).
Pursuant to Article 21 of this Law, the body of the Autonomous Province in
charge of educational affairs shall approve publishing and use of the textbooks in
the territory of the Autonomous Province, at the proposal of the council
concerned and the national council of national minority. This Law gives an option
78

to the Minister and to the body in charge of educational affairs in the territory of
the Autonomous Province respectively, to approve, at the explained request of an
adequate expert body at school, the textbook for the relevant subject and class in
use in the native country and that is printed in minority language and script, after
the positive opinion of the national council of national minority and the Institute
for the Promotion of Education and Up-Bringing had been obtained (Article 28
paragraphs 3 and 4).
139.

The Law on Pre-school Education, which governs pre-school education, as a part
of uniform system of education and up-bringing, prescribes in Article 5 paragraph
2 that education shall be performed in mother tongue for the members of national
minorities, and that it may also be performed bilingually or in Serbian language, if
at least 50% of parents and custodians of children so desire. The statute of a preschool institution shall establish the language in which education shall be
performed, and pre-school curriculum shall define the method how to accomplish
it. Article 6 of this Law prescribes that a pre-school institution and a school,
which implement pre-school curriculum, shall keep records of their activities and
issue certificates of attendance of preparatory pre-school classes. If education is
performed in minority language, a pre-school institution and a school
respectively, which performs preparatory pre-school classes, shall keep records in
the language concerned, and forms of certificates of attendance of pre-school
classes shall be printed in Serbian language in Cyrillic script and bilingually, in
Serbian language and in minority language being officially used. Article 19 of this
law provides an option that within the pre-school curriculum it is possible to
implement special curricula, including, inter alia, fostering of language and
culture of national minorities. More detailed conditions of types, method of
accomplishment and financing of those curricula shall be defined by the Minister
in charge of educational affairs. This Law also prescribes the number of children
who are to enrol into each group organizing education and up-brining of children.
Article 32 defines that education and up-bringing in bilingual groups may be
implemented if the number of children is for 10% less than the number of children
established by this Law. This Law also specifies fines for offences by pre-school
institutions, namely by schools organizing pre-school curriculum, as well as for
managers and responsible persons at the institutions concerned, if, inter alia, they
do not enable parents to declare in which language their children shall attend preschool classes (Article 53).

140.

The national councils of national minorities have, inter alia, special powers at
educational institutions where teaching is performed in a minority language or
where speech, language or culture of a national minority are taught as a special
teaching subject. The national council proposes to the National Educational
Council the fundamentals of pre-school programme, curricula and programmes of
primary and secondary education for a minority language and gives opinions to
the National Educational Council about the curricula for Serbian language as nonmother tongue. The National Educational Council may propose, only under the
approval of the national councils of national minorities, to the Minister in charge
79

of educational affairs to give approval to use textbooks and teaching aids the
contents of which express specific properties of national minorities. The Minister
shall approve the use of domestic or imported textbooks in minority languages at
the proposal of the national council of national minority.
4.1.2. Pre-school education - practice
Teaching language: Albanian
141.

Pre-school education in Albanian language is carried out in the municipalities of
Bujanovac, Medveña and Preševo at 5 pre-school institutions.

School Year

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

Number of
Municipalities (Local
Self-Governments)
3
3
3

Number of Pre-school
Institutions
5
5
5

Number
of
Groups
56
54
54

Number
of
Children
997
958
843

Bilingual teaching: Serbian and Albanian
142.

Bilingual teaching in Serbian and Albanian languages was carried out at preschool institutions in the above mentioned three municipalities where there were
31 children in the 2007/2008 and 35 children in the 2008/2009 school year.

Teaching language: Bosniak
143.

A pre-school institution in Bosniak is opened with the Islamic Community Board
in Novi Pazar, which has 140 children. Teaching is organized in six groups.

Bilingual teaching: Serbian and Bosniak
144.

In Sjenica there is a pre-school institution attended by 350 children in three shifts,
but because of the similarity between the two languages there is no precise
difference between the speakers of Serbian and Bosniak languages. The procedure
of submission of applications and declaration of parents about the language they
want their children to study was not carried out at this pre-school institution. In
the municipality of Tutin there is a pre-school institution in two locations attended
by about 680 children in 45 groups and the state of teaching languages is identical
to the one in Sjenica.

MUNICIPALITY
Sjenica
Тutin

Number of Groups
16
45

Number of Children
350
680

Teaching language: Bulgarian
80

145.

There is no organized pre-school education in Bulgarian in the Republic of
Serbia.

Bilingual teaching: Serbian and Bulgarian
146.

Bilingual pre-school education in Serbian and Bulgarian is carried out in the
municipalities of Bosilegrad and Dimitrovgrad at two pre-school institutions.

School Year
2007/2008
2008/2009

Number of Groups
15
16

Number of Children
324
341

2009/2010

16

330

Teaching language: Hungarian
147.

Organized education in Hungarian language is carried out at 20 pre-school
institutions in 20 local self-governments in the territory of AP of Vojvodina (Ada,
Apatin, Bačka Topola, Bečej, Žitište, Zrenjanin, Kanjiža, Kikinda, Kovin, Kula,
Mali Iñoš, Novi Kneževac, Novi Sad, Odžaci, Senta, Sombor, Srbobran, Subotica,
Temerin and Čoka) and at three primary schools in Zrenjanin, Nova Crnja and
Čantavir.

School Year

Number of Local SelfGovernments

Number of Pre-school
Institutions/schools

2007/2008)
2008/2009
2009/2010

22
24
21

23
24
23

Number
of
Groups
256
245
231

Number
of
Cchildren
4,839
4,602
4,447

Bilingual Education: Serbian and Hungarian
148.

Organized bilingual education in Serbian and Hungarian languages is carried out
in 12 local self-governments in the territory of AP of Vojvodina (Ada, Bačka
Topola, Bečej, Žitište, Mali Iñoš, Inñija, Pančevo, Srbobran, Senta, Sombor,
Subotica and Čoka).

School Year

Number of Local SelfGovernments

Number of Pre-school
Institutions

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

12
12
12

12
12
12

Number
of
Groups
54
77
47

Number
of
Children
896
1,469
923

Bilingual education: Hungarian and German

149.

Organized bilingual education in Hungarian and German languages is carried out
at one pre-school institution in Subotica.
81

School Year

Number of Local SelfGovernments

Number of Pre-School
Institutions

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

1
1
1

1
1
1

Number
of
Groups
1
1
1

Number
of
Children
18
22
23

Teaching language: Romani
150.

There is no organized pre-school education in Romani language in the Republic
of Serbia.

Bilingual teaching: Serbian and Romani
151.

In the municipalities of Prokuplje, Surdulica, Bela Palanka, Pirot, Bojnik, Lebane,
Vladičin Han and towns of Kruševac and Vranje, non-governmental Romani
organizations, supported by the donations of REF and UNICEF have formed
development educational centres whose purpose is to organize and include
Romani children in education, which is carried out bilingually, in Serbian and
Romani languages. The table below contains the data about the number of
children attending education in two languages in Vranje and Kragujevac.

Town

School Year

Number of Groups

Number of Children

Vranje

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

6
6
6

230
150
55

Kruševac

152.

In AP of Vojvodina in the 2007/2008 school year the programme of care and
education for children from 6 months to 3 years and the educational programme
for children from 3 years up to the primary school age in Romani language were
accomplished for 1,002 children, and in the 2008/2009 school year for 960
children. In relation to the previous year the number of children was decreased for
4.19%.

Teaching language: Romanian
153.

Organized education for children from 3 years of age up to the primary school age
in Romanian language is carried out at 5 pre-school institutions in 5 local selfgovernments in the territory of of AP of Vojvodina (Alibunar, Bela Crkva, Žitište,
Kovačica, Plandišteand at 4 primary schools in the municipalities of Vršac,
Zrenjanin and Pančevo).

School Year

Number of Local SelfGovernments

Number of Pre-School
Institutions/schools

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

4
5
8

4
5
9

Number
of
Groups
15
14
17

Number
of
Children
175
183
138

82

Bilingual teaching: Serbian and Romanian
154.

Organized bilingual education in Serbian and Romanian languages is carried out
at 4 pre-school institutions and at one primary school in 4 local self-governments
(Alibunar, Kovačica, Vršac and Žitište and at the primary school in Uljma, the
municipality of Vršac).

School Year

Number of Local SelfGovernments

Number of Pre-School
Institutions/schools

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

3
4
4

3
4
5

Number
of
Groups
3
4
5

Number
of
Children
40
72
106

Teaching language: Ruthenian
155.

Organized education in Ruthenian language is carried out at 3 pre-school
institutions in 3 local self-governments in the territory of AP of Vojvodina
(Vrbas, Žabalj and Kula).

School Year

Number of Local SelfGovernments

Number of Pre-School
Institutions

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

3
3
3

3
3
3

Number
of
Groups
10
11
8

Number
of
Children
173
213
171

Teaching language: Slovak
156.

Organized education in Slovak language is carried out at 5 pe-school institutions
in 5 local self-governments of AP of Vojvodina (Alibunar, Bač, Bački Petrovac,
Stara Pazova, Novi Sad and at 3 primary schools in 2 local self-governments
(Bačka Palanka and Zrenjanin).

School Year

Number of Local SelfGovernments

Number of Pre-School
Institutions/schools

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

6
7
7

7
7
8

Number
of
Groups
48
48
37

Number
of
Children
1,002
960
785

Bilingual teaching: Serbian and Slovak
157.

Organized bilingual education in Serbian and Slovak languages is carried out at 2
pre-school institutions in 2 local self-governments in the territory of AP of
Vojvodina (Pančevo and Bačka Topola).
83

School Year

Number of Local SelfGovernments

Number of Pre-School
Institutions

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

3
3
2

3
3
2

Number
of
Groups
3
3
2

Number
of
Children
50
49
66

Teaching language: Ukrainian
158.

According to the data of the Provincial Secretariat of Education of AP of
Vojvodina for the 2009/2010 school year, there are 28 children of Ukrainian
nationality in total at pre-school institutions in 4 local self-governments: Vrbas,
Inñija, Kula and Sremska Mitrovica. The parents of these children expressed no
interest that their children are educated in Ukrainian language for which reason
the children of the Ukrainian nationality attend school in Serbian language.

Teaching language: Croatian
159.

Organized education in Croatian language is carried out at one pre-school
institution in Subotica.

School Year

Number of Local SelfGovernments

Number of Pre-School
Institutions

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

1
1
1

1
1
1

Number
of
Groups
3
3
3

Number
of
Children
63
59
58

Bilingual teaching: Serbian and Croatian
160.

Organized bilingual education in Serbian and Croatian languages is carried out in
Đurñin (Subotica).

School Year

Number of Local SelfGovernments

Number of Pre-School
Institutions

2007/2008
2008/2009

1
1

1
1

Number
of
Groups
1
1

Number
of
Children
22
20

4.1.3. Primary education - practice
Teaching in Albanian language
161.

Entire teaching in Albanian language in the Republic of Serbia is carried out at 17
primary schools in the territory of 3 municipalities, in Bujanovac, Medveña and
Preševo.

School Year

Number of
Municipalities

Number of
Schools

Number of Classes

Number of
Pupils

84

2007/2008
2009/2010

3
3

17
17

411
416

8,775
8,327

Teaching in Bosniak language
162.

No entire teaching in Bosniak language is carried out at any school in the
Republic of Serbia. The study of Bosniak language with elements of national
culture as a subject has been introduced into schools in the municipalities of Novi
Pazar, Sjenica, Tutin and Prijepolje.
2007/2008 School Year

MUNICIPALITY

Novi Pazar
Sjenica
Тutin
Total

Grade

I-V
I-V
I-V

Total
number of
children

Number
of
children
of Bosniak
nationality

7,165
1,712
2,555
11,432

6,303
1,549
2,500
10,352

Number of
children
who are
learning
Bosniak
language
4,568
1,424
2,500
8,492

%

88 %
90 %
98 %
90 %

%

72 %
92 %
100 %
74 %

2008/2009 School Year
School Year
2008/2009

Number of
Municipalities
4

Number of
Schools
22

Number of
Pupils
9.738

2009/2010 School Year
MUNICIPALITY

Grade

Total
number of
children

Number of
children of
Bosniak
nationality

Novi Pazar
Sjenica
Тutin
Total

I-VII
I-VII
I-VII

9,944
2,264
3,572
15,780

8,804
2,050
3,488
14,342

%

89 %
91 %
98 %
91 %

Number of
children
who are
learning
Bosniak
language
5,396
1,777
3,471
10,644

%

61 %
87 %
100 %
74 %

Teaching in Bulgarian language
163.

Entire teaching in Bulgarian language in the Republic of Serbia is carried out at
two primary schools in the municipalities of Bosilegrad and Dimitrovgrad.

School Year
2007/2008

Number
Municipalities
2

of

Number
Schools
2

of

Number of Classes
4

Number of
Pupils
26

85

2008/2009
2009/2010

164.

2
2

2
2

47
46

Bulgarian language with elements of national culture as a subject is taught at two
primary schools in the municipalities of Bosilegrad and Dimitrovgrad.
School Year
2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

165.

4
3

Number of
Municipalities
2
2
2

Number of
Schools
2
2
2

Number of
Pupils
672
675
1,330

The teaching of Bulgarian language with elements of national culture as a subject
is organized at one primary school in the territory of the local community of
Ivanovo (the town of Pančevo). Teaching of this subject is organized for 16 pupils
from the fifth to the seventh grades. For the first four grades there is no organized
teaching of Bulgarian language with elements of national culture as a subject due
to the lack of adequate textbooks. The newly elected National Council of the
Bulgarian National Minority has already undertaken certain preparatory actions to
organize teaching of this subject for pupils of all grades of the mentioned primary
school.

Teaching in Hungarian language
166.

Entire teaching in Hungarian language in the Republic of Serbia was carried out
in the territory of AP of Vojvodina. In the 2009/2010 school year at 77 regular
primary schools in 27 local self-governments (Ada, Apatin, Bačka Topola, Bela
Crkva, Bečej, Žitište, Zrenjanin, Kanjiža, Kikinda, Kovačica, Kovin, Kula, Mali
Iñoš, Nova Crnja, Novi Bečej, Novi Kneževac, Novi Sad, Odžaci, Pančevo,
Plandište, Senta, Sečanj, Sombor, Srbobran, Subotica, Temerin and Čoka).
Number of
Municipalities

Number of
Schools

Number of
Classes

School Year

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

167.

27
27
27

78
77
77

934
946
969

Number of
Pupils
Attending
School in
Hungarian
16,780
16,373
16,168

Number of
Pupils of
Hungarian
Nationality
16,016
15,708
15,516

Hungarian language with elements of national culture as a subject was tought in
the 2009/2010 school year at 47 regular primary schools in 20 local selfgovernments (Ada, Bačka Topola, Bečej, Vrbas, Vršac, Žitište, Zrenjanin, Inñija,
Kanjiža, Kikinda, Kovačica, Kula, Novi Bečej, Novi Sad, Pančevo, Plandište,
Senta, Sečanj, Sombor and Srbobran).
School
Year

Number of Local
Self-Governments

Number of
Schools

Number of
Pupils

86

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

22
21
20

48
50
47

1,585
1,570
1,463

Teaching in Romani language
168.

No entire teaching in Romani language is carried out at any school in the
Republic of Serbia. Although the state has undertaken numerous activities for
education of the Roma at all levels, in order to carry out teaching in Romani
language it is necessary to fulfil several prerequisites first. The most important
one is to define the dialect, i. e. to define the version of Romani language to be
used since Romani language is not standardized, and then to approve the
textbooks and other teaching aids and train professionally teachers at schools at
which teaching in Romani language will be organized. In the accomplishment of
these prerequisites the National Council of the Roma National Minority has a
crucial role because this very representative body is in charge of all initiatives to
provide the conditions for accomplishment of rights prescribed by law, including
the field of education as well.

169.

Romani language with elements of national culture as a subject was taught in AP
of Vojvodina in the 2009/2010 school year at 23 primary schools in 12 local selfgovernments (Ada, Bač, Bačка Palanka, Žabalj, Kikinda, Kovačica, Novi Sad,
Odžaci, Srbobran, Sremska Mitrovica, Subotica and Titel).

School Year

Number of
Municipalities

Number of
Schools

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

13
11
12

28
26
23

Number of pupils
Studying the Subject
of Romani language
with Elements of
national Culture
802
584
695

Teaching in Romanian language
170.

Entire teaching in Romanian language is organized in one grade at the school in
the Ovča dwelling area (the Belgrade municipality of Palilula) for 5 pupils. Entire
teaching in Romanian language was carried out in the territory of AP of
Vojvodina. In the 2009/2010 school year at 18 primary schools in 9 local selfgovernments (Alibunar, Bela Crkva, Vršac, Žitište, Zrenjanin, Kovačica,
Pančevo, Plandište and Sečanj).
Number of
Municipalities

Number of
Schools

Number of
Grades

9
9

18
18

92
97

School Year
2007/2008
2008/2009

Number of
Pupils
Attending
School in
Romanian
1,396
1,327

Number of
Pupils of
Romanian
Nationality
1,203
1,145

87

2009/2010

171.

9

18

117

1,258

1,092

Romanian language with elements of national culture as a subject was taught in
the territory of the School Administration with the seat in Belgrade at the Vasa
Pelagić Primary School in the Ovča dwelling area (the Belgrade municipality of
Palilula) in 4 grades for 12 pupils. Teaching of Romanian language with elements
of national culture as a subject was organized in the territory of AP of Vojvodina.
In the 2009/2010 school year at 9 primary schools in 8 local self-governments
(Alibunar, Bač, Žitište, Zrenjanin, Kovačica, Kovin, Plandište and Sečanj).
School
Year
2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

Number of Local
Self-Governments
11
10
8

Number of
Schools
13
11
9

Number of
Pupils
319
268
244

Teaching in Ruthenian language
172.

Entire teaching in Ruthenian was carried out in the territory of AP of Vojvodina
in the 2009/2010 school year at 3 regular schools in 3 local self-governments
(Vrbas, Žabalj and Kula).
Number of
Municipalities

Number of
Schools

School Year

Number of
Classes

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

173.

3
3
3

3
3
3

35
35
34

Number of
Pupils
Attending
School in
Ruthenian
588
559
523

Number of
Pupils of
Ruthenian
Nationality
521
490
446

Ruthenian language with elements of national culture as a subject was taught in
the 2009/2010 school year at 27 regular schools in 7 local self-governments
(Bačka Topola, Vrbas, Žabalj, Kula, Novi Sad, Sremska Mitrovica and Šid).
School
Year
2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

Number of Local
Self-Governments
7
7
7

Number of
Schools
22
24
27

Number of
Pupils
286
216
266

Teaching in Slovak language
174.

Entire teaching in Slovak language was carried out in the territory of AP of
Vojvodina. In the 2009/2010 school year at 17 regular schools in 12 local selfgovernments (Alibunar, Bač, Bačka Palanka, Bački Petrovac, Beočin, Zrenjanin,
Inñija, Kovačica, Novi Sad, Odžaci, Stara Pazova and Šid).
Number of

Number of

Number of

Number of

Number of

88

Municipalities

Schools

Classes

12
12
12

17
17
17

166
168
172

School Year

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

175.

Pupils
Attending
School in
Slovak
3,233
3,226
3,178

Pupils of Slovak
Nationality

3,108
3,102
3,062

Slovak language with elements of national culture as a subject was taught in the
Republic of Serbia at the Branko Radičević Primary School in Boljevci (City
municipality of Surcin). In the 2009/2010 school year this subject was studied by
43 pupils from the first to the eighth grades. Slovak language with elements of
national culture as a subject was taught in the territory of AP of Vojvodina. In the
2009/2010 school year at 38 regular primary schools in 11 local self-governments
(Bačка Palanka, Bačka Topola, Bački Petrovac, Beočin, Vrbas, Zrenjanin,
Kovačica, Novi Sad, Pančevo, Planidšte and Šid).
School
Year
2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

Number of Local
Self-Governments
11
10
11

Number of
Schools
34
37
38

Number of
Pupils
588
616
620

Teaching in Ukrainian language
176.

No entire teaching in Ukrainian language is carried out at any school in the
Republic of Serbia. Ukrainian language with elements of national culture as a
subject was taught in the 2009/2010 school year in AP of Vojvodina at 9 regular
primary schools in 4 local self-governments (Vrbas, Kula, Novi Sad and Sremska
Mitrovica).
School
Year
2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

177.

Number of Local
Self-Governments
4
4
4

Number of
Schools
9
9
9

Number of
Pupils
130
105
114

In Budisava, the dwelling area in the territory of the town of Novi Sad, the
teaching of Ukrainian language with elements of national culture as the language
of the environment was organized for the first time in the 2009/2010 school year
for 25 pupils. Only four pupils are Ukrainians and other pupils are of other
nationalities.

Teaching in Croatian language
178.

Entire teaching in Croatian language is organized at schools in the territory of AP
of Vojvodina. Teaching is organized at 5 regular schools in Subotica.
89

Number of
Municipalities

Number of
Schools

Number of
Classes

1
1
1

5
5
5

14
20
32

School Year

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

179.

Number of
Pupils
Attending
School in
Croatian
228
276
319

Number of
Pupils of
Croatian
Nationality
215
260
311

Croatian language with elements of national culture as a subject was taught in the
2009/2010 school year at 12 regular primary schools in the territory of 5 local
self-governments (Apatin, Bač, Sombor, Sremska Mitrovica and Subotica).
School Year
2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

Number of
Municipalities
3
3
5

Number of
Schools
7
6
12

Number of
Pupils
255
257
374

4.1.4. Secondary education - practice
Teaching in Albanian language
180.

Entire teaching in Albanian language is carried out at 2 grammar schools in the
municipalities of Bujanovac and Preševo.

School year
2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

The Skenderbeg Grammar
School, Preševo
1,041
1,010
1,067

Grammar School in
Bujanovac
986
1,221
1,364

Teaching in Bosniak language
181.

Entire teaching in Bosniak language as well as the teaching of Bosniak language
with elements of national culture as a subject is not organized at any secondary
school in the Republic of Serbia.

Teaching in Bulgarian language
182.

25 pupils attended entire teaching in Bulgarian language in the 2009/2010 school
year at the Ćirilo and Metodije Grammar School in Dimitrovgrad.

183.

Bulgarian language with elements of national culture as a subject was studied by
all 490 pupils at two grammar schools in Bosilegrad and Dimitrovgrad in the
2009/2010 school year.

Teaching in Hungarian language
90

184.

Entire teaching in Hungarian language was carried out in the territory of AP of
Vojvodina. Teaching is carried out at 9 grammar schools (7 standard grammar
schools in Bečej, Zrenjanin, Novi Sad, Novi Kneževac, Senta, Sombor and
Subotica and at two grammar schools for young talented people in Senta and
Subotica).

School Year

Number of
Municipalities

Number of
Schools

Number of
Classes

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

7
7
7

9
9
9

54
54
55

Number of Pupils
Attending School
in Hungarian
1,119
1,090
1,140

Teaching in Romani language
185.

There is no organized entire teaching in Romani language at secondary schools in
the territory of the Republic of Serbia. The reasons for this are the same as the
reasons for the lack of entire teaching in Romani language at the level of primary
education, which are explained in paragraph 168 of this Report.

Teaching in Romanian language
186.

Entire teaching in Romanian language is organized in the territory of AP of
Vojvodina. At the Borislav Petrov Braca Grammar School in Vršac, as a mixed
school, the pupils obtain grammar education in Romanian language.

School Year

Number of
Municipalities

Number of
Schools

Number of
Classes

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

1
1
1

1
1
1

4
4
4

187.

Number of
Pupils
Attending
School in
Romanian
107
114
119

Romanian language with elements of national culture as a subject is taught at the
Mihajlo Pupin Grammar School in Kovačica and at the Borislav Petrov Braca
Grammar School in Vršac.
School Year

Grammar School in
Kovačica,
Number of Pupils

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

16
18
16

Grammar
School in Vršac,
Number of
Pupils
21
14
12

Teaching in Ruthenian language
91

188.

Entire teaching in Ruthenian language is carried out in the territory of AP of
Vojvodina. Teaching in Ruthenian language is carried out at the Petro Kuzmjak
Grammar School in Ruski Krstur.

School Year

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

189.

Number of
Municipalities

Number of
Schools

1
1
1

1
1
1

Number of
Classes
4
4
4

Number of Pupils
Attending School
in Ruthenian
69
60
60

The teaching of Ruthenian language with elements of national culture as a subject
was organized for the first time in the 2007/2008 school year for 3 pupils at the
Isidora Sekulić Grammar School in Novi Sad, and since the 2008/2009 school
year it has also been organized at the Sava Šumanović Grammar School in Šid for
23 pupils.
School Year

The Grammar
School in Novi Sad,
Number of Pupils

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

3
2
2

The Grammar
School in Šid,
Number of
Pupils
23
39

Teaching in Slovak language
190.

Entire teaching in Slovak language is carried out in the territory of AP of
Vojvodina. Teaching in Slovak language is carried out at 2 grammar schools, the
Jan Kolar in Bački Petrovac and the Mihajlo Pupin in Kovačica.

School Year

Number of
Municipalities

Number of
Schools

Number of
Classes

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

2
2
2

2
2
2

14
13
14

191.

Number
of Pupils
Attending
School in
Slovak
379
341
344

The teaching of Slovak language with elements of national culture as a subject is
organized at the Grammar School in Bačka Palanka and at the Grammar School in
Stara Pazova.
School Year

The Grammar
School in Bačka
Palanka,
Number of Pupils

The Grammar
School in Stara
Pazova,
Number of
Pupils

92

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

14
12
13

20
22
21

Teaching in Ukrainian language
192.

No entire teaching in Ukrainian language was organized at any secondary school
in the Republic of Serbia and Ukrainian language with elements of national
culture as a subject is not taught, either, since the pupils did not say they desired
so. The Table below contains the number of pupils who are the members of the
Ukrainian national minority who attend secondary schools in the territory of AP
of Vojvodina.
School Year

Level of Education
Secondary

2006/2007

2007/2008

2008/2009

135

137

138

Teaching in Croatian language
193.

Entire teaching in Croatian language is carried out in the territory of AP of
Vojvodina. Teaching in Croatian language is carried out at the Svetozar Marković
Grammar School in Subotica.

School Year

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

194.

Number of
Municipalities

Number of
Schools

1
1
1

1
1
1

Number of Pupils
Attending School
in Croatian
15
43
32

Number of
Classes
1
2
2

Within the period from 2007 to 2009, Croatian language with elements of national
culture as a subject was not organized to be taught in the territory of AP of
Vojvodina.

4.1.5. Technical and vocational education - practice
Teaching in Albanian language
195.

In 2 municipalities, Medveña and Preševo, entire teaching at 2 secondary
technical schools is carried out in Albanian language for the number of pupils
shown in the table below:

School Year

2007/2008
2008/2009

The Secondary
School,
Preševo
827
1,272

Technical

The Secondary Technical
School, Medveña
9
14

93

2009/2010

1,379

15

Teaching in Bosniak language
196.

The Gazi Isa-beg Islamic religious secondary school opened in Novi Pazar. Entire
teaching is carried out in Bosniak language.

Teaching in Bulgarian language
197.

198.

Since the 2009/2010 school year teaching in Bulgarian language has been
organized at the Secondary Tourist School in Dimitrovgrad. Teaching is
organized for a class of 16 pupils.
Bulgarian language with elements of national culture as a subject is taught at two
secondary schools in Bosilegrad and Dimitrovgrad.
School Year

The Electrotechnical School in
Bosilegrad,
Number of Pupils

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

46
33
33

The Secondary
School of
Tourism in
Dimitrovgrad,
Number of
Pupils
128
129
128

Teaching in Hungarian language
199.

Entire teaching in Hungarian language is carried out in the territory of AP of
Vojvodina. Teaching in Hungarian language is carried out at 24 specialized
schools, one mixed school and at two art schools.

School Year

Number of
Municipalities

Number of
Schools

Number of
Classes

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

12
12
12

26
26
27

258
254
257

200.

Number of Pupils
Attending School
in Hungarian
5,529
5,397
5,362

At the request of pupils attending school in Serbian language, teaching of
Hungarian language with elements of national culture as a subject is organized as
follows: in 2007 for four pupils of the Polytechnic School in Subotica and five
pupils of the Technical School in Temerin in 2008 for three pupils of the
Technical School in Ada.

Teaching in Romanian language
201.

Entire teaching in Romanian language is carried out in the territory of AP of
Vojvodina. Teaching in Romanian language is carried out at the Dositej
Obradović Economic-Commercial School in Alibunar.
94

School Year

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

Number of
Municipalities

Number of
Schools

1
1
1

1
1
1

Number of
Classes
4
4
4

Number of Pupils
Attending School
in Romanian
98
117
118

Teaching in Ruthenian language
202.

No entire teaching in Ruthenian language is organized at any technical or
specialized secondary school in the territory of the Republic of Serbia. In the
territory of AP of Vojvodina, teaching of the subject of Ruthenian language with
elements of national culture was organized for the first time in the 2008/2009
school year for 2 pupils of the 7. april Medical School in Novi Sad.

Teaching in Slovak language
203.

No entire teaching in Slovak language is organized at any technical or specialized
secondary school in the territory of the Republic of Serbia. Teaching of the
subject of Slovak language with elements of national culture is organized at
schools in the territory of AP of Vojvodina. In the 2007/2008 school year it was
organized at 3 secondary schools in Stara Pazova and at 2 secondary schools in
Bačкa Palanka and in the 2008/2009 school year it was organized at the Technical
School in Stara Pazova and at 3 secondary schools in Bačкa Palanka. In the
2009/2010 school year teaching of this subject was organized at 2 secondary
schools in Bačкa Palanka and at 2 secondary schools in Stara Pazova.

School Year

Number of
Municipalities

Number of
Schools

Number of
Classes

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

2
2
2

5
4
4

18
12
12

Number of pupils
studying the
subject of Slovak
language with
elements of
national culture
148
127
97

4.1.6. University education - practice
Albanian language
204.

The Branches of the Faculty of Economics and the Faculty of Law of the
University of Niš started working in Medveña in the 2009/2010 school year. At
the Branch of the Faculty of Economics 19 students were enrolled, of whom 4
students are of the Albanian nationality and the Branch of the Faculty of Law 35
students were enrolled, of whom 7 students are of the Albanian national minority.
The students of the Albanian national minority attend classes in Serbian language
with simultaneous interpretation of lectures into Albanian language. The
95

textbooks and teaching aids have been translated into Albanian language and
examinations will be arranged in Albanian language, too.
205.

Albanian language and literature are studied in the Republic of Serbia at Faculty
of Philology in Belgrade, Department of Albanian Language and Literature.

Number of students studying Albanian language and literature at the Faculty of Philology in
Belgrade
School Year

Students Enrolled in
First Year

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

17
16
9

Total Number of
Students in 4
Years
59
56
35

Bosniak language
206.

Bosniak language is studied at two university institutions in Novi Pazar. At the
State University, Department of Philosophic – Philological Sciences, within the
Department of Serbian Language and Literature, there is a possibility to study
Bosniak language as an optional subject. Upon the completion of studies, the
following bachelor degrees are gained: bachelor in Serbian language, bachelor in
Bosniak language, or combined – bachelor in Serbian-Bosniak languages, which
is the most frequent choice of the students. It is possible to study Bosniak
language as an optional subject at the University of Novi Pazar, Department of
Serbian/Bosnian Language as Teaching Subjects. Teaching is carried out in
Serbian language and upon the completion of studies the graduates gain a degree
of a teacher of Serbian and Albanian language, respectively, depending on
optional subjects. The Tables below contain the data about the number of students
who attend the above mentioned lectures.

Number of students at the State University, Department of Philosophic – Philological Sciences in
Novi Pazar
School Year
2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

Number of Students
40
40
40

Number of students at the University of Novi Pazar, Department of Serbian/Bosnian Language as
Teaching Subjects
School Year
2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

Number of Students
8
31
30

96

Bulgarian language
207.

Bulgarian language and literature are studied in the Republic of Serbia at the
Faculty of Philology in Belgrade, Department of Bulgarian Language and
Literature.

Number of students studying Bulgarian language and literature at the Faculty of Philology in
Belgrade
School Year

Students Enrolled in
First Year

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

13
12
13

Total Number of
Students in all 4
Years
49
46
25

Hungarian language
208.

209.

In the Republic of Serbia, university education in Hungarian language is provided
in the territory of AP of Vojvodina, as follows: at 5 faculties (Faculties of
Philosophy, Economics, Natural Sciences, Civil Engineering and Teaching) in
Novi sad and Subotica, the Academy of Arts in Novi Sad and at 3 higher schools
of vocational studies (the Higher School of Vocational Studies for Education of
Pre-School Teacher in Novi Sad, the Higher School of Vocational Studies for
Education of Pre-School Teachers in Subotica and the Higher Technical School of
Vocational Studies in Subotica). The table below contains the data about the
number of students studying in Hungarian language.
School Year

Faculties

2007/2008
2009/2010

583
617

Higher School
of Vocational
Studies
688
535

Hungarian language and literature are studied in the Republic of Serbia at the
Faculty of Philology in Belgrade, Department of Hungarian Language and
Literature and at the Faculty of Philosophy in Novi Sad, Department of Hungarian
Studies, Section of Hungarian Language and Literature. The Tables below contain
the data about the number of students at the above mentioned faculties.

Number of students studying Hungarian language and literature at the Faculty of Philology in
Belgrade
School Year
Students Enrolled in
Total Number of
First Year
Students in All 4
Years
2007/2008
8
41
2008/2009
13
42

97

2009/2010

9

21

Number of students studying Hungarian language and literature at the Faculty of Philosophy in Novi
Sad
School Year
2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

Number of Students
129
133
99

Romani language
210.

The teaching for education of pre-school teachers was organized for the first time
in both Serbian and Romani languages at the Higher School of Vocational Studies
for Education of Pre-School Teachers in Vršac in the 2009/2010 school year. The
first group of 5 students was enrolled. The teaching of Romani language with
elements of national culture, methodics and exercises as subjects is carried out in
Romani language and since this is only the beginning of education in Romani
language there are no professors engaged yet to deliver lectures in other subjects
in Romani language.

211.

In the Republic of Serbia, Romani language and literature as a subject are studied
at the School of Romani Studies in Novi Sad and at the European Centre for
Peace and Development of the United Nations Peace University in Belgrade. The
initiative to establish the School of Romani Studies was made in 2004 as a part of
ACIMSI University Studies of the Gender Studies Centre (Female Studies and
Researches). The Faculty of Philosophy from Novi Sad, the Institute of Culture of
Vojvodina and Romani non-governmental organizations contributed to the
establishment of this School. The School of Romani Studies has been organized
in the form of seminars, workshops, debates and performances, and the following
subjects are studied: fundamentals of Romani studies, Romani language, Romani
culture, history and religion, and since lately, learning about the Decade of Roma
Inclusion, as well as about the elements of application in the programmes for
primary schools. The School of Romani Studies has been attended in cycles by
students, postgraduates, journalists, non-governmental organizations and since
2010 a seminar has been organized for teachers, pedagogues and psychologists.
The European Centre for Peace and Development of the United Nations Peace
University has been implementing the study programme for master and doctor
degrees in Romani studies since 2010.

Romanian language
212.

Two university institutions in Vršac, Department of Teacher Training Faculty in
Belgrade – Department of Romanian Language (Romanian as mother tongue) and
the Higher School of Vocational Studies for Pre-School Teachers have complete
98

teaching in Romanian language in the Republic of Serbia. The tables below
contain the data about the number of students at the above mentioned faculties.
Number of students at the Teacher Training Faculty in Belgrade – Department in Vršac
School Year
2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

Number of Students
14
14
16

Number of students at the Higher School of Vocational Studies for Pre-School Teachers in Vršac
School Year
2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

213.

Number of Students
20
20
20

Romanian language and literature are studied in the Republic of Serbia at the
Faculty of Philology in Belgrade, Department of Romanian Language and
Literature and at the Faculty of Philosophy in Novi Sad, Department of Romanian
Studies, Section of Romanian Language and Literature. The Tables below contain
the data about the number of students at the above mentioned faculties.

Number of students studying Romanian language and literature at the Faculty of Philology in
Belgrade
School Year

Students Enrolled in
First Year

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

12
11
13

Total Number of
Students in all 4
Years
54
57
49

Number of students studying Romanian language and literature at the Faculty of Philosophy in Novi
Sad
School Year
Number of Students
2007/2008
41
2008/2009
33
2009/2010
22

Ruthenian language
214.

Ruthenian language and literature are studied in the Republic of Serbia at the
Faculty of Philosophy in Novi Sad, Department of Ruthenian Studies, Section of
Ruthenian Language and Literature. The Table below contains the data about the
number of students at the above mentioned faculty.
Number of students studying Ruthenian language and literature
at the Faculty of Philosophy in Novi Sad
School Year

Number of Students

99

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

19
23
25

Slovak language
215.

The teaching is carried out in Slovak language at the Higher School of Vocational
Studies for Pre-School Teachers in Novi Sad. The Table below contains the data
about the number of students at the above mentioned institution.

Number of students at the Higher School of Vocational Studies for Pre-School Teachers In Novi Sad
School Year
2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

216.

Number of Students
5
5
12

Slovak language and literature are studied in the Republic of Serbia at the Faculty
of Philology in Belgrade, Department of Slovak Language and Literature and at
the Faculty of Philosophy in Novi Sad, Department of Slavic Studies, Section of
Slovak Language and Literature. The Tables below contain the data about the
number of students at the above mentioned faculties.

Number of students studying Slovak language and literature at the Faculty of Philology in Belgrade
School Year

Students Enrolled in
First Year

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

8
15
10

Total Number of
Students in All 4
Years
41
48
48

Number of students studying Slovak language and literature at the Faculty of Philosophy in Novi Sad
School Year
2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

Number of Students
30
29
30

Ukrainian language
217.

Ukrainian language and literature are studied in the Republic of Serbia at the
Faculty of Philology in Belgrade, Department of Ukrainian Language and
Literature and at the Faculty of Philosophy in Novi Sad, Section of Ruthenian
Language and Literature. Since the 2006/2007 school year Ukrainian has been
introduced as a compulsory two-semester subject at the second year of studies for
all students studying at the Section of Ruthenian Language and Literature.

Number of students studying Ukrainian language and literature at the Faculty of Philology in
Belgrade

100

School Year

Students Enrolled in
First Year

2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010

16
17
13

Total Number of
Students in All 4
Years
45
47
35

Croatian language
218.

Contemporary Serbian and Croatian languages are studied at the Department of
South Slavic Philology of the Faculty of Philology in Belgrade at the second, the
third and the fourth years of studies.

4.1.7. Adult education - Practice
219.

The table below contains the data about primary education of adults in Hungarian
as a teaching language.
School
Year
2007/2008
2008/2009

220.

Number of Local
Self-Governments
3
3

Number of
Schools
3
3

Number of
Attendees
113
96

In the 2009/2010 school year the education for adults included 370 members of
the Roma nationality in total, which is 27 attendees more than the previous school
year (or 7.87%). Out of this number, education for 358 Roma is in Serbian and for
12 of them in Hungarian as a teaching language.

4.1.8. Activities for the implementation of box-recommendation of the Committee of
Experts concerning Article 8 of the Charter
221.

In the Report on the implementation of the Charter in the first reporting cycle, the
Committee of Experts stated the following recommendation:
The Committee of Experts encourages the Serbian authorities to develop a
coherent strategy in the field of teacher training and provide adequate teaching
materials for regional or minority language education.

222.

In 2007 the Government of the Republic of Serbia adopted the Strategy of
Specialized Education Development in the Republic of Serbia. This Strategy
provides the initial grounds for raising the general level of pedagogic capabilities
and skills of teachers, ensuring the conditions for their continuing professional
training and permanent professional advancement, in order to carry out
modernization of the curricula (experiments), innovate teaching process with new
contents, organization and new methods and carry out modernization of
equipment and teaching aids by introducing new information technologies.
Professional training of teachers is governed by laws and by-laws, whereas there
101

is no detachment of training and qualifications for the performance of teaching in
minority languages. It is noticed that in the Republic of Serbia there are
unsatisfactory circumstances primarily in relation to the lack of teachers to
implement curricula in education in minority languages at all levels of education,
and then in respect of their insufficient continuing professional training. One of
the possibilities to overcome such circumstances might be to implement the
agreements on co-operation with certain states in the field of education (see
Section 3.1.9. of the Report), as well as within the activities of inter-state
commissions, which are established according to bilateral agreements on
protection of national minorities. Namely, reactivation of inter-state commissions
ensures realistic grounds to establish adequate solutions in respect of both
professional and vocational training of teachers in minority languages in the
countries signatories to such agreements.
223.

The Republic of Serbia has been making efforts to provide in due time and under
the same conditions teaching aids for teaching in minority languages and that
teaching materials are of the same quality as for children attending school in
Serbian language. The newly adopted Law on Textbooks and Teaching Aids,
which prescribes procedures for approval and printing of textbooks in minority
languages, as well as the method of import of textbooks from mother countries,
should ensure quality and satisfactory coverage of curricula by means of adequate
textbooks for education in minority languages. The national councils of national
minorities, with clearly established competences, have a decisive word in making
initiatives and selection of teaching materials for education in minority languages.

102

4.2.

Article 9
Judicial Authorities
Selected paragraphs and sub-paragraphs

1. The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of
residents using the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below,
according to the situation of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the
facilities afforded by the present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the
proper administration of justice:
a) in criminal proceedings:
(ii) to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or minority
language; and/or
(iii) to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not be
considered inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a regional or
minority language; and/or
b) in civil proceedings:
(ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or
she may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring
additional expense; and/or
c) in proceedings before courts concerning
administrative matters:
(ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or
she may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring
additional expense; and/or
d) to take steps to ensure that the application of sub-paragraphs (i) and (iii) of
paragraphs b) and c) above and any necessary use of interpreters and
translations does not involve extra expense for the persons concerned.
2. The Parties undertake:
a) not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely
because they are drafted in a regional or minority language; or
b) not to deny the validity, as between the parties, of legal documents drawn up
within the country solely because they are drafted in a regional or minority
language, and to provide that they can be invoked against interested third parties
who are not users of these languages on condition that the contents of the
document are made known to them by the person(s) who invoke(s) it; or

103

c) not to deny the validity, as between the parties, of legal documents drawn up
within the country solely because they are drafted in a regional or minority
language.
3. The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or minority languages the
most important national statutory texts and those relating particularly to users of these
languages, unless they are otherwise provided.
4.2.1. Legislation relevant for the implementation of Article 9 of the Charter
224.

The relevant legislation for the implementation of Article 9 of the Charter is
explained in the Section 5.2.1. of the First Periodic Report on the Implementation
of the Charter in Serbia. After the first cycle of monitoring of the implementation
of the Charter, the Law on Amendments and Supplements to the Law on Official
Use of Language and Script was adopted (see Section 2.1.1. of this Report),
which amended Article 11 of this Law. In the amended Article 11 paragraph 3 it
is defined that official use of languages of national minorities also implies in
particular, inter alia, the use of languages of national minorities in administrative
and court proceedings and conduct of administrative and court proceedings in
minority languages. The provisions on official use of language at courts are also
contained in the laws governing criminal, civil and administrative court
proceedings, which are also contained in the relevant explanations of accepted
paragraphs of Article 9 of the Charter.

4.2.2. Criminal proceedings
225.

The Criminal Procedure Code, in the part regulating the basic principles of
criminal proceedings, prescribes that every accused person, namely every suspect,
has the right to be informed as soon as possible, and not later than at the first
interrogation, in details and in the language he/she understands, about the act
he/she is charged with, about the nature and reasons of charges and evidence
against him/her (Article 4 paragraph 1 item 1), as well as to have an interpreter if
he/she does not understand or does not speak the language used in the
proceedings (Article 4 paragraph 1 item 7). The provision of Article 7 prescribes
that Serbian language and Cyrillic script are officially used in criminal
proceedings. Other languages and scripts are officially used pursuant to law
(paragraph 1). At courts in the territories where the members of national
minorities live, their languages and scripts are also officially used in criminal
proceedings, in accordance with the Constitution and law (paragraph 2). The
provision of Article 8 prescribes that actions, appeals and other applications are to
be addressed to courts in the language officially used at court (paragraph 1). A
foreign citizen deprived of liberty may address applications to court in his/her
mother tongue (paragraph 2). The provision of Article 9 is very important
prescribing that criminal proceedings are conducted in the language officially
used at court (paragraph 1), and that parties, witnesses and other persons
participating in the proceedings have the right to use their language in the
104

proceedings. If the proceedings are not held in the language of the person
concerned, interpretation of what he/she is going to state and what other persons
are going to state shall be provided on the account of budgetary funds, as well as
the translations of documents and other written evidence (paragraph 2). The right
to interpretation/translation is explained in paragraphа 2 of this Article, which the
person concerned may waive if he/she knows the language of the proceedings. It
will be recorded in the minutes that the instructions had been given and what the
participant stated (paragraph 3). Interpretation is entrusted to an interpreter
(paragraph 4). Also, the provision of Article 10 prescribes that summons,
decisions and other writings shall be addressed to court in Serbian language
(paragraph 1). If some minority language is also officially used at court, the court
shall deliver writings in the language the members of the national minority used at
court. The persons concerned may request the writings to be submitted to them in
the language the proceedings are held (paragraph 2). An accused in detention,
who is serving sentence or who is at health institution for security reasons shall
also receive a translation of the writing referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article in
the language used in the proceedigns (paragraph 3). The provision of Article 11
prescribes that courts communicate between each other and render legal aid to
each other in the language officially used at court. If writing is prepared in some
minority language and is addressed to court in the language not officially used at
it, a translation into Serbian shall be enclosed. In the part of this Law related to
the proceedings in respect of ordinary legal remedies, governing the proceedings
on appeal against the first instance judgement, Article 368 paragraph 1 item 3
prescribes that there is a material violation of the provisions of criminal
proceedings if the main hearing is held without the presence of a person whose
presence is compulsory accroding to the Code, or if the accused, the defender, the
damaged person as the plaintiff or the private plaintiff, contrary to his/her request,
is deprived of the use of his/her language at the main hearing and to monitor the
course of the main hearing in his/her language (Article 9).
226.

The regulations in force concerning the organization of courts do not prescribe
that special records are to be kept at courts in the Republic of Serbia on the
grounds of which it would be possible to render the data about the number of
proceedings, including criminal proceedings, too, which had been entirely held in
in some minority language, the number of criminal proceedings in which the
accused used minority language, and about the number of criminal proceedings
held in Serbian language wherein the participants exercised the right to use
minority language. For the requirements of preparation of this Report, the
Ministry of Human and Minority Rights conducted a questionnaire at the
beginning of 2010 on the necessity to use minority languages at courts. Since the
questionnaire was conducted at the time of the beginning of application of the
reformed netowork of courts, when also there was the taking over of the court
documentation between former municipal and district courts respectively, to
newly established courts, the data obtained from courts may only be used as an
illustration of the use of minority languages in criminal proceedings, because
more precise records are needed to show the actual circumstances. The following
105

paragraphs give examples of use of minority languages in criminal proceedings,
but only for those courts that had accepted to take part in the preparation of this
Report.
The Magistrate Court in Vršac, for the territory of municipalities of Bela Crkva, Vršac
and Plandište, with court units in Bela Crkva and Plandište
Hungarian/Romanian/Slovak/Czech/
227.

Entire criminal proceedings were conducted in Romanian language in one case at
the Magistrate Court in Vršac. In 5 criminal proceedings the accused used
Romanian language. In 3 criminal cases the participants in the proceedings used
Romanian language. This court covered the costs of interpretation for the
participants exercising the right to use minority languages.

The Magistrate Court in Zrenjanin, for the territory of municipalities of Žitište, Novi
Bečej, Sečanj and for the town of Zrenjanin, with court units in Novi bečej and Sečanj
Hungarian/Romanian/Slovak
228.

Entire criminal proceedings were conducted in Romanian language in one case at
the Magistrate Court in Zrenjanin. In one criminal case the accused used
Romanian language. The costs of interpretation were covered by the court.

The Magistrate Court in Pančevo, for the territory of municipalities of Alibunar,
Kovačica, Kovin, Opovo and for the town of Pančevo, with court units in Alibunar,
Kovačica and Kovin
Hungarian/Romanian/Slovak
229.

At the seat of the Magistrate Court in Pančevo criminal proceedings are entirely
held in Romanian language in one case, while in the previous period there were
no proceedings entirely held in some minority language officialy used in the
territory of the present Magistrate Court. In one case before the Municipal Court
in Kovačica the accused used Romanian language as his mother tongue and gave
statements through an interpreter. In the proceedings held in Serbian language, the
participants used minority languages in 7 criminal cases before the Municipal
Court in Alibunar and in 3 criminal cases before the Municipal Court in Kovačica.
The courts covered the costs of interpretation for the participants using minority
languages.

The Magistrate Court in Subotica, for the territory of municipalities of Ada, Bačka
Topola, Kanjiža, Mali Iñoš and Senta and for the town of Subotica, with court units in
Ada, Bačka Topola, Kanjiža and Senta
Hungarian/Croatian
230.

A certain number of proceedings in criminal cases were held in Hungarian
language before the Magistrate Court in Subotica, as follows: 40 cases in 2007, 37
cases in 2008 and 20 cases in 2009.
106

The High Court in Leskovac for the territory of the Magistrate Court in Leskovac
Albanian
231.

In the territory of the High Court in Leskovac, in 4 criminal cases the accused
used Albanian language. In one criminal case in the proceedings held in Serbian
language one witness used Albanian language. The court covered the costs of
interpretation for the participants using minority language.

The High Court in Novi Sad for the territory of the Magistrate Court in Novi Sad
Hungarian/Ruthenian/Slovak
232.

At the Criminal Department of the High Court in Novi Sad, in 23 criminal cases
the accused and witnesses requested the presence of an interpreter on the occasion
of their interrogation, which costs were covered by the court. In several cases the
accused submitted bilingual power-of-attorney for defence or the damaged
persons submitted bilingual power-of-attorney for representation, in Serbian and
minority language.

The High Court in Pančevo for the territory of the Magistrate Court in Vršac and the
Magistrate Court in Pančevo
Hungarian/Romanian/Slovak/Czech
233.

In the proceedings in respect of rogatories before the High Court in Pančevo
Romanian language was used in 4 criminal cases. In those cases interrogations
were held through interpreters, whose services were paid on the account of
budgetary funds.

The High Court in Subotica for the territory of the Magistrate Court in Subotica
Hungarian/Croatian
234.

According to the data of the Criminal Department of the High Court in Subotica,
no entire criminal proceedings were held in some minority language in some
minority language officially used before the District Court in Subotica. There
were proceedings in which the accused used some of the minority languages
officially used in the territory of the court, and in the total number of 691 cases it
is not possible to establish the exact number of such cases. It is also impossible to
establish the number of testimonies and written evidence submitted, namely the
number of the same submitted in minority languages in the criminal proceedings
held in Serbian language. In criminal proceedings held in Serbian language the
participants exercised the right to use some minority language officially used.
Based on the data concerning the payment of costs of interpretation covered by
the court concerned in 2007, the participants exercised the right to use minority
language in 153 cases, in 289 cases in 2008 and in 249 cases in 2009.

4.2.3. Civil proceedings
107

235.

In the first part of the Law on Civil Procedure governing the basic provisions of
the civil proceedings, in the provision of Article 6 it is prescribed that civil
proceedings shall be held in Serbian language of ekavian dialect or jekavian
dialect and Cyrillic script shall be used in such proceedings, while Latin script
shall be used in accordance with the Constitution and law. In the territories where
the language of certain national minority is officially used pursuant to the law, the
proceedings are also held in the language of the national minority concerned using
the script of the national minority, too (paragraph 1). The parties and other
participants in the proceedings have the right to use their languages and scripts, in
accordance with the provisions of this Law (paragraph 2). The provision of
Article 96 prescribes that the parties and other participants in the proceedings
have the right to use their language at hearings and the occasion of oral
undertaking of procedural actions before the court. If the proceedings are not held
in the language of the party, namely in the language of other participants in the
proceedings, at their request interpretation into their language shall be provided of
what is going to be said at the hearing, as well as interpretation of the documents
that are going to be used at the hearing for the production of evidence (paragraph
1). The parties and other participants in the proceedings shall be instructed about
the right to attend oral proceedings before the court in their language through an
interpreter. It shall be stated in the Minutes that they had been instructed about
their right and the statements of the parties, namely of the participants (paragraph
2). Interpreters are engaged to do interpreting (paragraph 3). The provision of
Article 97 prescribes that summons, decisions and other court writings are
delivered to the parties and other participants in the proceedings in Serbian
language (paragraph 1). If some of national minority languages is also officially
used before the court, the court shall deliver court writings in the language
concerned to those parties and participants in the proceedings who are the
members of the national minority concerned and who use the language concerned
in the proceedings (paragraph 2). The provision of Article 98 prescribes that the
parties and other participants in the proceedings shall address their actions,
appeals and other submissions in the language officially used before the court
(paragraph 1). The parties and other participants in the proceedings may also
address their submissions to the court in the language of national minorities not
officially used before the court, if it is in accordance with the law (paragraph 2).
The provision of Article 99 prescribes that the costs of interpretation into the
language of national minorities, which result from the application of the
provisions of the Constitution and this Law concerning the right of the members
of national minorities to use their language are to be covered by the court. Also, in
Chapter 13, which governs the procedure of legal aid rendering, the provision of
Article 171 prescribes that courts shall communicate in the language officially
used before them (paragraph 1). If some writing is made in the language of
national minority, and is to be addressed to the court in the language of the
national minority concerned not officially used before the court, a translation of
the writing into Serbian language shall be enclosed to the writing (paragraph 2).
Chapter 20 concerns production of evidence. In the part governing the position of
108

witnesses, the provision of Article 246 prescribes that a witness who does not
know the language of the proceedings shall be examined through an interpreter
(paragraph 1). The court shall warn the interpreter of the duty to truly interpret the
questions asked and the statements to be expressed by the witness (paragraph 3).
Chapter 27 governs the issue of proceedings upon legal remedies. In the part
concerning ordinary legal remedies it is prescribed that an appeal against a
judgement may be also filed because of the material violation of the provisions of
civil proceedings, which exists if the court does not apply or if it applies in wrong
way some of the provisions of this Law, if it effects or if it might have effected
the adoption of lawful and proper judgement. There is always a material violation
of civil proceedings if, inter alia, contrary to the provisions of the law the
dismissed a motion of the party to freely use his/her language and script in the
proceedings (Article 361 paragraph 2 item 8).
236.

The regulations in force concerning the organization of courts do not prescribe
that special records are to be kept at courts in the Republic of Serbia on the
grounds of which it would be possible to render the data about the number of
proceedings, including civil proceedings, too, which had been entirely held in
some minority language, the number of civil proceedings in which the accused
used minority language, and about the number of civil proceedings held in
Serbian language wherein the participants exercised the right to use minority
language. For the requirements of preparation of this Report, the Ministry of
Human and Minority Rights conducted a questionnaire at the beginning of 2010
on the necessity to use minority languages at courts. Since the questionnaire was
conducted at the time of the beginning of application of the reformed network of
courts, when also there was the taking over of the court documentation between
former municipal and district courts respectively, to newly established courts, the
data obtained from courts may only be used as an illustration of the use of
minority languages in civil proceedings, because more precise records are needed
to show the actual circumstances. The following paragraphs give examples of use
of minority languages in civil proceedings, but only for those courts that had
accepted to take part in the preparation of this Report.

The Magistrate Court in Vršac, for the territory of municipalities of Bela Crkva, Vršac
and Plandište, with court units in Bela Crkva and Plandište
Hungarian/Romanian/Slovak/Czech
237.

Testimonies in Romanian language were delivered in Romanian language in one
civil case before the Municipal Court in Vršac. In 4 civil cases the participants in
the proceedings used Romanian language. This court covered the costs of
interpretation for the participants exercising their right to use minority language
concerned.

The Magistrate Court in Zrenjanin, for the territory of municipalities of Žitište, Novi
Bečej, Sečanj and for the town of Zrenjanin, with court units in Novi Bečej and Sečanj
Hungarian/Romanian/Slovak
109

238.

Entire civil proceedings were conducted in Hungarian language in 3 case before
the Magistrate Court in Zrenjanin. 10 probate proceedings were held in Hungarian
language. The costs of interpretation were covered by the court. In 29 cases in
civil proceedings an interpreter was engaged for the parties or witnesses. In 29
cases in the proceedings held in Serbian language the parties exercised their right
to use minority language. In the proceedings held in Serbian language, the court
covered the costs of interpretation for the participants exercising their right to use
official minority language.

The Magistrate Court in Leskovac, for the territory of municipalities of Bojnik,
Vlasotince, Lebane, Medveña and Crna Trava and for the town of Leskovac, with court
units in Vlasotince and Lebane
Albanian
239.

In one case in the civil proceeding before the Magistrate Court in Leskovac – the
court unit in Lebane, the party used Albanian language. The court covered the
costs of interpretation.

The Magistrate Court in Pančevo, for the territory of municipalities of Alibunar,
Kovačica, Kovin, Opovo and the town of Pančevo, with court units in Alibunar,
Kovačica and Kovin
Hungarian/Romanian/Slovak
240.

In the proceedings held before the Municipal Court in Kovin (Hungarian and
Romanian) in the officially used minority languages, there were testimonies in the
languages concerned, and before the Municipal Court in Alibunar there were
testimonies and written evidence submitted in minority languages (Romanian and
Slovak). In the proceedings held in Serbian language, minority language was used
in 16 civil cases before the Municipal Court in Alibunar and in 16 civil cases and
5 contentious cases before the Municipal Court in Kovačica. The courts covered
the costs of interpretation for the participants using minority language, except for
the Municipal Court in Kovin.

The Magistrate Court in Subotica, for the territory of municipalities of Ada, Bačka
Topola, Kanjiža, Mali Iñoš and Senta and for the town of Subotica, with court units in
Ada, Bačka Topola, Kanjiža and Senta
Hungarian/Croatian
241.

A certain number of proceedings in civil cases were held in Hungarian language
before the Magistrate Court in Subotica, as follows: 94 cases in 2007, 111 cases in
2008 and 127 cases in 2009.

The High Court in Leskovac
Albanian
110

242.

In the territory of this court, in the proceedings held in Serbian language in one
civil case one witness used Albanian language. The court covered the costs of
interpretation for the participants exercising their right to use minority language.

The High Court in Subotica
Hungarian/Croatian
243.

According to the data of the Civil Department of the High Court in Subotica, 36
entire proceedings were held in officially used minority language, as follows: 23
cases in 2007, 8 cases in 2008 and 5 cases in 2009. In civil proceedings held in
Serbian language, there were testimonies and written evidence submitted in
minority language but it is not possible to establish the exact number of such
cases. The court covered the costs of interpretation in 4 cases for the participants
exercising their right to use minority language.

4.2.4. Administrative disputes
244.

Part I, Chapter 1 of the Law on General Administrative Procedure, concerning
general principles of general administrative procedure, govern the use of language
and script in the procedure concerned. The provision of Article 16 prescribes that
the body shall conduct the proceedings in Serbian language in ekavian or jekavian
dialects and Cyrillic script shall be used in such proceedings, while Latin script
shall be used in accordance with the Constitution and law. In the territories where
the language of certain national minority is officially used pursuant to the law, the
proceedings are also held in the language of the national minority concerned using
the script of the national minority, too (paragraph 1). If the proceedings are not
held in the language of the party, namely in the language of other participants in
the proceedings, who are the citizens of the Republic of Serbia, an interpreter
shall be provided to interpret the course of the proceedings into their language, as
well as the delivery of summons and other writings in their language and script
(paragraph 2). The parties and other participants in the proceedings who are not
the citizens of the Republic of Serbia have the right to attend the hearing in their
language through an interpreter and to use their language in the proceedings
(paragraph 3). Also, In the part governing production of evidence, namely the
position of witnesses, the provision of Article 169 prescribes that a witness shall
be examined through an interpreter if he/she does not know the language of the
proceedings (paragraph 1). Chapter 15 governs the repetition of the proceedings.
The provision of Article 239 prescribes that the proceedings ended in the decision
against which there is no ordinary legal remedy (final decision) may be repeated,
inter alia, if the person participating in the proceedings had no opportunity to use
his/her language and script under the conditions of Article 16 of this Law (item
11). At the end of 2009 the new law on administrative disputes was adopted, as
the result of harmonization with the Constitution of the Republic of Serbia and
international standards, especially with the principles and rules of the European
Convention for Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. Article 8
111

paragraph 1 of this Law establishes that an administrative dispute shall be
resolved by the Administrative Court. Article 74 prescribes that the provisions of
the law governing civil proceedings shall be accordingly applied to the issues of
the proceedings for resolution of administrative disputes not regulated by this
Law, including also, inter alia, the provisions of Article 6 of the Law on Civil
Procedure governing the issue of use of language and script in civil proceedings,
namely the use of other languages and scripts.
4.2.5. Activities for the implementation of box-recommendation of the
Committee of Experts concerning Article 9 of the Charter
245.

In the Report on the Implementation of the Charter in the first reporting cycle, the
Committee of Experts established two box-recommendations regarding Article 9
of the Charter. The following paragraphs contain information on the activities
undertaken by the State in order to implement them.

4.2.5.1. Information to citizens about the possibility of using minority languages
in courts
The Committee of Experts encourages the Serbian authorities to actively inform
citizens about the possibility of using a regional or minority language in courts.
246.

In the Section 5.2.1. of the First Periodic Report on the implementation of the
Charter in Serbia, it is stressed that the establishment of the language of the
proceedings is the issue to be decided on by the person conducting the
proceedings, pursuant to the provisions of this Law. The court the proceedings are
to be held before is obliged to inform the party about the languages officially used
in the territory of the court and to request the party to declare in which language
the proceedings are to be held. Article 13 of the Law on Official Use of language
and Script prescribes that the method of establishment of the language of the
proceedings and the established language of the proceedings shall be specified in
the Minutes, and Article 14 of this Law prescribes that the Minutes and the
decisions adopted in the first instance proceedings and referring to the
proceedings concerned shall be made, as authentic texts in Serbian language and
in minority language, if the proceedings had been conducted in minority
language. The rights of the members of national minorities to use their language
through the assistance of interpreters if the proceedings are not held in their
language are respected before the court. In the court proceedings, any violation of
the right to use one's own language and script is always treated as a relatively
material violation of the rules of the procedure, and for this reason, it is
investigated in each particular case whether such a violation might have effected
the final decision.

247.

In co-operation with the Mission of OESC to Serbia, the Ministry of Justice
printed a brochure and the poster under the title of Judiciary Reform for All
Citizens, which had been submitted to all courts to inform the members of the
112

national minorities about their rights, as well as about the method of functioning
of the new network of courts. In the forthcoming period the Ministry of Justice
intends to pay more attention to the creation of positive measures in order to
facilitate practical use of minority language at courts.
4.2.5.2. Availability of the most important statutory texts in minority languages
The Committee of Experts encourages the Serbian authorities to make available
in the regional or minority languages the most important national statutory texts
and those relating particularly to users of these languages, to be identified in cooperation with the speakers.
248.

Article 26 of the Statute of AP of Vojvodina governs that Serbian language and
Cyrillic script shall be officially used at the bodies and organizations of AP of
Vojvodina, as well as Hungarian, Slovak, Croatian, Romanian and Ruthenian
languages and their scripts, in accordance with the law and the decision of the
Provincial Assembly. The Provincial Secretariat for Regulations, Administration
and National Communities (Department of the Official Gazette of AP of
Vojvodina and publishing of regulations) takes care of the publishing of the
Official Gazette of AP of Vojvodina, which is, in addition to Serbian language,
also published in Hungarian, Slovak, Romanian, Ruthenian and Croatian
languages and scripts. Also, the Translation Pool of the Provincial Secretariat for
Regulations, Administration and National Communities provides interpretations
and translations from Serbian into Hungarian, Croatian, Slovak, Romanian and
Ruthenian languages and vice versa. In addition to the sessions of the Assembly
of AP of Vojvodina, the decisions adopted by the Assembly and the Government
of AP of Vojvodina are also interpreted and translated, which are then published
in the Official Gazette of AP of Vojvodina. The Translation Pool has additionally
translated into the officially used minority languages in the territory of AP of
Vojvodina, the most important national legal regulations concerning in particular
the users of those languages (the Constitution of the Republic of Serbia, the Law
on Prohibition of Discrimination, the Law on the National Councils of the
National Minorities, etc.). The Internet page of the Provincial Secretariat for
Regulations, Administration and National Communities also provides an option to
see and take over the documents of this Secretariat in Hungarian, Slovak,
Romanian, Ruthenian and Croatian languages in addition to Serbian language.

113

4.3.

Article 10
Administrative Authorities and Public Services
Selected paragraphs and sub-paragraphs

1. Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who
are users of regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and
according to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is
reasonably possible:
a)
(iv) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or
written applications in these languages; or
(v) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a
document in these languages;
c) to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in a regional or
minority language.
2. In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of
residents who are users of regional or minority languages in such as to justify the
measures specified below, the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
b) the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or
written applications in these languages;
c) the publication by regional authorities of their official documents also in the
relevant regional or minority languages;
d) the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in the
relevant regional or minority languages;
g) the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official
language(s), of traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or
minority languages.
3. With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other
persons acting on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which
regional or minority languages are used, in accordance with the situation of each
language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
c) to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request in these
languages.
4. With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted
by them, the Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
114

c) compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees
having a knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the
territory in which that language is used.
5. The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or
minority languages, at the request of those concerned.
4.3.1. Submission of applications in minority languages to the state administration
bodies
249.

In the Section 5.3.1. of the First Periodic Report on the implementation of the
Charter, the right to written and oral referral to the administrative bodies is
explained in details, as prescribed by the Constitution of the Republic of Serbia
and the national regulations (the Law on Protection of Rights and Freedoms of
National Minorities, the Law on the Official Use of Language and Script, the Law
on General Administrative Procedure and the Decision on Precise Regulation of
Certain Issues of Official Use of National Minority Languages and Scripts in the
territory of AP of Vojvodina). In relation to the first cycle of monitoring of the
implementation of the Charter, the provision of Article 11 paragraph 8 of the Law
on the Official Use of Language and Script is also an improvement of the right to
refer to the republic bodies in minority language, the amendments and
supplements of which are explained in details in the Section 2.1.1. of the Report.
Namely, this paragraph prescribes that the members of national minorities whose
number in the total population of the Republic of Serbia does not reach 2%
according to the last census, may refer to the republic bodies in their language and
have the right to receive a reply in the language concerned through the unit of
local self-government where the language of national minority is officially used,
whereas the unit of local self-government shall provide the translation and cover
the costs of the translation of the letter addressed to the republic body and of the
reply by the body concerned.

4.3.2. Submission of applications in minority languages to local or regional
authorities
250.

In respect of submission of applications in minority languages to local or regional
authorities within the period covered by this Report, the legislative framework has
not been amended compared to the previous one and it is contained in the Section
5.3.4 of the First Periodic Report on the implementation of the Charter.

251.

In practice, according to the data received from the units of local self-government
the number of oral and written applications of speakers of minority languages to
local authorities is in co-relation with the participation of speakers of minority
languages in the total number of population of the unit of local self-government.
The parties have the right to refer to the bodies orally or in writing in their
language and in practice there are reasonable possibilities to accomplish this right,
except in case of some places with the low percentage of speakers of minority
115

languages. The data obtained from the units of local self-government that had
accepted to participate in the preparation of this Report do not make it possible to
show total data about the applications of parties in certain minority languages
under different circumstances. Nevertheless, for example, in the municipality of
Ada there were 4 administrative cases in which applications were submitted in
Hungarian language. in the municipality of Ada the administrative proceedings
were held in Serbian language in which the party used Slovak language through
an interpreter the costs of whom were covered by the municipality. In the
municipality of Žitište, 90 administrative proceedings were held in Serbian
language and the parties used minority language, which were conducted by the
expert associates of the municipal administration knowing Romanian and
Hungarian languages (officially used minority languages). At the bodies of the
town of Zrenjanin, there were 73 administrative proceedings conducted in Serbian
language wherein the parties used some of officially used minority languages,
whereas the costs were covered by administration bodies. The total number of
administrative proceedings held entirely in Hungarian language before the
administrative bodies of the town of Subotica amounted to 29,162, and in
Croatian to 5,570. In the municipality of Bujanovac, the number of applications of
citizens in Albanian language to municipal authorities amounted to several
hundreds. In the municipality of Preševo there were 3,100 proceedings held in
Albanian language. In the municipality of Sjenica, the number of applications in
Bosniak language is relatively small.
252.

An insight in submission of requests to local authorities in minority languages
may be directly made on the grounds of the data about certificates from registry
books and certificates from the books of citizens. According to the information by
the Provincial Secretariat for Regulations, Administration and National
Communities, in towns and municipalities of AP of Vojvodina in 2008, where in
addition to Serbian language minority languages and scripts were also officially
used, 10,864 certificates from the registry books were issued in bilingual forms
(5,962 certificates were issued in Serbian-Hungarian forms, 18 certificates were
issued in Serbian-Romanian forms, 30 certificates were issued in SerbianRuthenian forms, 2,724 certificates were issued in Serbian-Slovak forms and
2,130 certificates were issued in Serbian-Croatian forms). Out of 16,106
certificates from the registry books issued in 2009, 7,485 certificates were issued
in Serbian-Hungarian forms, 30 certificates were issued in Serbian-Romanian
forms, 30 certificates were issued in Serbian-Ruthenian forms, 5,426 certificates
were issued in Serbian-Slovak forms and 3,135 certificates were issued in
Serbian-Croatian forms. If we compare the total number of issued bilingual
certificates with the number of municipalities and towns, the largest number of
bilingual certificates was issued in the municipality of Bački Petrovac, where out
of the total number of 4,585 issued certificates from registry books, 3,984
certificates were issued in Serbian-Slovak forms (in the course of 2008, 1,597
certificates in total were issued in Bačкi Petrovac, of which 1,577 certificates
were in Serbian-Slovak forms). 449 certificates from the registry books were
issued in 2008 in minority languages officially used in the units of local self116

government: 139 certificates in Serbian-Hungarian forms, 1 certificate was issued
in Serbian-Romanian form, 11 certificates were issued in Serbian-Ruthenian
forms, 271 certificates were issued in Serbian-Slovak forms and 27 certificates
were issued in Serbian-Croatian. 870 certificates from the registry books were
issued in 2009 in some officially minority languages, as follows: 334 certificates
in Serbian-Hungarian forms, 16 certificates were issued in Serbian-Ruthenian
forms, 503 certificates were in Serbian-Slovak forms and 17 certificates were
issued in Serbian-Croatian. No certificates were issued in Serbian-Romanian
forms. As for the registry book of citizens in officially used minority languages,
1,518 certificates were issued in 2008, as follows: 342 certificates in SerbianHungarian forms, 1 certificate was issued in Serbian-Romanian form, 209
certificates in Serbian-Slovak forms and 966 certificates in Serbian-Croatian
forms. No certificates from the registry book of citizens were issued in SerbianRuthenian and Serbian-Czech forms. 1,395 certificates were issued in total in
2009, as follows: 510 certificates in Serbian-Hungarian forms, 12 certificates in
Serbian-Ruthenian forms, 422 certificates in Serbian-Slovak forms and 451
certificates in Serbian-Croatian forms. No certificates from the registry book of
citizens were issued in Serbian-Romanian and Serbian-Czech forms.
253.

Submission of applications in minority languages to local authorities has also
been facilitated by prescribing that knowledge of relevant minority languages is
required according to the documents of systematization of jobs in certain units of
local self-governments. According to the information available by the Provincial
Secretariat for Regulations, Administration and National Communities of AP of
Vojvodina, out of the total number of towns and municipalities where minority
language is also officially used, in the majority of them (19), a condition for
employment of adequate number of officials is, according to the document on
internal organization and systematization of jobs, that they know the relevant
language of national minority. Even in those units of local self-government where
it is not a condition of employment (16), a certain number of officials working
with parties or conducting administrative proceedings know the minority
language officially used. Based on the Decision of the Assembly of AP of
Vojvodina on the exam in minority language passed for the jobs with the
administrative authorities (2003), which establishes an exam as the method of
check-up of knowledge of such languages for the jobs with the bodies of local
self-government and provincial administrative bodies, the employees are enabled
to improve their knowledge of some of minority languages. Certificate of exam
passed obtained in accordance with this decision may be used for the jobs with the
administrative authorities if an adequate level of knowledge of a foreign or a
minority language had been established as a condition to perform jobs and duties,
but it may also be used with other bodies and legal entities if their documents
prescribe that an adequate knowledge of language is required to perform certain
jobs. In the course of 2008 there were 8 certificates of knowledge of a minority
language issued, while in 2009 there were 11 certificates issued in total. In
relation to the initial great interest of candidates to pass the above mentioned
exam, this interest has been decreased three times these last years. In order to
117

provide improvement of knowledge of minority languages, the Provincial
Secretariat for Regulations, Administration and National Communities of AP of
Vojvodina continued organizing specialized language courses for the employees
of administrative authorities and judiciary, for those who conduct proceedings or
communicate with parties in minority languages concerned. The seventh seminar
for employees communicating in Hungarian was held in 2009 in co-operation
with the National Council of Hungarian National Minority. In the territory of AP
of Vojvodina, 21 local self-governments have permanently employed
interpreters/translators for minority languages. In 10 town or municipal
administrations, translations are provided at the request of the party, and in 8
administrations there were no requests to provide translations.
254.

As a rule, the provincial authorities receive applications from parties in Serbian
language. Slightly more frequent applications in some minority language (mostly
in Hungarian), due to the nature of its business, are reported at the Provincial
Secretariat for Regulations, Administration and National Communities. This
Provincial Secretariat issues tenders to finance organizations and manifestations
of national minorities as well as of the traditional churches and religious
communities. The text of the tender is published in all official languages and the
tender documents (forms) are also provided in official languages of AP of
Vojvodina. The organizations of various national minorities and churches mainly
gathering the members of national minorities exercise the right to use language in
writing in various scopes. According to the analysis of submitted applications, it
may be concluded that the organizations of the Hungarians exercise the right to
use mother tongue to the largest extent. Namely, according to the available data,
out of 176 applications submitted by various organizations for support to
organizations of ethnic communities in AP of Vojvodina at the tender issued in
2008, 154 applications were in Hungarian, and out of 141 report in total submitted
for this tender (four reports were bilingual), 112 were in Hungarian language. In
2009 two tenders were issued for these purposes. At the first tender, in respect of
organizations gathering Hungarians, out of 168 received applications in total, 138
applications were in Hungarian language, and out of 40 received reports, 30 were
in Hungarian. At the second tender, there were 185 applications submitted in
total, of which 164 were in Hungarian language, and out of the received reports,
all six reports were in Hungarian language. Differences in using mother tongue
indicate that the members of various national minorities whose language had been
recognized as an official language, do not have identical requirements in respect
of official use of their own language. Writings received in officially used minority
languages are translated, if necessary, and replies are provided in minority
languages, too. The Translation Pool also renders translation services to other
provincial authorities.

4.3.3. Publishing of regional documents in minority languages
255.

In the First Periodic Report on the Implementation of the Charter, in the Sections
2.6. and 2.10, the competences of autonomous provinces are explained in details,
118

as well as the jobs and the organization of administration in AP of Vojvodina, and
it is stated in the Section 5.3.5. that regional authorities in the legal system of the
Republic of Serbia are the authorities of AP of Vojvodina.
256.

All the decisions adopted by the Assembly and the Government of the
Autonomous Province of Vojvodina are translated and published in the Official
Gazette of AP of Vojvodina, which is also published, in addition to Serbian
language, in officially used minority languages at the bodies and organizations of
AP of Vojvodina: Hungarian, Romanian, Ruthenian, Slovak and Croatian
languages. Thanks to the Translation Pool, there is the possibility that all the
documents made during the activities of the provincial authorities are translated
into the above mentioned minority languages, thus also making the possibility to
publish them. At the request of some provincial authority, the Translation Pool
shall translate the required document, which is made available to the interested
persons after it had been placed on the Internet page of the authority concerned.
Many bulletins and publications of the Assembly of AP of Vojvodina and the
Executive Council of AP of Vojvodina have also been translated. On the Internet
page of the Provincial Secretariat for Regulations, Administration and National
Communities, one may also review and take the documents of the Provincial
Secretariat in Hungarian, Slovak, Romanian, Ruthenian and Croatian languages,
in addition to Serbian language.

4.3.4. Publishing of local documents in minority languages
257.

The statutes of the units of local self-government where minority languages are
officially used also govern publishing of local municipal documents in official
gazettes of the units of local self-government. The majority of the units of local
self-government where some minority language is officially used have their own
official gazettes, while a number of the units of local self-government utilize the
services of publishing of their documents in the official gazettes of other units of
local self-government. The Table below contains a review of publishing of local
documents in adequate minority languages, prepared on the basis of information
from all the units of local self-government where some of minority languages is
officially used.

Minority Language

Local Self-Government
Bujanovac

Albanian language

Medveña
Preševo

Bosniak language

Novi Pazar
Prijepolje
Sjenica
Tutin
Ada
Bačka Topola

Official Journal
The Official Gazette of the town
of Leskovac
The Official Gazette of the town
of Leskovac
The Official Gazette of the town
of Leskovac
Its own official journal
Its own official journal
Its own official journal
Its own official journal
Its own official journal
Its own official journal

119

Hungarian language

Ruthenian language
Slovak language
Croatian language

258.

Bečej
Kanjiža
Kikinda
Kula
Mali Iñoš
Nova Crnja
Novi Kneževac
Senta
Sombor
Srbobran
Subotica
Temerin
Čoka
Kula
Bačка Palanka
Bački Petrovac
Subotica

Its own official journal
Its own official journal
Its own official journal
Its own official journal
Its own official journal
Its own official journal
Its own official journal
Its own official journal
Its own official journal
Its own official journal
Its own official journal
Its own official journal
Its own official journal
Its own official journal
Its own official journal
Its own official journal
Its own official journal

Another form of affirmation of minority languages has been provided by Internet
presentations, because many units of local self-government where minority
languages are officially used also have presentations in minority languages. For
example, the website of the municipality of Bujanovac also has a presentation in
Albanian language, the website of the municipality of Bosilegrad has a
presentation in Bulgarian language, and the websites of the town of Novi Pazar
and the Municipality of Prijepolje are prepared in Latin script (the script of
Bosniak language). After having an insight into the websites of units of local selfgovernment and the possibility of their use in minority languages, the Provincial
Secretariat for Regulations, Administration and National Communities established
that out of 31 local self-governments where Hungarian language and script are
officially used, 10 websites are also prepared in this language. Out of 10 local
self-governments where Romanian language and script are officially used , 1
website (the municipality of Alibunar) is prepared in this language, too. Out of 6
local self-governments where Ruthenian language and script are officially used,
no website has been prepared in the language concerned. Out of 13 local selfgovernments where Slovak language and script are officially used, 3 websites (the
municipalities of Alibunar, Bački Petrovac, Stara Pazova) have been prepared in
this language, too. Out of 4 local self-governments where Croatian language and
script are officially used, 1 website (the town of Subotica) has been prepared in
this language, too. Czech language and script are only officially used in the
municipality of Bela Crkva and the website is not prepared in this minority
language.

4.3.5. Use of traditional forms of place names in minority languages
259.

The Law on the National Councils of the National Minorities prescribes that
traditional names of the units of local self-government, places and other
geographic names in minority languages shall be used as to be established by the
national council, if the language concerned is officially used in the territory of the
unit of local self-government or place. Traditional names established by the
120

national council become names officially used, in addition to names in Serbian
language and are published in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Serbia and
in the Official Gazette of the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina respectively, if
the seat of the national council is in the territory of AP of Vojvodina.
260.

The Section 5.3.7. of the First Periodic Report on the Implementation of the
Charter contains the decisions on establishment of traditional names of towns,
municipalities and places in Hungarian, Romanian, Ruthenian, Slovak languages,
as well as of some places in Albanian and Bosniak languages. The following
paragraphs of the Report contain traditional names of places in other minority
languages, as well as the supplements to the decisions on establishment of
traditional names for certain places where some of minority languages had been
introduced into official use.

Albanian language
261.

By decisions of the municipalities of Bujanovac, Medveña and Preševo, where
Albanian language is officially used, traditional names of places in Albanian had
been established, as follows:
Name of Place in Serbian
Language

Name of Place in
Albanian Language

Municipality of Bujanovac
Бујановац
Велики Трновац
Мали Трновац
Брезнице
Ђорђевац
Муховац
Равно Бучје
Чар
Прибовце
Зарбинце
Сухарно
Кончуљ
Добросин
Лучане
Tурија
Осларе
Несалце
Врбан
Грамада
Г. Летовица
Летовица

Bujanoc
Tërrnoc
Mal Tërrnoci
Breznicë
Gjergjec
Muhoc
Ramabuçë
Çarr
Priboc
Zarbicë
Suharnë
Konçul
Dobrosin
Lluçan
Turi
Osllarë
Nesalcë
Vërban
Gramadë
Letovica e Epërme
Letovicë

Municipality of Medveña
Медвеђа

Меdvegjë

121

Сијаринска бања
Равна бања
Тупале
Капит
Свирце

Banja e sijarinës
Rama baja
Tupallë
Kapit
Svircë

Municipality of Preševo
Прешево
Рајинце
Г. Шушаја
Буковац
Мађере
Госпођинце
Илинце
Црнотинце
Д. Шушаја
Букуревац
Ораовица
Бујић
Курбалија
Норча
Трнава
Миратовац
Чакановац
Чукарка
Жујинце
Стрезовце
Алиђерце
Големи Дол
Релан
Буштрање
Свињиште
Славујевац
Љаник

Preshevë
Raincë
Shoshaja e Epërme
Bukoc
Maxhere
Gosponicë
Ilincë
Corroticë
Shoshaja e Poshtme
Bukuroc
Rahovicë
Buhiq
Kurbali
Norçë
Tërrnavë
Miratoc
Cakanoc
Çukarkë
Zhunic
Strezoc
Geraj
Golemi doll
Leran
Bushtran
Svinjishtë
Bugarinë
Lanik

Bosniak language
262.

In 2009 the National Council of the Bosniak National Minority adopted the
Decision on establishment of traditional names of the units of local selfgovernment and places in the territories of Novi Pazar, Tutin, Sjenica and
Prijepolje, where Bosniak language is officially used. Traditional names of the
units of local self-government and dwelling areas in Bosniak language are:
Novi Pazar – dwelling areas: Haluloviće, Bajevica, Banja, Bare, Batajnik,
Bjekova, Bijele Vode, Boturovina, Brñani, Brestovo, Varevo, Vjever, Vidovo,
Vitkoviće, Vojkoviće, Vojniće, Vranovina, Vučiniće, Vučija Lokva, Golice,
Gornja Tušimlja, Goševo, Grañanoviće, Gračane, Grubetiće, Deževa, Dojinoviće,
Dolac, Doljani, Dragočevo, Dramiće, Žunjeviće, Zabrñe, Zlatare, Ivanča, Izbice,
Jablanica, Javor, Janča, Joha, Kašalj, Kovačevo, Kožlje, Koprivica, Kosuriće,
Kruševo, Kuzmičevo, Leča, Lopuzinje, Lukare, Lukarsko Goševo, Lukocrijevo,
122

Miščiće, Mur, Muhovo, Negotinac, Odojeviće, Okose, Osaonica, Osoje, Oholje,
Pavlje, Pasji Potok, Pilorete, Pobrñe, Požega, Požežina, Polokce, Pope, Postijenje,
Prćenova, Pusta Tušimlja, Pustovlah, Radaljica, Rajetiće, Rajkoviće, Rajčinoviće,
Rajčinovićka Trnava, Rakovac, Rast, Sebečevo, Sitniče, Skukovo, Slatina, Smilov
Laz, Srednja Tušimlja, Stradovo, Sudsko Selo, Tenkovo, Trnava, Tunovo,
Hotkovo, Cokoviće, Čašić Dolac, Šavci, Šaronje, Štitare;
Prijepolje - naseljena mjesta: Haljinovići, Balići, Bare, Biskupići, Bjelahova,
Brajkovac, Brvine, Brodarevo, Bukovik, Vinicka, Vrbovo, Gojakoviće, Gornje
Babine, Gornje Goračići, Gornji Stranjani, Gostun, Gračanica, Grobnice, Divci,
Donje Babine, Donji Stranjani, Drenova, Dušmanići, Đurašići, Zabrnji Toci,
Zavinograñe, Zalug, Zastup, Zvijezd, Ivanje, Ivezići, Izbičanj, Jabuka, Junčevići,
Kamena Gora, Karaula, Karoševina, Kaćevo, Kašice, Kovačevac, Koprivna,
Kosatica, Koševine, Kruševo, Kučin, Lučice, Mataruge, Meñani, Mijani, Mijoska,
Milakovići, Mileševo, Milošev Dol, Miljevići, Mrčkovina, Muškovina, Orovac,
Orašac, Osoje, Oštra Stijena, Potkrš, Potok, Pravoševa, Pranjci, Rasno, Ratajska,
Sedobro, Seljane, Seljašnica, Skokuće, Slatina, Sopotnica, Taševo, Hisardžik,
Hrta, Crkveni Toci, Čadinje, Čauševići, Džurovo;
Sjenica – dwelling areas: Aliveroviće, Bagačiće, Bare, Bačija, Bioc, Blato,
Boguti, Boljare, Borišiće, Boroviće, Breza, Brnjica, Buñevo, Vapa, Veskoviće,
Visočka, Višnjeva, Višnjice, Vrapci, Vrbnica, Vrhsjenice, Goluban, Gonje,
Gornje Lopiže, Goševo, Grabovica, Gradac, Grgaje, Doliće, Donje Goračice,
Donje Lopiže, Dragojloviće, Draževiće, Družiniće, Dubnica, Duga Poljana,
Dujke, Dunišiće, Žabren, Žitniće, Zabrñe, Zaječiće, Zahumsko, Jevik, Jezero,
Kalipolje, Kamešnica, Kanjevina, Karajukića Bunari, Kijevce, Kladnica,
Kneževac, Koznik, Kokošiće, Krajinoviće, Krivaja, Krnja Jela, Krstac, Krće,
Lijeva Rijeka, Ljutaje, Mašoviće, Medare, Meñugor, Milići, Papiće, Petrovo
Polje, Plana, Poda, Ponorac, Pralja, Raždaginja, Rasno, Raspoganče, Rastenoviće,
Raškoviće, Skradnik, Strahiniće, Stup, Sugubine, Sušica, Crešnjevica, Trijebine,
Tuzinje, Tutiće, Uvac, Ugao, Ursule, Ušak, Fijulje, Caričina, Cetanoviće, Crvsko,
Crčevo, Čedovo, Čipalje, Čitluk, Šare, Štavalj, Šušure;
Tutin – dwelling areas: Harapoviće, Baljen, Batrage, Baćica, Bijohane, Blace,
Bovanj, Boroštica, Braćak, Bregove, Brniševo, Bujkoviće, Velje Polje, Veseniće,
Vrapče, Vrba, Glogovik, Gluhavica, Gnjila, Godovo, Gornji Crniš, Gradac,
Gujiće, Gurdijelje, Guceviće, Devreče, Delimeñe, Detane, Dobri Dub, Dobrinje,
Dolovo, Draga, Dubovo, Dulebe, Đerekare, Ervenice, Žirče, Župa, Žuče, Zapadni
Mojstir, Izrok, Istočni Mojstir, Jablanica, Jerebica, Jezgroviće, Jeliće, Južni
Kočarnik, Kovače, Koniče, Ljeskova, Lipica, Lukavica, Melaje, Mitrova, Morani,
Naboje, Nadumce, Namga, Noćaje, Oraše, Orlje, Ostrovica, Paljevo, Piskopovce,
Plenibabe, Pokrvenik, Pope, Popiće, Potrijeb, Pružanj, Raduhovce, Raduša,
Ramoševo, Reževiće, Ribariće, Rudnica, Ruñe, Saš, Sjeverni Kočarnik, Smoluća,
Starčeviće, Strumce, Suhodo, Točilovo, Čulije, Kadiluk, Čarovina, Čmanjke,
Čukote, Šaronje, Šipče, Špiljane.
Bulgarian language

123

263.

Bulgarian language and script are officially used in the municipalities of
Bosilegrad and Dimitrovgrad, and since 2008 it has also been introduced into
official use in the territory of the dwelling area of Ivanovo according to the statute
of the town of Pančevo. The National Council of the Bulgarian National Minority
submitted a request to the assembly of the municipality of Dimitrovgrad to return
previously used names in the territory of this municipality, but this request has not
been resolved yet. Upon the resolution of the request, the national Council shall
adopt the decision on establishment of traditional names of towns, municipalities
and places in Bulgarian language.

Hungarian language
264.

The decision on establishment of names of places in Vojvodina in Hungarian
language provided a list of traditional names of places in this language in the
territory of 28 local self-governments, in 288 places. After the first cycle of
monitoring of the implementation of the Charter, certain local self-governments
established new places in the territories of which Hungarian language had been
introduced into official use, too. For those places, the National Council of the
Hungarian National Minority established the following traditional names:
Name of Place
Serbian Language

in

Купусина
Свилојево
Карађорђево
Његошево
Томиславци
Победа
Светићево
Сутјеска
Иваново

Name of Place in
Hungarian Language

Municipality/Town

Kupuszina
Sílagy
Karañorñevo
Njegoševo
Tomislavci
Pobeda
Svetićevo
Sarcia
Sándoregyháza

Apatin
Apatin
Bačка Topola
Bačка Topola
Bačка Topola
Bačка Topola
Bačка Topola
Sečanj
Pančevo

Romanian language
265.

The National Council of the Romanian National Minority established 38
traditional names of towns, municipalities and dwelling areas in Romanian
language. After the first cycle of monitoring of the implementation of the Charter,
traditional names of dwelling areas in Romanian language were established for
the following places:
Name of Place in
Serbian Language
Житиште
Банатски Двор
Банатско Вишњићево
Банатско Карађорђево
Међа
Нови Итебеј

Name of Place in
Romanian Language
Jitişte
Banatski Dvor
Banatsko Višnjićevo
Bantsko Karadjordjevo
Meña
Novi Itebej

Municipality
Žitište
Žitište
Žitište
Žitište
Žitište
Žitište

124

Равни Тополовац
Српски Итебеј
Торда
Хетин
Честерег

Ravni Topolovac
Srpski Itebej
Torda
Hetin
Čestereg

Žitište
Žitište
Žitište
Žitište
Žitište

Slovak language
266.

The initial decision established traditional names for 30 towns, municipalities and
dwelling places in Slovak language. The supplement to this decision established
traditional names for another 22 dwelling places in the territory of the
municipalities of Bačка Palanka and Bačка Topola in Slovak language, as
follows:
Name of Place
Serbian Language
Багремово
Bačka Topola
Bačки Соколац
Богарош
Горња Рогатица
Гунарош
Зобнатица
Карађорђево
Кавило
Криваја
Мали Београд
Мићуново
Ново Орахово
Његошево
Оборњача
Томиславци
Панонија
Пачир
Победа
Светићево
Средњи Салаш
Стара Моравица

in

Name of Place in
Slovak Language
Bagremovo
Báčska Topol'a
Báčsky Sokolac
Bogaroš
Gornja Rogatica
Gunaroš
Zobnatica
Karañorñevo
Kavilo
Krivaja
Malý Belehrad
Mićunovo
Novo Orahovo
Njegoševo
Obornjača
Tomislavci
Panónia
Pačir
Pobeda
Svetićevo
Srednji Salaš
Stara Moravica

Municipality
Bačка Palanka
Bačка Topola
Bačка Topola
Bačка Topola
Bačка Topola
Bačка Palanka
Bačка Topola
Bačка Topola
Bačка Topola
Bačка Topola
Bačка Palanka
Bačка Topola
Bačка Topola
Bačка Topola
Bačка Topola
Bačка Topola
Bačка Topola
Bačка Palanka
Bačка Topola
Bačка Topola
Bačка Topola
Bačка Topola

Croatian language
267.

In the course of 2009, the National Council of the Croatian National Minority
established a list of 8 traditional names of dwelling places in Croatian language in
5 municipalities, as follows:
Name of Place
Serbian Language
Бајмок
Љутово
Стари Жедник

in

Name of Place in
Croatian Language
Bajmak
Mirgeš
Žednik

Town/Municipality
Subotica
Subotica
Subotica

125

Сонта
Bačки брег
Bačки Моноштор
Стара Бингула
Сот

268.

Sonta
Bereg
Monoštor
Stara Bingula
Sot

Apatin
Sombor
Sombor
Sremska Mitrovica
Šid

It was concluded from the consultations with the representatives of the national
councils of speakers of Romani and Ukrainian languages that there are no
traditional names of places in the languages concerned in the territory of the
Republic of Serbia, since the subject national minorities do not live in larger
numbers in certain territories and dwelling places so that their names could be
established and accepted. The speakers of Ukrainian language use Serbian names
for towns, which are phonetically modified (and sound like Ukrainian names),
such as: Beljhorod – Belrgade, Novi Sad – Novej Sad, Sremska Mitrovica –
Сремска Метровеца, Vrbas – Вербас, etc.

4.3.6. Submission of applications to public services in minority languages
269.

The Section 5.3.8. of the First Periodic Report on the Implementation of the
Charter contains the information about the status of public services in the legal
system of the Republic of Serbia and the legislative framework of their activities.
As mentioned, the Law on Public Services does not contain any explicit provision
on the language the citizens may use to apply to public services in order to
accomplish their rights and obligations, however, bearing in mind that public
services, when deciding on the rights and obligations of citizens, organizations,
namely uses of their services and when performing other jobs established by law,
shall decide and act pursuant to the Law on General Administrative Procedure and
the Law on Official Use of Language and Script, which means that oral and
written applications may also be submitted in minority languages.

270.

According to the information obtained from the Elektroprivreda Srbije Public
Company, at this company and its dependant companies, there are no special
regulations concerning the use of minority languages on the occasion of
submission of applications by parties, but there are no limitations of any kind,
either, to submit applications in the languages concerned. For example, although
the documents on internal organization and systematization do not prescribe a
condition of knowledge of some minority language for employees of public
companies doing business in the territory of AP of Vojvodina, the Elektroprivreda
Public Company and the Panonske termoelektrane – toplane Public Company, in
which territory some minority language is used, have an option to provide written
and oral communications in minority language concerned. No applications in any
of minority languages were submitted to this public company by parties. Also, the
Telekom Srbija Communication Company received no applications in minority
languages. However, should they be submitted, they will be processed according
to the legal regulations. If Telekom receives any applications in some minority
language, it shall not be a problem to act accordingly. The Srbija PTT
Communication Public Company ensures the implementation of legal regulations
126

in the official use of minority languages in the territory of its postal
communication units where some minority language and script are officially used,
such as the postal communication units of Subotica, Sombor, Kikinda, etc.
271.

According to the information of the Provincial Secretariat for Regulations,
Administration and National Communities of AP of Vojvodina, the bodies,
institutions and companies rendering the services and collecting the payments for
the services from citizens in the field of electric power industry, sales of natural
gas, utilities, post and telegraph, insufficiently accept the positive effects of the
decision on precise establishment of certain issues of official use of language and
script of national minorities in the territory of AP of Vojvodina, primarily in
promotion and presentation of the services they render, by writing them in the
officially used languages of national minorities in the territories concerned. The
discussions have been held and the supervision has been provided for a certain
number of providers of such services and by a relevant decision they were
ordered to act accordingly within a specified term. In spite of several
interventions and 12 issued decisions to the supervised companies, not much has
been done concerning the official use of languages and scripts of national
minorities with the Serbian Railways Public Company in the territory of AP of
Vojvodina, because the names of places, timetable, announcements of arrivals and
departures of trains and the main information on platforms and premises are only
written in Serbian language and not in the officially used minority languages. In
respect of the decisions related to the railway stations of Bačka Topola, Vrbas,
Kisač, Senta and Subotica, appeals had been filed, which were dismissed as
groundless in the second instance proceedings. The Serbian Railways Public
Company initiated administrative proceedings before the District Court in Novi
Sad against these decisions, which became final. Deciding upon the actions, the
District Court adopted judgements dismissing all individual actions as groundless,
thus also upholding all the decisions of the Provincial Secretariat for Regulations,
Administration and National Communities. In subsequent contacts with the
authorised representatives and managers of the Serbian Railways Public
Company, it was stressed that this company is obliged to act according to final
court judgements and a term was fixed for this company to act voluntarily. Upon
the expiration of the fixed term, the provincial authority intends to initiate the
procedure of forced enforcement. In respect of various information delivered to
customers, which are usually written or printed in Serbian language and in
officially used minority language in the community concerned, the state of affairs
is much better. This primarily refers to the post offices of the Srbija PTT
Communication Public Company, counters of the Elektroprivreda Srbije Public
Company where the information to customers have been lately written in minority
languages, too. There is an increasing number of public companies rendering
utility services, which now issues bills and various information to citizens in the
minority language officially used in their territory.

272.

Based on the information received from the units of local self government, which
accepted to participate in the preparation of this Report, bills, receipts and
127

information in minority languages are issued by the public companies (electricity
bills, utility services and postal and telephone bills) in the following towns and
municipalities: Ada (Hungarian language), Bečej (Hungarian language), Bačka
Topola (Hungarian language), Preševo (Albanian language), Senta (Hungarian
language), Subotica (Hungarian and Croatian languages), Temerin (Hungarian
language) and Čoka (Hungarian language). In the territory of the town of Subotica
and in the municipalities of Apatin and Kanjiža, the public utility companies
founded by the town or by the assembly of the municipality issue receipts and
information in the minority language officially used in their territory, while the
bills are issued in Serbian language.
4.3.7. Engagement of speakers of minority languages in public services
273.

The regulations of the Republic of Serbia, as already said ensure the use of
minority languages in the operations of public services, too, which directly
indicates the engagement of speakers of minority languages in public services.
There are no precise data about the number of engaged speakers of minority
languages in public services because, for example, the public companies that
accepted to participate in the preparation of this Report, do not contain in their
internal documents on organization and systematization of jobs in the territories in
which minority languages are also in official use, the provisions concerning
positions which require the knowledge of minority languages. The Telekom
announced the preparation of the internal document to govern the scope and
method of application of the constitutional and legal provisions concerning the
use of minority languages and script at the company level in order to regulate this
issue in a uniform way.

4.3.8. Use and adoption of family names in minority languages
274.

The Section 5.3.10. of the First Periodic Report on the Implementation of the
Charter contains the relevant regulations governing the issue of use of family
names in minority languages. After the first cycle of monitoring of the
implementation of the Charter, the new Law on Registry Books was adopted in
2009, which governs the issue of entering personal names of the members of
national minorities in registry books, as the basic official records on the personal
status of citizens. The certificates from the registry books are issued on the basis
of the data contained in the integral texts of registry books, namely, the
certificates contain the latest data entered in the registry books until the time of
issuance of certificates, thus also containing the data about personal names. Bylaws necessary for its implementation were adopted on the grounds of this Law.
Among other documents, the instructions concerning keeping of registry books
and forms of registry books were also adopted, which prescribe the method of
issuance of certificates from the registry books and the forms of the certificates
from the registry books. In this respect it is to be stressed in particular that this is
for the first time to define the appearance and the contents of the forms of the
certificates from the registry books in minority language and script. Namely, item
128

137 of these instructions prescribe that the names of the columns of the
certificates from the registry books may also be printed in minority language and
script at the back of the forms of the certificates from the registry books. If there
are several officially used national minority languages, the text in the languages
concerned is written according to the alphabetic order. The administrative bodies,
which provide keeping of registry books pursuant to Article 6 of the Law on
Registry Books, have been issuing the certificates from the registry books in the
forms prescribed by the instructions since 1 March 2010.
275.

As mentioned in the Section 2.1.1. of the Report, the amendments and
supplements of the Law on the Official Use of Language and Script added new
Article 18а. This provision prescribes that the members of national minorities
have the right to free choice and use of personal names of their children, as well
as to enter these personal names in all public documents, official records and
personal data bases according to the orthography of minority languages too,
which does not exclude that personal names are also parallelly written according
to Serbian orthography and script. The decision on precise regulation of certain
issues on official use of national minorities language and script in the territory of
AP of Vojvodina also prescribes that a member of the national minority has the
right to enter his/her personal name and personal name of his/her children into the
registry books in their original form in script and according to orthography of the
language concerned. The decision on multilingual forms of certificates from the
registry books and entries in the same books enable the administration in the units
of local self-governments where minority language is also officially used, to issue
a certificate from the registry books in bilingual forms, if required, and in the way
it had been originally entered in the registry books. If some personal name is only
entered in the registry books in Serbian language the registrar will instruct the
client how to request that his/her personal name is also entered in the registry
book in the original way after the relevant administrative had been conducted.

276.

According to the data of the Provincial Secretariat for Regulations,
Administration and National Communities in 2009 there were 52 administrative
proceedings for the amendment of personal names into minority languages
officially used. All 52 proceedings were conducted in Serbian and Hungarian
languages, namely, 172 administrative proceedings for the amendment of
personal names. In percentage, the largest number of proceedings for the
amendment of personal names, comparing the number of proceedings in minority
language with the total number of proceedings, was conducted in the municipality
of Kanjiža where, out of 52 applications in total, the proceedings were held in
Serbian and Hungarian languages in 38 cases, in the municipality of Bečej where,
out of 28 applications in total, 10 proceedings were held in Serbian and Hungarian
languages and in the municipality of Temerin where, out of 32 applications in
total, 4 proceedings were held in Serbian and Hungarian languages. In the
proceedings for the amendment of the entry of personal names in registry books
in the course of 2009, in 125 cases (323 cases in the course of 2008), the
proceedings were held in minority languages, to be more precise in Serbian and
129

Hungarian languages. In percentage, the largest number of proceedings for the
amendment of entry of personal names in minority languages was conducted in
the municipalities of Bačka Topola, Kanjiža, Kovin, Kula, Novi Bečej and towns
of Zrenjanin and Subotica. In the proceedings for the correction of entry of
personal names in the registry books, 184 proceedings in minority languages were
held in 2009 (33 proceedings in the course of 2008) and these proceedings were
the first instance administrative proceedings for the corrections of entries in the
registry books. All 184 proceedings were held in Serbian and Hungarian
languages.
4.3.9. Activities for the implementation of box-recommendations of the Committee
of Experts concerning Article 10 of the Charter
277.

In the Report on the Implementation of the Charter in the first reporting cycle, the
Committee of Experts established two box-recommendations concerning Article
10 of the Charter. The following paragraphs contain information on the activities
undertaken by the state for the purpose of its implementation.

4.3.9.1. Activities to ensure submission of oral and written applications to State
authorities in minority languages
The Committee of Experts encourages the Serbian authorities to take the
necessary legal and practical measures to ensure that users of regional or
minority languages may submit oral or written applications in these languages to
State authorities.
278.

It is stated in the Section 4.3.1. of the Report that after the first cycle of
monitoring of the implementation of the Charter, the amendment of legal
regulations enabled the users of minority languages to submit applications to the
State authorities in their languages. Namely, Article 11 paragraph 8 of the Law on
Official Use of Language and Script prescribes that the members of national
minorities the number of which does not reach 2% in the total population of the
Republic of Serbia according to the last census, may submit applications to the
republic authorities in their language and that they have the right to receive a
reply in the language concerned through the unit of local self-government where
the language of the national minority concerned is officially used, whereas the
unit of local self-government will arrange a translation and cover the costs of the
translation of the letter addressed to the republic authority and of its reply. It
practically means that the users of all officially used minority languages in the
units of local self-government have an option to submit applications to the State
authorities and receive replies from them in their language.

4.3.9.2. Activities to ensure the publication of official documents in minority
languages
The Committee of Experts encourages the Serbian authorities to take the
130

necessary organisational measures to ensure the publication by local authorities
of their official documents also in relevant regional or minority languages.
279.

Since the State leaves to the units of local self-government to establish the
minority languages in official use in their territories, the State approves and
encourages local authorities to publish the documents in minority languages.
However, as already said, the units of local self-government ensuring the right to
official use of minority language, have increased costs also relating to translations
or to installation of adequate computer programmes, requiring that their financing
is resolved as a system. The adoption of the Law on Maximum Number of
Employees in Local Administration, which prescribes that on the occasion of
establishment of the required number of employees at the bodies of local selfgovernment special requirements in respect of the need for translators in local
self-governments where several minority languages are officially used, may also
be considered a form of support by the State to the units of local self-government
in, inter alia, their efforts to ensure the publishing of their official documents in
the relevant minority languages.

131

4.4.

Article 11
Media
Selected paragraphs and sub-paragraphs

1. The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the
territories in which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each
language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent,
have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence
and autonomy of the media:
a)
to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:
(iii) to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer programmes in the
regional or minority languages;
b)
(ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a magistrate basis;
c)
(ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in
the regional or minority languages on a magistrate basis;
d) to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and
audiovisual works in the regional or minority languages;
e)
(i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one
newspaper in the regional or minority languages; or
f)
(ii) to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual
productions in the regional or minority languages;
2. The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form
to a regional or minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and
television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language. They further
undertake to ensure that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and
free circulation of information in the written press in a language used in identical or
similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of the abovementioned
freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such
formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are
necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial
integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of
health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for preventing
disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the authority and
impartiality of the judiciary.
132

3. The Parties undertake to ensure that the interests of the users of regional or minority
languages are represented or taken into account within such bodies as may be
established in accordance with the law with responsibility for guaranteeing the freedom
and pluralism of the media.
4.4.1. Novelties after the first cycle of monitoring of the implementation of the
Charter
4.4.1.1. Broadcasting licences for radio and TV programmes
280.

Pursuant to the Law on Broadcasting and the Distribution Schedule of Radio
Frequencies, since 2006 the Republic Radio-Broadcasting Agency has started the
process of issuance of licences for broadcasting of programmes by electronic
media for the territory of entire Republic of Serbia, regional and local areas. The
process of issuance of licences implies a compulsory public tender, which is
issued when on the grounds of the Distribution Schedule of Radio Frequencies
there are possibilities to issue new licences for programme broadcasting. In 2007
the first tenders for broadcasting of programmes for local areas were issued. The
broadcaster – radio and television stations from local areas, especially from
nationally mixed environments, play a very important role in information to be
rendered to the members of national minorities, namely of users of minority
languages. Based on the procedure prescribed by law, the Republic RadioBroadcasting Agency adopts a decision on issuance of licence for broadcasting of
programmes in accordance with the established criteria and prescribed conditions
and standards for production and broadcasting of programmes. The licence to run
a radio-broadcasting station is an integral part of the licence for programme
broadcasting, which is issued by the Republic Telecommunication Agency
(RATEL) pursuant to the procedure established by law. The registry of issued
licences for broadcasting of TV/radio programmes is kept and this registry is
public. The registry of issued licences may also be accessed on the official
website of the Republic Radio-Broadcasting Agency and it is regularly updated in
accordance with the decisions of the Council of the Republic Radio-Broadcasting
Agency. Since the registry of issued licences for broadcasting of TV/radio
programmes does not include special records of radio and television stations
broadcasting programmes in minority languages, for the requirements of this
Report, the Republic Radio-Broadcasting Agency prepared a list of radio and
television stations broadcasting programmes in minority languages after a review
of the tender documentation for the issuance of licences for broadcasting of
programmes. Based on the programme studies by the applicants to the tender, it
was found that programmes in Albanian language are broadcasted by three radio
and three TV stations, one radio and one TV station in Bosniak language, three
radio and two TV stations in Bulgarian language, 24 radio and 8 TV stations in
Hungarian language, 20 radio and 7 TV stations in Romani language, 9 radio and
3 TV stations in Romanian language, 10 radio and one TV station in Ruthenian
language, 20 radio and 5 TV stations in Slovak language, 7 radio stations in
133

Ukrainian language and 9 radio stations in Croatian language. The above
mentioned numbers do not present the factual status of the number of radio and
television stations broadcasting programs in minority languages because many
applicants to the public tender stated in their program studies that they were going
to broadcast programs in minority languages as well during the validity of the
licence for program broadcasting.
4.4.1.2. Measures for resolution of media issues
281.

Within the limits of financial capabilities, the activities are being undertaken in
the republic of Serbia to resolve the issue of lack of financial resources, qualified
journalists and modern equipment for the media broadcasting or publishing
programs in minority languages, the following paragraphs contain some examples
of such measures.

282.

The Ministry of Culture – the Media Sector, through tenders for co-financing of
media and productions in minority languages, also grants funds to the projects
aimed at technical improvement, professional advancement and engagement of
young journalists, expansion of network of reporters, initiation of Internet
presentations, special editorial offices and programs in minority languages, etc. In
2007, 2,612,000.00 dinars (9 projects) were allocated for these purposes out of the
total budget of 11,500,000.00 dinars, and in 2008, 2,600,000.00 dinars (9
projects) out of the total budget of 24,700,000.00 dinars. A considerably smaller
number of projects was received for the tender in 2009, so the funds were
allocated to two projects only in the total amount of 528,000.00 dinars.

283.

Under the initiative of the Ministry of Culture, the Government of the Republic of
Serbia adopted the conclusion on measures for assistance to media under the
circumstances of the economic crisis. One of these measures was financial
support to media distributed within the framework of the tender for co-financing
of projects/programs in the field of public information issued in August 2009. Out
of the total sum of 80,000,000.00 dinars, the amount of 11,300,000.00 dinars was
allocated to the productions and projects in minority languages.

284.

The Ministry of Culture – the Media Sector also granted funds to individual
projects in order to help some media and institutions of importance for the
improvement of information in minority languages overcome the current financial
and personnel problems and to improve professional standards. Accordingly in
2007 the Research Centre for Ethnicities was granted 200,000.00 dinars for the
project of Training of Media Representatives in Accomplishment of Rights of
National Minorities in Serbia and Opportunities for Advancement, 200.000,00
dinars to Radio Srbobran for bilingual programs (Serbian-Hungarian) on culture,
art and media, as well as 736,800.00 dinars to the Beta Press Newspaper Agency
for news in minority languages. In 2008, due to financial difficulties, three
electronic media broadcasting programs in minority languages referred to the
Ministry of Culture – the RTV Nišava (Romani), the Niš Radio Rom (Romani),
134

Obrenovac and Radio Ema (Romani), Bujanovac. They were granted almost
300,000.00 dinars for the preparation of technical documentation required for the
provision of a licence from the RATEL, being a condition for program
broadcasting. The Ministry of Culture helped the same year the Romano Nevipe,
Romani newspaper, with 960,000.00 dinars to improve and expand its network of
reporters, engaging young and educated Roma interested in journalism. Assessing
its extremely difficult financial status, as well as its incapability to resolve
aggravated technical problems on its own (obsolete equipment), in 2009 the
Ministry of Culture granted 2,100.000.00 dinars to the Nezavisna televizija from
Niš to improve technical capacities.
285.

In co-operation with the Ministry of Human and Minority Rights and the National
Council of the Romani National Minority, the Ministry of Culture started the
implementation of the project of engagement of Romani representatives in media .
The project included 18 attendees of training for Romani representatives in media,
which is performed for one representative in each of 16 towns in Serbia and for
two representatives in Belgrade. Upon the completion of training, which has two
stages, Romani representatives in media will be engaged in local communities to
edit programmes and place information of importance for the Romani community
through local media. For this purpose the Ministry of Culture allocated over
1,000,000.00 dinars.

286.

The Provincial Secretariat of Information of AP of Vojvodina is engaged in the
resolution of financial difficulties of minority media. In addition to subsidies to
Magyar Szó, daily in Hungarian language, another 6,000,000.00 dinars have been
allocated to resolve the difficulties faced by the printing unit belonging to the
same company.

287.

Since 2009 the Provincial Secretariat for Information of AP of Vojvodina has
been granting scholarship to the students of all media professions and other
professions required by the public media in order to improve their personnel
structure. Unfortunately, although 42 scholarships were foreseen, only seven
media applied to the tender, and the tender requirements were met by three
students only, of whom for one student the job is secured by the Hrvatska riječ, a
weekly in Croatian language. The amount of scholarship is 7,000 dinars monthly.

4.4.2. Public broadcasting agencies
288.

The following republic and provincial radio-broadcasting institutions are
responsible for the radio-broadcasting service in the Republic of Serbia: the
Public Radio-Broadcasting Agency of Serbia and the Public Radio-Broadcasting
Agency of Vojvodina. These very public radio-broadcasting agencies have a
primary role in respect of the development of program diversities in order to
affirm plural identities. This for the reason that the provisions of the Law o
Broadcasting prescribe special obligations of public radio-broadcasting agencies
in respect of achievement of general interest in the sphere of quality and program
135

diversities, and thus also the obligations concerning the accomplishment of
interests of minority groups to preserve their identities.
289.

Article 77 paragraph 3 of the Law on Broadcasting establishes that the programs
produced and broadcasted within the framework of public radio-broadcasting
agency must ensure diversity and balance of contents (mutual conformity or
compliance), which support democratic values of a modern society and in
particular the respect for human rights and cultural, national, ethnic and political
pluralism of ideas and opinions. The provisions of Article 78 items 2, 3 and 4 of
the same Law prescribe that the public radio-broadcasting agencies are obliged to
produce and broadcast programmes intended for all segments of the society,
without any discrimination, taking particular care of specific social groups, such
as, inter alia, minority and ethnic groups, to comply with linguistic and speech
standards of both majority population and of national minorities, to an adequate
extent, namely of ethnic groups in the territories where the programmes are
broadcasted and to meet the requirements of citizens related to programme
contents expressing cultural identity of both the nations and the national
minorities and ethnic groups respectively, providing them a possibility to watch
and listen to certain programmes in their mother tongue and script in the
territories where they live and work.

290.

The Department of Supervision and Analysis of the Republic Broadcasting
Agency controls the programmes of the public radio-broadcasting agencies
related to the mentioned article of the Law on Broadcasting, which was the
ground to establish programmes intended to specific social groups, including
minority and ethnic groups as well.

291.

Within the framework of the Public Radio-Broadcasting Agency of Serbia –
Radio Belgrade, there is an editorial office in Romani language broadcasting daily
programmes mainly in Romani language in the duration of 30 minutes. Television
Belgrade has no special editorial offices producing programmes in minority
languages. However, within the period from 2007-2009 and within the framework
of the first and the second channel of the RTS, 3,475 programmes in minority
languages were broadcasted, which in the terms of the duration of broadcasted
programmes amounts to 48,134 minutes, namely 33.4 days. The Grañanin,
programme dedicated to the members of national minorities in Serbia (education,
employment, participation in public life, cultural events, customs, multi-ethnic
projects, issues of re-admission...) has been produced and broadcasted once a
week. Depending on the interlocutor’s wish, mother tongue or minority language
(Albanian, Bulgarian, Hungarian, Macedonian, Romani, Romanian, Slovak,
Croatian…) or Serbian language may be used.

292.

Within the framework of the Public Radio-Broadcasting Agency of Vojvodina,
one channel, Radio-Television of Vojvodina 2 (RTV2) broadcasts programmes
intended to the users of the minority languages. Radio Novi Sad broadcasts
programmes in eight minority languages and Television of Vojvodina broadcasts
136

programmes in nine minority languages. TV Vojvodina broadcasts programmes in
ten languages (including Serbian language as well) and the joint programme of 30
minutes under the title of Zajedno, once a week.
293.

The data on the duration of radio and television programmes on RTV Vojvodina in
minority languages are presented in the table below.

Radio Programme
Broadcasting Language

Programme Duration

Hungarian language

24 hours daily

Romani language

1 hour daily

Romanian language

5 hours daily

Ruthenian language

5 hours daily

Slovak language

5 hours daily

Ukrainian language

15 minutes daily + 1 hour weekly

Bunjevac speech

0.5 hour weekly

Macedonian language

0.5 hour weekly

Television Programme
Broadcasting Languages

Programme Duration

Hungarian language

Romani language

Romanian language

Ruthenian language

Slovak language

In average 2.9 hours daily, namely 64 hours monthly premier and
reply programmes (45 minutes daily + 3 hours on Mondays and
Saturdays + 2 hours on Sundays + once monthly: 1.5 hours of family
magazine and 0,5 hour of children’s programme + twice a month
0.5hour of programme for Diaspora and entrepreneurs).
In average 1 hour daily, namely 58 hours monthly of premier and
replay programmes (10 minutes of daily information programmes +
weekly: 1.5 hours of information-political and cultural programmes
and 1 hour of magazine + 1.5 hours monthly of family magazine).
In average 1 hour daily, namely 58 hours monthly of premier and
replay programmes (10 minutes of daily information programmes +
weekly: 1.5 hours of information-political and cultural programmes
and 1 hour of magazine + 1.5 hours monthly of family magazine).
In average 1 hour daily, namely 58 hours monthly of premier and
replay programmes (10 minutes of daily information programmes +
weekly: 1.5 hours of information-political and cultural programmes
and 1 hour of magazine + 1.5 hours monthly of family magazine).
In average 1 hour daily, namely 58 hours monthly of premier and
replay programmes (10 minutes of daily information programmes +
weekly: 1.5 hours of information-political and cultural programmes
and 1 hour of magazine + 1.5 hours monthly of family magazine).

137

Ukrainian language
Croatian language

0.5 hour weekly
6 hours monthly in total (10 minutes daily + 0.5 hours on Saturdays
and Sundays).

Bunjevac speech

0.5 hour weekly

Macedonian language

0.5 hour weekly

294.

The Provincial Secretariat of Information of AP of Vojvodina granted to RTV
Vojvodina the funds in the amount of 14,274,741 dinars for information services
and capital investments for equipment, which were internally distributed to
sectors, media and editorial offices.

4.4.3. Encouragement and facilitation of radio programmes in minority languages
295.

The Ministry of Culture – the Media Sector issues an annual tender for cofinancing of projects/programmes in the field of public information and the
Provincial Secretariat of Information of AP of Vojvodina issues a tender for
equipment, promotion of programme and information to public in minority
languages. The public companies founded by the units of local self-government
are partially financed from their budgets. The Tables below contain the data on
co-financing of regular radio programme broadcasting in minority languages on
tender basis, through allocation of funds from the republic and provincial budgets
to those radio stations broadcasting programmes in minority languages.

Albanian language
Broadcaster
Multi-lingual Programme
Broadcasting – Public
Companies
RTV Bujanovac
Radio Bujanovac,
Bujanovac

Duration of Radio
Programme

Measures of Encouragement and Facilitation
of Programme Broadcasting

6.5 hours daily
(ceased to operate in 2009,
waiting for a licence from the
RBA)

In 2007 the Ministry of Culture granted 321,980
dinars for technical equipment for the radio.

138

Bosniak language
Broadcaster
Broadcasting in Bosniak
Language only – Other
Broadcasters
Bošnjački radio,
Tutin

Duration of Radio
Programme

Measures of Encouragement and Facilitation
of Programme Broadcasting

24 hours daily planned,
(should start operation upon
the installation of equipment)

In 2009 the Ministry of Culture granted 540,000
dinars for the radio news programme.

Duration of Radio
Programme

Measures of Encouragement and Facilitation
of Programme Broadcasting

70% of 24 hours daily

In 2007 the Ministry of Culture granted 344,000
dinars for technical equipment.

Duration of Radio
Programme

Measures of Encouragement and Facilitation
of Programme Broadcasting

Bulgarian language
Broadcaster
Multi-lingual Programme
Broadcasting – Public
Companies
Radio Bosilegrad,
Bosilegrad

Hungarian language
Broadcaster
Broadcasting in Hungarian
Language only – Public
Companies

Radio Subotica,
Editorial Office in Hungarian
Language,
Subotica

18 hours daily

In 2008 the Ministry of Culture granted 392,000
dinars for the Srpski manastiri na Fruškoj Gori
and for the documentary radio programme on
culture of the Hungarians in Vojvodina, in 2009,
340,000 dinars for the Žene i društveni problemi
series and the Svakodnevna ekologija
programme;
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
3,412,000 dinars in total for equipment,
promotion of programme, information services
and information to public at the company level.

Broadcasting in Hungarian
Language only – Other
Broadcasters

RTV Pannon
Radio Pannon,
Subotica

24 hours daily

The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
8,193,000 dinars in total for equipment,
promotion of programme, information services
and information to public.
(the funds were awarded to the radio and TV
programmes at the level of RTV).

139

Multi-lingual Programme
Broadcasting – Public
Companies

Radio regije,
Bačka Topola

1 hour weekly

Radio Bela Crkva,
Bela Crkva

1 hour weekly

In 2007 the Ministry of Culture granted 417,000
dinars for broadcasting of programmes in
minority languages an in 2009 it granted 210,000
dinars for programmes in Hungarian language;
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
500,000 dinars in total for information to public.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
650,000 dinars in total for information to public.

RTV Vrbas
Radio Vrbas,
Vrbas

45 minutes daily, five days a
week + 1 hour weekly

The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
2,882,520 dinars in total for equipment,
information services and information to public.

Radio Zrenjanin,
Zrenjanin

1 hour daily

Radio Kikinda,
Kikinda

Daily news + 10 hours
weekly

RTV Kovačica
Radio Kovačica,
Kovačica

2.5 hours daily

Radio Novi Bečej,
Novi Bečej

2 hours daily, six days a
week

Radio Odžaci,
Odžaci

2 hours weekly

Radio Sečanj,
Sečanj

1 hour weekly

In 2007 the Ministry of Culture granted 432,000
dinars for programmes in minority languages. In
2008 it granted 340,000 dinars for the
programme for the young in the minority
languages;
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
3,298,000 dinars in total for equipment,
information services and information to public.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
400,000 dinars in total for information services
and information to public.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
3,996,000 dinars in total for equipment,
promotion of programme, information services
and information to public.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
550,000 dinars in total for information services
and information to public.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
1,100,000 dinars in total for equipment,
information services and information to public.
In 2007 the Ministry of Culture granted 160,500
dinars for programmes in Romanian and
Hungarian languages and in 2008 it granted
324.000 dinars for the Multijezična Vojvodina u
malom;
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
1,166,000 dinars in total for equipment,
information services and information to public.

Multi-lingual Programme
Broadcasting – Other
Broadcasters
Radio Ada,
Ada

15 hours daily

The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
150,000 dinars in total for information to public.

140

Radio Trend,
Bačka Topola

30 to 40% of 24 hours daily
programme

Radio Аctive,
Bečej

10 hours

Panda Radio,
Kanjiža

17 hours daily

Radio Bus,
Kovin

1.5 hours weekly

Radio Zenit,
Kula

1.5 hours daily

Radio Blue,
Odžaci

0.5 hour weekly

Radio Blue Plus,
Odžaci

0.5 hours weekly

Radio Sombor,
Sombor

2 hours daily

Radio Srbobran,
Srbobran

4 hours daily, 6 hours on
Saturday

Radio Temerin,
Temerin

5 hours daily

In 2009 the Ministry of Culture granted 450,000
dinars for programme on tolerance in 4
languages;
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
1,247,562 dinars in total for equipment and
information to public.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
1,010,000 dinars in total for equipment,
promotion of programme, information services
and information to public.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
270,000 dinars in total for information to public.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
1,354,000 dinars in total for equipment,
information services and information to public.
In 2007 the Provincial Secretariat of Information
granted 300,000 dinars for equipment.
In 2008 the Ministry of Culture granted 350,000
dinars for the Bogatstvo naše kulture radio
programme;
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
1,252,000 dinars in total for equipment,
information services and information to public.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
902,000 dinars in total for equipment,
information services and information to public
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
3,072,000 dinars in total for equipment,
information services and information to public.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
780,007 dinars in total for equipment, promotion
of programme, information services and
information to public.
In 2009 the Ministry of Culture granted 320,000
dinars for the series of programmes in Hungarian
language;
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
296,000 dinars in total for equipment and
information to public.

Romani language
Broadcaster

Duration of Radio
Programme

Measures of Encouragement and Facilitation
of Programme Broadcasting

1 hour weekly

The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
650,000 dinars in total for information to public.

Multi-lingual Programme
Broadcasting – Public
Companies
Radio Bela Crkva,
Bela Crkva

141

RTV Bujanovac
Radio Bujanovac,
Bujanovac

1 hour weekly
(ceased to operate in 2009,
waits for licence from RBA)

Radio Kikinda,
Kikinda

4 hours weekly

Radio Novi Bečej,
Novi Bečej

1 hour weekly

Radio Odžaci,
Odžaci
RTV Trstenik
Radio Trstenik,
Trstenik

2 hours weekly

Multi-lingual Programme
Broadcasting – Other
Broadcasters
RTV Khrlo e Romengo
Radio Khrlo e Romengo,
Belgrade
Radio Ema,
Bujanovac

1 hour weekly

In 2007 the Ministry of Culture granted 321,980
dinars for technical equipment for the radio.
In 2008 the Ministry of Culture granted 200,000
dinars for the Romski san;
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
400,000 dinars in total information services and
information to public.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
550,000 dinars in total for information services
and information to public.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
1,100,000 dinars in total for equipment,
information services and information to public.
In 2007 the Ministry of Culture granted 250,000
dinars in total for broadcasting in Romani
language and in 2008 it granted 310,000 dinars.

10 hours daily
(ceased to operate in 2008)

In 2007 the Ministry of Culture granted 450,000
dinars for technical equipment.

15-minutes daily information
programme + 8 hours of
programme monthly

In 2008 the Ministry of Culture granted 500,000
dinars for Romi i civilno društvo and in 2009 it
granted 320,000 dinars for information
programme in Romani language.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
1,354,000 dinars in total for equipment,
information services and information to public.

Radio Bus,
Kovin

1 hour monthly

Radio Rom,
Obrenovac

24 hours,
Major part in Romani

Radio Blue,
Odžaci

0.5 hour weekly

Radio Sombor,
Sombor

1.5 hours daily

Radio Srbobran,
Srbobran

1 hour weekly

In 2007 the Ministry of Culture granted 450,000
dinars, in 2008 it granted 690,000 dinars and in
2009 it granted 408,904 dinars for the Reč Roma
programme.
In 2008 the Ministry of Culture granted 350,000
dinars for the Bogatstvo naše culture radio
programme;
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
1,252,000 dinars in total for equipment,
information services and information to public.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
3,072,000 dinars in total for equipment,
information services and information to public.
In 2008 the Ministry of Culture granted 300,000
dinars for broadcasting of programmes in
Romani;
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
780,007 dinars total for equipment, promotion of
programme, information services and
information to public.

142

Romanian language
Broadcaster

Duration of Radio
Programme

Measures of Encouragement and Facilitation
of Programme Broadcasting

24 hours daily

In 2007 the Ministry of Culture granted 60,000
dinars and in 2008 it granted 300,000 dinars;
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
1,663,000 dinars in total for information services
and information to public.

Broadcasting in Romanian
Language only – Other
Broadcasters
RTV Viktorija
Radio Viktorija,
Vršac

Multi-lingual Programme
Broadcasting – Public
Companies
Radio Bela Crkva,
Bela Crkvа

1 hour weekly

Radio Zrenjanin,
Zrenjanin

1.5 hour weekly

Radio Kikinda,
Kikinda

2 hours weekly

RTV Kovačica
Radio Kovačica,
Kovačica

2.5 hours daily

Radio Kovin,
Kovin

2 hours daily

Radio Sečanj,
Sečanj

1 hour weekly

The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
650,000 dinars in total for information to public.
In 2007 the Ministry of Culture granted 432,000
dinars for broadcasting in minority languages. In
2008 it granted 340,000 dinars for programme
for the young in minority languages;
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
3,298,000 dinars in total for equipment,
information services and information to public.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
400,000 dinars in total for information services
and information to public.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
3,996,000 dinars in total for equipment,
promotion of programme, information services
and information to public.
In 2007 the Provincial Secretariat of Information
granted 346,000 dinars for equipment,
information services and information to public.
In 2007 the Ministry of Culture granted 160,500
dinars for broadcasting in Hungarian and
Romanian and in 2008 it granted 324,000 dinars
for the Multijezična Vojvodina u malom
programme;
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
1,166,000 dinars in total for equipment,
information services and information to public.

Multi-lingual Programme
Broadcasting – Other
Broadcasters

Radio Far,
Alibunar

4 hours daily

In 2007 the Ministry of Culture granted 40,000
dinars for broadcasting in Romanian and in 2008
it granted 140,000 dinars for the Mladi za mlade
programme;

143

Radio Bela Crkva,
Bela Crkva
Radio Bus,
Kovin

The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
800,000 dinars in total for equipment and
information to public.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
650,000 dinars in total for information to public.
1 hour weekly
1 hour weekly

The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
1,354,000 dinars in total for equipment,
information services and information to public.

Duration of Radio
Programme

Measures of Encouragement and Facilitation
of Programme Broadcasting

Ruthenian language
Broadcaster

Multi-lingual Programme
Broadcasting – Public
Companies

Radio Regije,
Bačka Topola

0.5 hour weekly

RTV Vrbas
Radio Vrbas,
Vrbas

45 minutes daily five days a
week + 1 hour weekly

In 2007 the Ministry of Culture granted
417,000.00 dinars for broadcasting in minority
languages and in 2008 it granted 80,000.00
dinars for information in Ruthenian language;
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
500,000.00 dinars in total for information to
public.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
2,882,520 dinars in total for equipment,
information services and information to public.

0.5 hours weekly

The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
648,000 dinars in total for equipment,
information services and information to public.

Radio Šid,
Šid
Multi-lingual Programme
Broadcasting – Other
Broadcasters
Radio Trend,
Bačka Topola

1 hour weekly

Radio Zenit,
Kula

1.5 hour daily

Radio Blue,
Odžaci

0.5 hour weekly

Radio Blue Plus,

0.5 hour weekly

In 2009 the Ministry of Culture granted 450,000
dinars for programmes for tolerance in 4
languages;
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
1,247,562 dinars in total for equipment,
information services and information to public.
In 2007 the Provincial Secretariat of Information
granted 300,000 dinars in total for equipment.
In 2008 the Ministry of Culture granted 350,000
dinars for the Bogatstvo naše culture radio
programme;
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
1,252,000 dinars in total for equipment,
information services and information to public.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
902,000 dinars in total for equipment,

144

Odžaci

information services and information to public.

Slovak language
Broadcaster

Duration of Radio
Programme

Measures of Encouragement and Facilitation
of Programme Broadcasting

Multi-lingual Programme
Broadcasting – Public
Companies
Radio Bačка,
Bač

5 hours weekly

Radio Zrenjanin,
Zrenjanin

1.5 hour weekly

RTV Kovačica
Radio Kovačica,
Kovačica

6 hours daily

Radio Odžaci,
Odžaci

2 hours weekly

Radio Stara Pazova,
Stara Pazova

5 hours daily

Radio Šid,
Šid

1 hour weekly

The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
1,850,000 dinars in total for equipment,
promotion of programme, information services
and information to public.
In 2007 the Ministry of Culture granted 432,000
dinars for programmes in minority languages and
in 2008 it granted 340,000 dinars for programme
for the young in minority languages.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
3,298,000 dinars for equipment, information
services and information to public.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
3,996,200 dinars in total for equipment,
promotion of programme, information services
and information to public.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
1,100,000 dinars in total for equipment,
information services and information to public.
In 2007 the Ministry of Culture granted 35,000
dinars.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
1,350,000 dinars in total for information services
and information to public.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
648,000 dinars in total for equipment,
information services and information to public.

Multi-lingual Programme
Broadcasting – Other
Broadcasters
Radio Far,
Alibunar

1 hour daily

Radio Trend,
Bačka Topola

1 hour weekly

In 2008 the Ministry of Culture granted 140,000
dinars for Mladi za mlade programme.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
800,000 dinars for equipment and information to
public.
In 2009 the Ministry of Culture granted 450,000
dinars for the programme on tolerance in 4
languages.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
1,247,562 dinars for equipment, information
services and information to public.
In 2007 the Ministry of Culture granted 100,000

145

Radio Bački Petrovac,
Bački Petrovac

24 hours daily
(major part in Slovak)

Radio Kisač,
Novi Sad

14 hours weekly + 12 hours
on Fridays +
6 hours daily on other days

Radio Blue,
Odžaci

0.5 hour weekly

Radio Blue Plus,
Odžaci

0.5 hours weekly

dinars.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
1,483,512 dinars for equipment, promotion of
programme, information services and
information to public.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
813,000 dinars in total for information services
and information to public.
In 2008 the Ministry of Culture granted 350,000
dinars the Bogatstvo naše culture radio
programme and in 2009 it granted 84,000 dinars
for the Žena stub slovačke evangelističke crkve
programme.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
1,252,000 dinars in total for equipment,
information services and information to public.
In 2008 the Ministry of Culture granted 100,000
dinars for the Blu nedeljnik in Slovak and in
2009 it granted 270.000 dinars for the
Upoznajmo Vojvodinu programme;
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
902,000 dinars in total for equipment,
information services and information to public.

Ukrainian language
Broadcaster

Duration of Radio
Programme

Measures of Encouragement and Facilitation
of Programme Broadcasting

RTV Vrbas
Radio Vrbas,
Vrbas

1 hour weekly

The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
2,882,520 dinars in total for equipment,
information services and information to public.

RTV Inñija
Radio Inñija,
Inñija

1 hour weekly

Multi-lingual Programme
Broadcasting – Public
Companies

Multi-lingual Programme
Broadcasting – Other
Broadcasters
Radio Zenit,
Kula

1 hour weekly

In 2007 the Ministry of Culture granted 200,000
dinars for programme in Ukrainian and in 2009 it
granted 264,000 dinars for documentaryinformation programme in Ukrainian.

In 2007 the Provincial Secretariat of Information
granted 300,000 dinars in total for equipment.

Croatian language

146

Broadcaster

Duration of Radio
Programme

Measures of Encouragement and Facilitation
of Programme Broadcasting

Multi-lingual Programme
Broadcasting – Public
Companies
Radio Subotica,
Subotica

3 hours of programme from
Monday to Friday + religious
programme on Saturdays

Radio Bačка, Bač

0.5 hour weekly

Radio Odžaci,
Odžaci

0.5 hour weekly

The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
3,412,000 dinars in total for equipment,
promotion of programme, information services
and information to public.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
1,850,000 dinars in total for equipment,
promotion of programme, information services
and information to public.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
1,100,000 dinars in total for equipment,
information services and information to public.

4.4.4. Encouragement and facilitation of television programmes in minority
languages
296.

The Ministry of Culture – the Media Sector issues an annual tender for cofinancing of projects/programmes in the field of public information and the
Provincial Secretariat of Information of AP of Vojvodina issues a tender for
equipment, promotion of programme and information to public in minority
languages. The public companies founded by the units of local self-government
are partially financed from their budgets. The Tables below contain the data on
co-financing of regular TV programme broadcasting in minority languages on
tender basis, through allocation of funds from the republic and provincial budgets
to those television stations broadcasting programmes in minority languages.

Albanian language
Broadcaster

Duration of TV Programme

Measures of Encouragement and Facilitation
of Programme Broadcasting

Multi-lingual Programme
Broadcasting – Public
Companies
RTV Bujanovac
TV Bujanovac,
Bujanovac
Broadcasting in Albanian
Language only - Other
Broadcasters
RTV Aldi
TV Aldi,
Preševo

4 hours daily

24 hours daily

In 2008 the Ministry of Culture granted 600,000
dinars for news in Albanian language and in
2009 it granted 450,000 dinars for contact
programmes in Albanian and Romani languages.

In 2009 the Ministry of Culture granted 480,000
dinars for the Integracija mladih iz opština
Preševo i Bujanovac.

147

Bosniak language
Broadcaster

Multi-lingual Programme
Broadcasting – Public
Companies
Regionalna TV Novi Pazar,
Novi Pazar

Duration of TV Programme

Due to language similarities
there is no distinguished
programme duration in
Bosniak language

Measures of Encouragement and Facilitation
of Programme Broadcasting

In 2008 the Ministry of Culture granted
1,000,000 dinars for the Spomenici kulture
sandžačkih Bošnjaka series.

Broadcasting in Bosniak
Language only – Public
Companies
TV Tutin,

24 hours daily

Tutin
Multi-lingual Programme
Broadcasting – Other
Broadcasters
TV Forum,

Prijepolje

Due to language similarities
there is no distinguished
programme in Bosniak
language

In 2008 the Ministry of Culture granted
1,000,000 dinars for the Njedra puna zavičaja
programme.

In 2009 the Ministry of Culture granted 636,000
dinars for the Putevima bošnjačke culture.

Bulgarian language
Broadcaster

Multi-lingual Programme
Broadcasting – Public
Companies
RTV Caribrod,
TV Caribrod,
Dimitrovgrad

Duration of TV Programme

Measures of Encouragement and Facilitation
of Programme Broadcasting

3.5 hours daily

In 2008 the Ministry of Culture granted
1,117,364 dinars for information programmes in
Bulgarian language.

Duration of TV Programme

Measures of Encouragement and Facilitation
of Programme Broadcasting

Hungarian language
Broadcaster
Broadcasting in Hungarian
Language only – Other
Broadcasters

TV Mozaik,
Novi Sad

24 hours daily

In 2009 the Ministry of Culture granted 150,000
dinars for daily information programmes;
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
2,395,000 dinars in total for equipment,
promotion of programme, information services

148

RTV Pannon TV Pannon,
Subotica

24 hours daily

and information to public.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
8,193,000 dinars in total for equipment,
promotion of programme, information services
and information to public. (the funds were
granted for the radio and TV programme at the
level of RTV).

Multi-lingual Programme
Broadcasting – Public
Companies
RTV Kovačica
TV Kovačica,
Kovačica
RTV Pančevo
TV Pančevo,
Pančevo
Multi-lingual Programme
Broadcasting – Other
Broadcasters

0.5 hours daily

0.5 hour weekly

TV Odžaci,
Odžaci

0.5 hour weekly

RTV
YU ECO TV,
Subotica

12 hours daily

The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
3,996,200 dinars in total for equipment,
promotion of programme, information services
and information to public.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
3,046,000 dinars in total for equipment,
promotion of programme, information services
and information to public.

The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
3,349,000 dinars in total for equipment,
promotion of programme, information services
and information to public.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
10,045,000 dinars in total for equipment,
promotion of programme, information services
and information to public.

Romani language
Broadcaster

Multi-lingual Programme
Broadcasting – Public
Companies
RTV Bujanovac
TV Bujanovac,
Bujanovac
RTV Valjevo
TV Valjevo,
Valjevo
RTV Kruševac
TV Kruševac,
Kruševac
RTV Krajina
TV Krajina,
Negotin

Duration of TV Programme

Measures of Encouragement and Facilitation
of Programme Broadcasting

1 hours weekly

In 2009 the Ministry of Culture granted 450,000
dinars for the programmes in Albanian and
Romani languages.
In 2007 the Ministry of Culture granted 360,000
dinars for the programmes in Romani language
and in 2008 it granted 604,800 dinars for the
information in Romani language.
In 2008 the Ministry of Culture granted 310,000
dinars for the Reč Roma –programme in Romani
language.
In 2007 the Ministry of Culture granted 200,000
for the programmes in Romani language.

4 hours monthly

10 minutes daily
(news)
0.5 hour weekly

The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted

149

RTV Pančevo
TV Pančevo,
Pančevo
Multi-lingual Programme
Broadcasting – Other
Broadcasters
RTV Nišava
TV Nišava,
Niš

0.5 hour weekly

3,046,000 dinars in total for equipment,
promotion of programme, information services
and information to public.

24 hours daily,
major part in Romani

In 2007 the Ministry of Culture granted 440,000
dinars for the information programme in Romani
language and in 2008 it granted 500,000 dinars
for the programmes in the Romani language.

Duration of TV Programme

Measures of Encouragement and Facilitation
of Programme Broadcasting

Romanian language
Broadcaster

Multi-lingual Programme
Broadcasting – Public
Companies
RTV Kovačica
TV Kovačica,
Kovačica

2.5 hours daily

RTV Pančevo
TV Pančevo,
Pančevo
Multi-lingual Programme
Broadcasting – Other
Broadcasters

1 hour weekly

RTV Viktorija
TV Viktor,
Vršac
(since 2009)

12 hours daily

The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
3,996,200 dinars in total for equipment,
promotion of programme, information services
and information to public.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
3,046,000 dinars in total for equipment,
promotion of programme, information services
and information to public.

The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
1,663,000 dinars in total for information services
and information to public.

Ruthenian language
Broadcaster

Duration of TV Programme

Measures of Encouragement and Facilitation
of Programme Broadcasting

Multi-lingual Programme
Broadcasting – Other
Broadcasters

TV Odžaci,
Odžaci

0.5 hour weekly

The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
3,349,000 dinars in total for equipment,
promotion of programme, information services
and information to public.

Slovak language
Broadcaster

Duration of TV Programme

Measures of Encouragement and Facilitation
of Programme Broadcasting

Broadcasting in Slovak

150

Language only – Other
Broadcasters

TV Petrovac,
Bački Petrovac

24 hours daily

The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
3,692,486 dinars in total for equipment,
information services and information to public.

Multi-lingual Programme
Broadcasting – Public
Companies
RTV Kovačica
TV Kovačica,
Kovačica
RTV Pančevo
TV Pančevo,
Pančevo
Multi-lingual Programme
Broadcasting – Other
Broadcasters

TV Odžaci,
Odžaci
Sremska TV,
Šid

2 hours daily

0.5 hour weekly

0.5 hour weekly
0.5 hour weekly

The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
3,996,200 dinars in total for equipment,
promotion of programme, information services
and information to public.
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
3,046,000 dinars in total for equipment,
promotion of programme, information services
and information to public.

The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
3,349,000 dinars in total for equipment,
promotion of programme, information services
and information to public.
In 2007 the Ministry of Culture granted 200,000
dinars for the Slovački magazine programme.

Croatian language
Broadcaster

Duration of TV Programme

Measures of Encouragement and Facilitation
of Programme Broadcasting

Multi-lingual Programme
Broadcasting – Other
Broadcasters

YU ECO TV,
Subotica

297.

0.5 hour weekly

In 2007 the Ministry of Culture granted 127,774
dinars for the programmes in Croatian language;
The Provincial Secretariat of Information granted
10,045,000 dinars in total for equipment,
promotion of programme, information services
and information to public out of which 200,000
dinars were granted in 2009 for the programme
in Croatian language.

Since 2009 the Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina has been
issuing a tender for the grant of funds for the production and broadcasting of
television programmes in the field of culture and art in Serbian and minority
languages. The tender is issued for TV programme broadcasters – private
companies and non-governmental organizations broadcasting programmes that
have seats in the territory of AP of Vojvodina. For broadcasting of TV
programmes in the field of culture and art in Ruthenian language, the Provincial
Secretariat of Culture granted 800,000 dinars for the Sremska televizija from Šid
151

for the production and broadcasting of the Rusinski magazin television
programme. For broadcasting of TV programmes in culture and art in Hungarian
language, the Provincial Secretariat of Culture granted the funds for the
production and broadcasting of the following television programmes:
TV Station
TV Pannon, Subotica
TV Mozaik, Novi Sad

TV Programme in Culture and
Art
Vitraž
Kultur Ter

Granted Funds
330,000.00
330,000.00

4.4.5. Encouragement and facilitation of production and distribution of audio and
audio-visual works in minority languages
298.

The Tables below contain examples of encouragement of production and
distribution of audio and audio-visual works in minority languages, which had
been financially supported from the republic and provincial budgets based on the
tenders issued by the Ministry of Culture, the Provincial Secretariat of
Information and the Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina.

Albanian language
Institution

Ministry of
Culture – Media
Sector

Beneficiary
RDU B92,
Belgrade

Purpose/Programme
B92 Internet page in
Albanian and Hungarian
languages

Granted Funds
444,000.00

Jug press Regional
Information Agency,
Leskovac

Capacity Building –
establishment of editorial
office in Bulgarian and
activities of editorial offices
in Albanian, Romani and
Serbian languages

Beneficiary
National Council of Bosniak
National Minority,
Novi Pazar

Purpose/Programme
Internet presentation

Granted Funds
440,000.00

Beneficiary
RTV Zaječar,
Zaječar

Purpose/Programme
Govor prekrio jezik,
documentary film on
migration of Bulgarians

Granted Funds
807,000.00

Jug press Regional
Information Agency,
Leskovac

Capacity Building –
establishment of editorial
office in Bulgarian and
activities of editorial offices

1,032,000.00

Bosniak language
Institution
Ministry of
Culture – Media
Sector

Bulgarian language
Institution
Ministry of
Culture – Media
Sector

1,032,000.00

152

in Albanian, Romani and
Serbian languages

Hungarian language
Institution
Ministry of
Culture

Beneficiary
The Panonija Fund,
Subotica

Purpose/Programme
Naše priče – CD with
Hungarian and Serbian
traditional fairytales

Granted Funds
50,000.00

Ministry of
Culture – Media
Sector

The Večera Šandor Cultural
Club, Bačка Palanka

Dunakanjar, TV
programme in Hungarian

120,000.00

The Magyar Szó,
Novi Sad

New web-site

300,000.00

DB Trade Co,
Bačka Topola

Kikik es Miki and De-arte,
TV programme for children
and youth

979,126.00

RDU B92, Belgrade

B92 Internet page in
Albanian and Hungarian
languages
Daily news in Hungarian
language

444,000.00

Provincial
Secretariat of
Information
Provincial
Secretariat of
Culture

The PostPesimisti Kikinde –
audio and video production/
VK Radio
The Kodalj Zoltan Cultural
Club, Bačka Topola

100,000.00

CD of the Čaloka Group:
Pastiri sa Potisja

50,000.00

Beneficiary
Rominterpress, Belgrade

Purpose/Programme
Internet site, Za Rome o
Romima

Granted Funds
400,000.00

Studio MAG, Obrenovac

Кroz vreme, TV series

671,000.00

Jutro Produktion, Gornji
Milanovac

Glas Roma, series of
programmes

250,000.00

Liberty Production TV
Production Agency, Niš

Obrazovanje Roma,
documentary film

534,375.00

Jug press Regional
Information Agency,
Leskovac

Capacity Building –
establishment of editorial
office in Bulgarian and
activities of editorial offices
in Albanian, Romani and
Serbian languages
Uspešni Romi u Vojvodini,
filming and broadcasting of
the programme

Romani language
Institution
Ministry of
Culture – Media
Sector

UG Novinsko istraživački
centar, Novi Sad
Ministry of

1,032,000.00

6,000,000.00

153

Human and
Minority rights
Provincial
Secretariat of
Information

Provincial
Secretariat of
Culture

UG Multimedija Centar

Documentary series of 24
episodes
Internet site

400,000.00

Roma Educational Centre,
Subotica

Internet site

100,000.00

Association of Roma, Novi
Bečej

Internet site

100,000.00

Rrota Edu-info

Internet site

100,000.00

Association of Roma
Teachers, Deronje

Sound recording of
traditional Romani songs

120,000.00

Association of Roma Students,
Novi Sad

150,000.00

Romanian language
Institution
Ministry of
Culture – Media
Sector

Provincial
Secretariat of
Culture

Beneficiary
Panovizija, Vršac

Purpose
Lutkarsko pozorište,
programme for children

Granted Funds
510,000.00

3. Oktobar Culture Club,
Banatsko Novo Selo

Production of CD with
traditional Romanian music

30,000.00

Viktoria Association of
Admirers of Romanian Music,
Vršac

Sound recording of the
material in Romanian
language of the Stelele
Banatului Group

80,000.00

Ruthenian language
Institution
Ministry of
Culture – Media
Sector

Beneficiary
The Ruske Slovo, Newspaper
Agency

Purpose
Support to Ruthen press
Information Agency

Granted Funds
300,000.00

Beneficiary
The Selenča Association for
Preservation of Culture,
Tradition and Art, Selenča

Purpose
250. жетва, TV
Programme

Granted Funds
500,000.00

Purpose
Subotički pjesnik Vojislav
Sekelj, short documentary
film-video DVD

Granted Funds
50,000.00

Slovak language
Institution
Ministry of
Culture – Media
Sector

Croatian language
Institution
Ministry of
Culture

Beneficiary
Croatian Academic Society,
Subotica

154

Ministry of
Culture – Media
Sector

Provincial
Secretariat of
Information

Provincial
Secretariat of
Culture

The Hrvatska Riječ
Newspaper Agency, Subotica

Hrvatske riječi, daily
electronic issue with audio
and video contents

220,000.00

PC Radio Subotica

Series of radio dramas in
Croatian language

500,000.00

BeneficiaryCro Media,
Subotica

Kronika, TV and radio
programmes

712,000.00

CroV, Subotica

Ostanak mladih Hrvata u
sremskim selima

113,000.00

Pišimo jedni drugima
Slike 20. stoljeća,
documentary radio
programme

130,000.00
200,000.00

Cro Media/ К23- LTV
Subotica, ТV Spektar, Sombor
and RTV2, Novi Sad
Croatian Academic Society,
Subotica

Video zapisi kulturnog
stvaralaštva Bačke i Srijema

200,000.00

Traditional fairytales on CD

46,000.00

The Matija Gubec, Tavankut

Creation of the Society’s
web-site

30,000.00

3 Video studio/ Radio
Subotica

4.4.6. Encouragement or facilitation of establishment and preservation of at least
one newspaper in minority languages
299.

11 informative newspapers in languages of Part III of the Charter are regularly
financed from the budgetary funds in the Republic of Serbia (Albanian, Bosniak,
Bulgarian, Hungarian, Romani – 2 newspapers, Romanian, Ruthenian, Slovak,
Ukrainian and Croatian languages) and 2 newspapers in minority languages of
Part II of the Charter (Bunjevac speech and Macedonian language).

300.

The Ministry of Culture – the Media Sector, as the competent republic authority,
financed: the Perspektiva daily in Albanian language, based on the opinion of the
municipalities of Bujanovac and Preševo that this daily expresses the interests of
the Albanian national minority; the Sandžačke novine daily in Bosniak language,
based on the opinion of the National Council of the Bosniak National Minority
that this daily expresses the interests of the national minority concerned; the
Romanino Nevipe, founded by the National Council of the Romani National
Minority. The entire activities the Bratstvo Newspaper Publishing Association,
established by the National Council of the Bulgarian National Minority were
financed from the republic budget until 2009 with the amount of 30,000,000
annually. After having noticed disproportion of funds allocated for the
newspapers in minority languages and the number of the members of national
155

minorities these newspapers are intended to, in 2009 the Ministry of Culture
started the preparation of precise criteria for financing of newspapers in minority
languages. In accordance with the volume of the newspaper, it was decided to
finance the costs of printing, distribution and salaries for a certain number of
employees producing newspapers in minority languages. On the grounds of such
criteria, the funds for the Bratstvo Newspaper Publishing Association were
reduced, namely, the funds were provided from the republic budget to publish a
newspaper in Bulgarian language, the Bratstvo, which caused numerous protests
by the Bratstvo Newspaper Publishing Association and the National Council of
the Bulgarian National Minority. The funds were allocated in the provincial
budget to finance the newspapers founded by the national councils of Hungarian,
Romani, Romanian, Ruthenian, Slovak, Ukrainian and Croatian national
minorities, pursuant to the decision on the transfer of founder’s rights to the
national councils of the national minorities active in AP of Vojvodina, and 2
informative newspapers in minority languages of Part II of the Charter, which
were also founded by the national councils of national minorities.
301.

In addition to encouragement, creation and maintenance of at least one newspaper
in minority languages by means of subsidies, the competent institutions at the
republic and provincial levels issue tenders for co-financing of programmes or
projects in the field of public information. The Tables below contain the data on
funds granted to the newspapers in minority languages, on both grounds.

Albanian language
Newspaper
Content

Periodical

The Perspektiva,
Bujanovac

informative

weekly

The Diellori,
Bujanovac

for children

monthly

Measures of Encouragement
or Facilitation of
Establishment or
Preservation of Newspapers
Subsidies by the Ministry of
Culture – the in the total
amount of 18,116,322 dinars.
In 2007 the Ministry of Culture
– the Media Sector granted
900,000 dinars.

Bosniak language
Newspaper

Periodical
Content

The Sandžačke novine,
Novi Pazar

informative

weekly

Measures of Encouragement
or Facilitation of
Establishment or
Preservation of Newspapers
Subsidies by the Ministry of
Culture – the in the total
amount of 14,033,334 dinars.
In 2008 it granted 1,050,000
dinars for the promotion of
publishing.

Bulgarian language
156

Newspaper

Content

Periodical

Measures of Encouragement
or Facilitation of
Establishment or
Preservation of Newspapers

Newspaper Founded by
the National Council of
the Bulgarian National
Minority

The Bratstvo,
Niš

informative

weekly

The Drugarče,
Niš

for children

monthly

The Most,
Niš

magazine in culture,
art and social issues

twice a month

Within the period from 20072008 the Ministry of Culture –
the Media Sector provided
subsidies for the Bratstvo
Newspaper Publishing
Association in the amount of
60,000,000 dinars. In 2009
subsidies were in the amount of
7,513,303 dinars. In 2008 the
amount of 980,000 dinars was
granted to the Bratstvo
Newspaper Publishing
Association to mark its jubilee.
Within the period from 20072008 the Ministry of Culture –
the Media Sector provided
subsidies for the Bratstvo
Newspaper Publishing
Association in the amount of
60,000,000 dinars.
Within the period from 20072008 the Ministry of Culture –
the Media Sector provided
subsidies for the Bratstvo
Newspaper Publishing
Association in the amount of
60,000,000 dinars.

Hungarian language
Newspaper

Content

Periodical

Measures of Encouragement
or Facilitation of
Establishment or
Preservation of Newspapers

Newspaper Founded by
the National Council of
the Hungarian National
Minority
The Magyar Szó,
Novi Sad

informative

news

The Jó Pajtás,

school

weekly

Subsidies by the Provincial
Secretariat of Information were
granted in the total amount of
189,787,000 dinars.
In 2007 the Ministry of Culture
– the Media Sector granted
200,000 dinars on tender basis;
Subsidies by the Provincial

157

Novi Sad

The Mézéskalács,
Novi Sad

for children

monthly

The Képes Ifjúság,
Novi Sad

for youth

weekly

Secretariat of Information were
granted in the total amount of
11,392,200 dinars.
Subsidies by the Provincial
Secretariat of Information were
granted in the total amount of
4,549,000 dinars.
Subsidies by the Provincial
Secretariat of Information were
granted in the total amount of
18,068,400 dinars.

Newspaper in Hungarian
Language

The Hét Nap,
Subotica

family periodical

weekly

The Új Kanizsai Újság The Kanjiške novine,
Kanjiža

informative

weekly

The Muzslyai Újság –
The Mužljanske novine,
Mužlja
(the municipality of
Zrenjanin)

informative
(mainly in Hungarian
language)

quarterly

The Családi kör – The
Porodični krug,
Novi Sad

family magazine

weekly

The Kisoroszi Hirmondó
– The Ruskoselski
glasnik,
Rusko Selo
(the municipality of
Kikinda)

informative

quarterly

The Temerini Újság –
The Temerinske novine
Temerin

informative

weekly

The Tordai Újság - The

informative

monthly

In 2007 the Ministry of Culture
– the Media Sector granted
85,820 dinars on tender basis
for photo equipment;
Subsidies by the Provincial
Secretariat of Information were
granted in the total amount of
69,565,000 dinars.
The Provincial Secretariat of
Information granted 100,000
dinars in total on tender basis
for information to public.
The Provincial Secretariat of
Information granted 150,000
dinars in total on tender basis
for information to public.
The Provincial Secretariat of
Information granted 1,249,320
dinars in total on tender basis
for information to public,
improvement of standard and
programme as well as for the
information services.
The Provincial Secretariat of
Information granted 500,000
dinars in total on tender basis
for information to public.

In 2007 the Ministry of Culture
– the Media Sector granted
116,160 dinars on tender basis;
The Provincial Secretariat of
Information granted 100,000
dinars in total on tender basis
for information to public.
In 2007 the Ministry of Culture
– the Media Sector granted
50,000 dinars on tender basis;

158

Tordjanske novine,
Torda
(the municipality of
Žitište)

(mainly in Hungarian
language)

The Provincial Secretariat of
Information granted 450,000
dinars in total on tender basis
for information to public.

The Fecske,
Feketić

informative

monthly

The Bečejski Mozaik,
Bečej

informative,
3 pages in Hungarian
language

weekly

The Moj Kovin
(Igaz Szó), Kovin

informative,
12 pages in
Hungarian language

monthly

The Zrenjanin,
Zrenjanin

informative,
1 page in Hungarian
language

weekly

The Kovinske novine,
Kovin

informative,
0.5 page in
Hungarian language

monthly

The Čokanska hronika,
Čoka

informative,
6 pages in Hungarian
language

monthly

In 2007 the Ministry of Culture
– the Media Sector granted
50,000 dinars on tender basis

Multi-lingual
Newspaper (with pages
in Hungarian language)
The Provincial Secretariat of
Information granted 820,000
dinars in total on tender basis
for technical improvement of
operations and information to
public.
The Provincial Secretariat of
Information granted 250,000
dinars in total on tender basis
for information to public.
The Provincial Secretariat of
Information granted 1,204,000
dinars in total on tender basis
for technical improvement of
operations and information to
public and for information
services.
The Provincial Secretariat of
Information granted 100,000
dinars in total on tender basis
for information to public.
The Provincial Secretariat of
Information granted 133,200
dinars in total on tender basis
for technical improvement of
operations.

Romani language
Newspaper

Content

Periodical

Measures of Encouragement
or Facilitation of
Establishment or Preservation
of Newspapers

Newspaper Founded by
the National Council of
the Romani National
Minority

The Them,
Novi Sad
The Chavorrengo Them,

informative

twice a month

for children

monthly, during

Subsidies by the Provincial
Secretariat of Information were
granted in the total amount of
25,718,000 dinars.
Subsidies by the Provincial

159

Novi Sad

The Romanino Nevipe,
Belgrade

the school year

magazine

monthly

Secretariat of Information were
granted in the total amount of
5,176,000 dinars.
Subsidies by the Ministry of
Culture – the Media Sector were
granted in the total amount of
13,000,000 dinars.

Romanian language
Newspaper

Content

Periodical

Measures of Encouragement
or Facilitation of
Establishment or Preservation
of Newspapers

Newspaper Founded by
the National Council of
the Romanian National
Minority
The Libertatea,
Pančevo

informative

weekly

The Bucuria Copilor,
Pančevo

for children

monthly, during
the school year

The Tineretea,
Pančevo

for youth

monthly, during
the school year

magazine in culture
and art

monthly

Magazines in
Romanian Language
The Tibiscus,
Uzdin

Subsidies by the Provincial
Secretariat of Information were
granted in the total amount of
69,532,000 dinars .
Subsidies by the Provincial
Secretariat of Information were
granted in the total amount of
6,311,000 dinars.
Subsidies by the Provincial
Secretariat of Information were
granted in the total amount of
6,311,000 dinars.

In 2007 the Ministry of Culture
– the Media Sector granted
50,000 dinars on tender basis.

Multi-lingual
Newspapers (with
pages in Romanian
language)
The Vršačka kula,
Vršac

informative,
1 page in Romanian
language

twice a month

The Zrenjanin,
Zrenjanin

informative,
1 page monthly in
Romanian language

weekly

The Kovinske novine,
Kovin

informative,
0.5 page in
Romanian language

monthly

The Provincial Secretariat of
Information granted 150,000
dinars in total on tender basis for
information services.
The Provincial Secretariat of
Information granted 1,204,000
dinars in total on tender basis for
technical improvement of
operations and information to
public and for information
services.
The Provincial Secretariat of
Information granted 100,000
dinars in total on tender basis for
information to public.

160

Ruthenian language
Newspaper

Content

Periodical

Measures of Encouragement
or Facilitation of
Establishment or Preservation
of Newspapers

Newspaper Founded by
the National Council of
the Ruthenian National
Minority
The Ruske slovo,
Novi Sad

informative

weekly

The Zagradtka,
Novi Sad

for children

monthly

The Мак,
Novi Sad

for youth

monthly

Subsidies by the Provincial
Secretariat of Information were
granted in the total amount of
69,532,000 dinars .
Subsidies by the Provincial
Secretariat of Information were
granted in the total amount of
6,311,000 dinars .
Subsidies by the Provincial
Secretariat of Information were
granted in the total amount of
25,718,000 dinars .

Slovak language
Newspaper

Content

Periodical

Measures of Encouragement
or Facilitation of
Establishment or Preservation
of Newspapers

Newspaper Founded by
the National Council of
the Slovak National
Minority
The Hlas L’udu,
Novi Sad

informative

weekly

The Vzlet,
Novi Sad

for youth

monthly

The Zornička,
Novi Sad

for children

monthly

Subsidies by the Provincial
Secretariat of Information were
granted in the total amount of
70,188,000 dinars .
Subsidies by the Provincial
Secretariat of Information were
granted in the total amount of
6,300,000 dinars .
Subsidies by the Provincial
Secretariat of Information were
granted in the total amount of
4,941,000 dinars.

Multi-lingual
Newspapers (with
pages in Slovak
language)

The Zrenjanin,

informative,

weekly

The Provincial Secretariat of
Information granted 1,204,000
dinars in total on tender basis for

161

Zrenjanin

1 page monthly in
Slovak language

technical improvement of
operations and information to
public and for information
services.

Ukrainian language
Newspaper
Content

Periodical

Measures of Encouragement
or Facilitation of
Establishment or Preservation
of Newspapers

Newspaper Founded by
the National Council of
the Ukrainian National
Minority
The Рïдне слово,
Kula

informative

monthly

The Соловейко,
Novi Sad

for children

monthly

social magazine

quarterly

Magazines in
Ukrainian Language
The Украјинске слово,
Novi Sad

Subsidies by the Provincial
Secretariat of Information were
granted in the total amount of
7,857,400 dinars.
Subsidies by the Provincial
Secretariat of Information were
granted in the total amount of
2,734,000 dinars.

In 2007 the Ministry of Culture
– the Media Sector granted
100,000 dinars on tender basis

Croatian language
Newspaper

Content

Periodical

Measures of Encouragement
or Facilitation of
Establishment or Preservation
of Newspapers

Newspaper Founded by
the National Council of
the Croatian National
Minority
The Hrvatska riječ,
Subotica

informative

weekly

The Hrcko,
Subotica

supplement for
children

monthly

The Kužiš?!

for youth

monthly

Subsidies by the Provincial
Secretariat of Information were
granted in the total amount of
58,339,000 dinars
Subsidies by the Provincial
Secretariat of Information were
granted in the total amount of
6,300,000 dinars .
In 2007 the Ministry of Culture
– the Media Sector granted
200,000 dinars on tender basis to
Newspaper Publishing
Association for youth
newspaper;

162

Subsidies by the Provincial
Secretariat of Information were
granted in the total amount of
4,547,000 dinars.

302.

In addition to the support to the projects in the field of public information in
minority languages, the state also co-finances magazines and publications in the
field of art and culture in minority languages. On tender basis the Ministry of
Culture co-finances projects/programmes the quality of which contributes to the
development and presentation of art and culture of national minorities, while the
Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina finances, on tender basis,
magazines in the field of culture, literature and art of special importance for the
development of culture and art in AP of Vojvodina and magazines for children in
minority languages. The Tables below contain the data about financial support to
projects and magazines in minority languages.

Bosniak language
Beneficiary
The National Council of the
Bosniak National Minority,
Novi Pazar

Project /Magazine
The Bošnjačka riječ

Measures of Encouragement
The Ministry of Culture granted
600,000 dinars.

Bulgarian language
Beneficiary
The Link Design Studio, Pirot

Project
Preservation of cultural tradition of
the Stara Planina villages in the
territory of the Republic of Serbia
(the municipalities of
Dimitrovgrad, Knjaževac and
Pirot)

Granted Funds
The Ministry of Culture granted
80,000 dinars.

Hungarian language
Beneficiary/ Publisher

Project /Magazine

The Stanišić Printing House,
Bačка Palanka

Akácos Út (The Аleja bagrema)

The Sziveri János Art Scene,
Mužlja

The Sikoly (The Krik), magazine

The Híd (The Most),4
magazine in literature and art

The Forum, Novi Sad
4

The Létünk (Stvarnost),5

Granted Funds
The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 50,000 dinars.
The Ministry of Culture granted
50,000 dinars;
The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 182,000 dinars .
The Ministry of Culture granted
500,000 dinars; The Provincial
Secretariat of Culture granted
352,000 dinars.
The Ministry of Culture granted

Since 2009 the magazine is financed within the regular activities of the Forum, Publishing Company.

163

magazine in society, science and
culture
The Collegium of University
Education of the Vojvodina
Hungarians, Novi Sad
Department of Hungarian
Language and Literature, the
Faculty of Philosophy, Novi
Sad
The Lajoš Sabo, Subotica

The Symposion, Association of
Citizens, Subotica
The Zobodka, Association of
Citizens, Subotica
The Bácsország, Association of
Vojvodina for Familiarization
with Homeland,
Subotica

DNS

220,000 dinars;
The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 208,000 dinars.
The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 310,500 dinars.

Hungarológiai Közlemények
(Information of Hungarian Studies)

The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 158,500 dinars.

The Bačорсаг, magazine

The Ministry of Culture granted
50,000 dinars.
The Ministry of Culture granted
230.000 dinars; The Provincial
Secretariat of Culture granted
264,500 dinars.
The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 264,500 dinars.

Symposion

Üzenet
The Bácsország,
magazine for familiarization with
homeland

The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 368,500 dinars.

Social Cultural Organization of
the Aracs Village, Subotica

Aracs,
a Délvidéki Magyarság Közéleti
Folyóirata

The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 152,000 dinars.

Club of Torda Citizens, Torda

The Tordai Újság – The Torñanske
novine
The Mezéskalács,6
magazine for children

The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 190,500 dinars.

The Jó Pajtás,7
magazine for children

The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 180,500 dinars.

The Képes Ifjúság,
magazine for children

The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 150,500 dinars.

Magazine
The Romologija,
magazine in science, art and social
issues of Roma

Granted Funds
The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 129,000 dinars.

Project /Magazine
Limba Romanina

Granted Funds
The Ministry of Culture granted
50,000 dinars.

Amicus -Jó Pajtás Kft, Novi
Sad

Magyar Szó Kft,
Novi Sad

The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 80,000 dinars.

Romani language
Publisher
Association of Romani
Teachers of Vojvodina, Deronje

Romanian language
Beneficiary/Publisher
Association for Romanian
Language of Vojvodina, Vršac
5

Since 2009 the magazine is financed within the regular activities of the Forum, Publishing Company.
Since 2009 the magazine is published by the Magyar Szó Kft .
7
Since 2009 the magazine is published by the Magyar Szó Kft.
6

164

Romanian Association for
Ethnography and Folklore,
Novi Sad

The Libertatea, Newspaper
Publishing Association,
Pančevo

The Tibiscus, Literature and Art
Association,
Uzdin

The Traditia,
magazine in ethnography and
folklore
The Lumina,
magazine in literature, art and
culture

The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 143,500 dinars.
The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 357,000 dinars.

The Bucuria Copilor,
magazine for children

The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 150,500 dinars.

The Tineretea,
magazine for youth
The Tibiscus,
magazine in culture and art

The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 131,000 dinars.
The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 114,000 dinars.

Magazine
The Шветлосц,
magazine in literature, culture and
art

Granted Funds
The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 357,000 dinars.

The Заградка,
magazine for children

The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 150,500 dinars.

The MAK (Младост, Активност,
Креативност),
cultural-politic magazine
The Studia Ruthenica,
collection of works

The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 131,000 dinars.

The Ерато над
Куцуром/Коцуром,
In Ruthenian an Serbian languages

The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 65,000 dinars.

Ruthenian language
Publisher

The Руске слово, Newspaper
Publishing Association
Novi Sad

Association for Ruthenian
Language, Literature and
Culture, Novi Sad
Multilingual Magazines
Association for Ruthenian
Language, Literature and
Culture, Novi Sad and Cultural
Centre of Vrbas, Vrbas

The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 84,500 dinars.

Slovak language
Beneficiary/Publisher
Slovak Publishing Centre,
Bački Petrovac

The Kultura Printing House,
Bački Petrovac

Project /Magazine

The Rovina,
family magazine

Granted Funds
The Ministry of Culture granted
200,000 dinars; The Provincial
Secretariat of Culture granted
357,000 dinars.
The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 145,500 dinars.

The Zornička,
magazine for children

The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 150,500 dinars.

The Obzory,

The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 110,500 dinars.

The Nový život,
Magazine in literature and culture

The Hlas L’udu, Newspaper

165

Publishing Association, Novi
Sad
The Faculty of Philosophy –
Department of Slovak Studies,
Novi Sad

The Vzlet,
magazine for youth
Traf

The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 131,000 dinars.
The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 40,000 dinars.

Ukrainian language
Beneficiary/Publisher
The Ридне слово, Newspaper
Publishing Association,
Kula

Project /Magazine
The Слово (The Reč),
magazine in culture, literature and
art

The Просвита, Association for
Ukrainian Language, Literature
and Culture, Novi Sad
The National Council of the
Ukrainian National Minority/
The Ридне слово, Newspaper
Publishing Association, Novi
Sad

Українсъке словоУкрајинске слово
The Соловејко,
magazine for children

Granted Funds
The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 70,000 dinars.
The Ministry of Culture granted
100,000 dinars;
The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 39,000 dinars.
The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 106,500 dinars.

Croatian language
Beneficiary/Publisher
The Croatian Academic
Society, Subotica

Project /Magazine
The Leksikon podunavskih Hrvata–
Bunjevaca i Šokaca (Book IX)

The Hrvatska riječ, Newspaper
Publishing Association,
Subotica

The Klasije naših ravni,
magazine in literature, art and
science

Granted Funds
The Ministry of Culture granted
130,000 dinars.
The Ministry of Culture granted
200,000 dinars;
The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 357,000 dinars..

The Hrcko,
magazine for children

The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 102,000 dinars..

The Kužiš?!

303.

The Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted 92,000 dinars.

In order to encourage and promote multi-linguistic character of Vojvodina, the
Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina also co-finances, on tender
basis, magazines in the field of culture, literature and art in several languages. The
Table below contains examples of such support.

Publisher
Association for Ruthenian Language,
Literature and Culture, Novi Sad and
the Cultural Centre of Vrbas, Vrbas
The Zetna, Association of Citizens,
Senta

The KPZ Sečanj, Sečanj

Magazine
The Ерато над Куцуром/Коцуром,
in Ruthenian and Serbian languages
The Zetna,
Magazin a vulkán alatt – Магазин под
вулканом,
in Hungarian and Serbian languages
The Огледало – the Oglinda,

Granted Funds
65,000.00

119,000.00

134,000.00

166

Regional, Subotica

Fokus Foundation for Youth Culture
and Creativity, Subotica

in Hungarian, Romanian and Serbian
languages
The Regional,
magazine in culture,
in Hungarian, Serbian and Croatian
languages
The Картон,
in Hungarian, Serbian and Croatian
languages

132,000.00

45,000.00

4.4.7. Representation of the interests of users of minority languages
304.

As already stated in the Section 4.4.2. of the Report, the provisions of the Law on
Broadcasting prescribe the undertakings of public radio broadcasting agencies in
respect of interests of minority groups, too – users of minority languages.
Pursuant to Article 8 paragraph 1 item 6 of the Law on Broadcasting, the Agency
shall supervise the operations of public radio broadcasting agencies and take care
that they comply with their undertakings in relation to programme standards
defined by the provisions of the Law. If the Agency finds, on the occasion of such
supervision, that a public radio broadcasting agency violates its undertakings, it
may, within the meaning of Article 17 paragraph 2 and Article 87 paragraph 2 of
the Law on Broadcasting, order a measure to the public broadcasting agency
(dunning or warning) or, as the last instance, discharge the members of the Board
of Directors of the public broadcasting agency. In addition to specific legal
obligations in respect of programme contents and their operations in general, it is
also prescribed by the provisions of Article 87 paragraphs 1 and 2, Article 92
paragraph 3 and Article 94 paragraph 4 of the same Law that RBA shall appoint
and discharge the members of the boards of directors of public radio broadcasting
agencies and propose to the National Assembly the candidates for the
appointment of members of programmes boards of public radio broadcasting
services.

305.

In the opinion of the authorities of the Republic of Serbia, the above mentioned
provisions give guarantees that the interests of users of minority languages shall
be also represented in public radiobroadcasting agencies, although at present they
do not have their representatives in the boards of directors and the programme
boards of public radiobroadcasting agencies.

306.

The Law on the National Councils of the National Minorities defines the
competences of national councils in the field of information. Article 20 of this
Law prescribes that national councils of national minorities give an opinion in the
procedure of appointment of the members of the boards of directors, the
programme board and managing director of the Radiobroadcasting Agency of
Serbia and the Radiobroadcasting Agency of Vojvodina if those institutions
broadcast programmes in minority languages; they set up criteria for the
appointment of the programme editor in charge in minority languages at an
institution of the public agency; they propose to the board of director of the
radiobroadcasting institution to appoint the editor in charge of the programme in
167

minority language among the candidates who apply and meet the requirements of
the advertisements, and they also give an opinion about the candidates for the
editor in charge of the programme in minority languages at the radiobroadcasting
institution where the editor in charge for several programmes in minority
languages is appointed.
4.4.8. Activities for the implementation of box–recommendation of the Committee of
Experts concerning Article 11 of the Charter
307.

In the Report on the Implementation of the Charter in the first cycle of reporting,
the Committee of Experts issued the following recommendation:
The Committee of Experts encourages the Serbian authorities to ensure that the
privatisation of local broadcasters does not negatively affect the offer of
programmes in the regional or minority languages.

308.

The process of privatization of media has not been completed yet in the Republic
of Serbia. Although Law on Broadcasting (Article 96 paragraph 10) prescribes
that radio and/or television stations of local and regional communities founded by
the assembly of municipality, several assemblies of municipalities and the town
assembly have an obligation to be privatized not later than 31 December 2007, the
process has been stopped because it was noticed that privatization might
jeopardize the survival of programmes in minority languages of the media
broadcasting it. Bearing in mind the fact that local and regional radio and TV
stations are exactly the greatest chances for the members of national minorities to
accomplish their right to information in their own mother tongue, the Government
of the Republic of Serbia adopted a conclusion on 27 December 2007, which
adopted the Information on the necessity to terminate the privatization process of
radio and/or television stations and other electronic media broadcasting
programmes in minority language. After this the Privatization Agency adjourned
the privatization process of these media. The continuation of operations of local
and regional media founded by the municipality/town was also strengthened after
the period fixed for their privatization in Article 20 item 34 of the Law on Local
Self-Government (adopted on 29 December 2007), which prescribes that the
municipality may, through its bodies, in accordance with the Constitution and
law, establish television and radio stations for the purpose of reporting in minority
language officially used in the municipality, as well as for reporting in minority
language if it is not officially used if such reporting presents the achieved level of
minority rights. According to the data of journalistic associations, slightly more
than one third of media has been privatized, while the privatization of press has
been completely finished. According to the data of the Privatization Agency, 53
electronic media and press media were privatized in the Republic of Serbia in the
last six years. The new media owners are obliged to comply with the Rules on the
Method of Privatization of radio and/or television stations of local and regional
communities, which oblige them to operate continually. The Rules prescribe that
broadcaster, whose programmes have contents in minority languages, must
168

continue to operate according to this programme concept. Article 68 of the Law
on Broadcasting makes all electronic media obliged to comply with general
programme standards when broadcasting programmes. The Republic
Radiobroadcasting Agency shall perform the control of programme contents of
broadcaster, as already stressed in the above paragraphs on the implementation of
Article 11 of the Charter.

169

4.5.

Article 12
Cultural Activities and Facilities
Selected paragraphs and sub-paragraphs

1. With regard to cultural activities and facilities - especially libraries, video libraries,
cultural centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary
work and film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the
culture industries, including inter alia the use of new technologies - the Parties
undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used and to the extent that
the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this field:
a) to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority
languages and foster the different means of access to works produced in these
languages;
b) to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in
regional or minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing,
postsynchronisation and subtitling activities;
c) to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other
languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation
and subtitling activities;
f) to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given
regional or minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural
activities;
2. In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages
are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or
minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural
activities and facilities in accordance with the preceding paragraph.
4.5.1. Encouragement of expression and access to works in minority languages
309.

In this three year period the State also continued to encourage expression and
access to works in minority languages. Examples of such efforts are contained in
the following paragraphs of this Report.

310.

The Ministry of Culture, within its competences, undertakes certain actions
striving to enable, encourage and facilitate various forms of expression in
minority languages. In view of the fact that minority languages are an integral part
of the cultural identity and the grounds to preserve, crate and present cultural
values, the Ministry of Culture supports projects related to this area, both
financially and/or in logistics. Although co-financing of projects/programmes was
established as regular annual activity in 2002, since 2007 the Ministry of Culture
has been issuing special tenders to co-finance projects/programmes of national
170

minorities. This tender does not only relate to co-financing of cultural projects of
minority communities, but it also relates to the area of multi-cultural activities.
Since 2008, this tender has also been expanding to financing of magazines in the
field of culture, which is presented in minority languages and in the field of
publishing in minority languages. The national councils of national minorities are
active participants in the procedure of adoption of final decisions on co-financing
in each tender. The applications received at the tender are examined and relevant
decisions are adopted by an independent commission consisting of experts in
relevant fields. The criteria of distribution of funds intended for the culture of
national minorities are, inter alia, the following: the importance of the project for
the promotion of cultural and linguistic identity, art and culture, promotion and
development of multilingual character of the community, contribution to the
intercultural dialogue, realistic possibilities of implementation and the quality of
the project as the most important criterion. Although care is taken that all national
minorities are represented in the selection of the project the funds are to be
granted to, the quality of the project is the major criterion of selection. After
having noticed that certain minority communities receive less financial support,
due to the lack of good quality projects, at the end of 2007 and at the beginning of
2008 the Ministry of Culture performed the training of the members of the
national minorities on how to apply to the tenders to be issued by the Ministry,
which was carried out under the support of the national councils of national
minorities. In order to provide successful training of the members of the national
minorities on how to apply to the tenders, as well as to provide successful cooperation with national communities in general, the Ministry printed a guide in
compiled form, which explains in details all important elements of the tender
procedures. In addition to the measures of affirmative actions, which are applied
in relation to the Roma national minority, concrete steps related to the Albanian
national minority in the South of Serbia. Since it has been noticed that the
national minority concerned had not taken part in the tenders issued by the
Ministry of Culture in previous years, through the Co-ordinating Body of the
Government of the Republic of Serbia for the Municipalities of Preševo,
Bujanovac and Medveña, information on all essential elements of the tender
procedures were forwarded to them, resulting in the first applications to tenders
from this region.
311.

The adoption of the Law on Establishment of Certain Competences of the
Autonomous Province of Vojvodina (2002), major part of competences of the
Ministry of Culture, related to the programmes of the national minorities living in
this territory, was transferred to the provincial authorities. Although Vojvodina
gained the right to develop its own cultural policy and cultural strategies on the
grounds of this Law, the obligations of the Ministry of Culture have not
eliminated but only decreased in this territory.

312.

The Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina, in addition to subsidies
to the institutions of culture established by the Autonomous Province of
Vojvodina also co-finances, on tender basis, the programmes accomplishing the
171

needs and interests of national minorities in the field of culture and minority
languages they represent.
313.

Municipalities, as the basic territorial units of self-government, organize jobs
concerning the protection of cultural goods of importance for the municipality,
encourage the development of cultural and art works, provide funds to finance
and co-finance the programmes and projects in the field of culture of importance
for the municipality and create the conditions for the activities of the cultural
institutions they are the founders of.

314.

The following paragraphs of this Report contain the data on the encouragement of
forms of expression and access to works produced in minority languages.

4.5.1.1. Libraries
315.

The existence of libraries with book stocks in minority languages available to the
members of national minorities are important for fostering of language and
culture in general. Public libraries are mainly active in the Republic of Serbia,
although it is also possible to establish private libraries in accordance with the
Law. According to Article 2 paragraph 2 of the Law on Libraries, library
activities include: collection , processing, keeping and use of books, magazines
and newspapers, scripts, music works, copies of art paintings and drawings, maps
and plans of settlements, phonodocuments, reprographic matter, posters,
advertising matter, video and film records and other works that are copied by
printing or in other ways, as well as manuscripts and documents in electronic
format, as well as collection, processing and rendering of information and data
related to the library stock. According to Article 10 item 2 of the Law on
Libraries, general interest in the field of library activities is, inter alia, to produce
current, retrospective and other bibliography of the Serbian nation and national
minorities living in the Republic of Serbia. According to the provision of Article
20 paragraph 1 item 18 of the Law on Local Self-Government, the funds for the
activities of the libraries funded by the municipality are provided from the
municipal budget. The number of books in minority languages and the availability
of libraries to the users of minority languages was also contained in the First
Periodical Report on the Implementation of the Charter. For the requirements of
this Report, the libraries were interviewed concerning the number of books in
minority languages. The table below contains the data on the number of books in
minority languages at the libraries that replied to the interviews.

Minority Languages
Albanian

Bosniak

Library
The 14. novembar, Bujanovac
The Petar Petrović Njegoš, Medveña
The Mehmet Jusufi, Preševo
The Dositej Obradović, Novi Pazar
The Vuk Karadžić, Prijepolje
The De Ejup Mišović, Tutin
The Public Library, Babušnica
The Hristo Botev, Bosilegrad

Number of Books
15,000
2,943
7,775
1,814
700
249
5,700
6,378

172

Bulgarian

Hungarian

Romani

Romanian

Ruthenian

Slovak

The Detko Petrov, Dimitrovgrad
The Dositej Obradović, Negotin
The Stevan Sremac, Niš
The Public Library, Pirot
The Sarvaš Gabor, Ada
The Public Library, Apatin
The Vuk Karadžić, Bač
The Veljko Petrović, Bačka Palanka
The Public Library, Bačka Topola
The Public Library, Bečej
The Danilo Kiš, Vrbas
The Town Library, Vršac
The Branko Radičević, Žitište
The Town Library, Zrenjanin
The Đorñe Natošević, Inñija
The Jožef Atila, Kanjiža
The Jovan Popović, Kikinda
The Municipal Library, Kovačica
The Vuk Karadžić, Kovin
The Public Library, Kula
The Matica Srpska Library, Novi Sad
The Town Library, Novi Sad
The Town Library, Pančevo
The Public Library, Plandište
The Town Library, Senta
The Karlo Bjelicki, Sombor
The Gligorije Vozarević, Sremska Mitrovica
The Simraj Karolj, Temerin
The Public Library, Bela Crkva
The Stevan Sremac, Niš
The Town Library, Novi Sad
The Town Library, Vršac
The Branko Radičević, Žitište
The Town Library, Zrenjanin
The Vuk Karadžić, Kovin
The Matica Srpska Library, Novi Sad
The Town Library, Novi Sad
The Town Library, Pančevo
The Public Library, Plandište
The Public Library, Bačka Topola
The Danilo Kiš, Vrbas
The Veljko Petrović, Žabalj
The Matica Srpska Library, Novi Sad
The Town Library, Novi Sad
The Gligorije Vozarević, Sremska Mitrovica
The Simeon Piščević, Šid
The Štefan Homola, Bački Petrovac
The Veljko Petrović, Bačka Palanka
The Public Library, Bačka Topola
The Danilo Kiš, Vrbas
The Town Library, Zrenjanin
The Municipal Library, Kovačica
The Matica Srpska Library, Novi Sad
The Town Library, Novi Sad
The Town Library, Pančevo
The Gligorije Vozarević, Sremska Mitrovica

12,000
40
57
80
27,511
10,334
302
1,016
81,027
39,788
7,783
5,538
9,847
19,785
1,037
42,032
32,969
3,228
6,461
5,046
39,482
19,021
7,689
41
41,642
63,882
18
15,048
20
5
542
3,085
4,924
90
2,719
9,416
3,424
7,689
114
256
2,900
550
3,292
528
74
255
1,356
4,747
467
49
41
10,898
6,395
7,892
274
7

173

The Dositej Obradović, Stara Pazova
The Simeon Piščević, Šid

6,880
38

4.5.1.2. Cultural clubs, cultural centres and cultural institutions
316.

Cultural clubs and cultural centres are the basic cultural institutions in the units of
local self-government, which subsidize their activities. They are most frequently
those organizing the most important cultural manifestations and the institutions
promoting culture and linguistic diversity and minority languages, as well as the
access to works produced in the languages concerned in multi-national
communities.

317.

In 2003 the Assembly of AP of Vojvodina founded the Institute of Culture of
Vojvodina. The aim of foundation of this Institute is to foster and promote
modern cultural strategies, investigations of possibilities to apply and develop
new cultural models in Vojvodina, networking of the existing cultural institutions
and affirmation of multiculturalism. The programme concept of the Institute
includes scientific, expert, development and applied researches, and to stimulates
modern artistic production in Vojvodina through the implementation of projects
covering management in culture, cultural production, cultural tourism,
organization of cultural-artistic manifestations, presentation, informativedocumentary activities, new media, professional training and education in culture
and art. The activities of the Institute are aimed at fostering, development and
organization of: culture and language of nation, national and ethnic communities
in AP of Vojvodina; painting and music and theatre activities in AP of Vojvodina
(drama, opera, ballet, ballet and other similar activities); galleries; amateurism in
AP of Vojvodina according to the plan and programme of the Association of
Amateurs of Vojvodina; multiculturalism and interculturalism in the territory of
Vojvodina; establishment of links and co-operation between cultural institutions,
enabling individuals in AP of Vojvodina to make contacts with international
institutions and organizations. The Institute actively participates in the
implementation of the policy of the provincial authority in charge of culture.
Department of development and Research of the Institute of Culture of Vojvodina
also implemented the project Language and Identity, which affirmed
multiculturalism and promoted modern artistic expression and culture, included a
series of activities related to visits of modern writers, presentation of scientific
works, organization of lectures, promotions of books, exhibitions, etc. The
following topics have been discussed so far: literature in Romanian and
Hungarian languages, and promotion of literature in Romani language. The Coordinating Body of the Association for Languages, Literature and Culture is also
active, among other authorities, within the Institute of Culture of Vojvodina,
which includes 23 units (associations, sections, clubs) organizing various
activities in Serbian language and in the following minority languages: Bulgarian,
Macedonian, Hungarian, German, Romani, Romanian, Ruthenian, Slovak,
Ukrainian, Croatian and Czech.

174

318.

In order to foster, promote and develop culture and minority languages, the
Assembly of AP of Vojvodina and the national councils of the Hungarian,
Romanian, Ruthenian, Slovak, and Croatian national minorities in 2008
established the institutes of culture, as professional cultural institutions of the
minority communities concerned. The objectives the institutions had been
established for, will be accomplished by: development-research and analyses of
cultural infrastructure of the speakers of languages concerned in order to achieve
their development; informative-documentary activities, permanent and systematic
activities to improve the quality of cultural and artistic manifestations, as well as
by professional training and education in culture. The decisions on establishment
of those institutions prescribe that their activities are: publishing of books,
brochures, music books and publications, magazines and similar periodical issues
and audio records; research and experiments in social and humanitarian sciences;
market and public opinion researches; consulting and management; library
activities; archive activities; museums, galleries and collections; protection of
cultural goods, natural resources and other monuments. The institutes of culture
of national minorities established in this form in the Republic of Serbia are unique
and they do not exist in any other country in the surroundings. Through the
implementation of projects of scientific, development and applied researches in
the field of culture, art and science, as well as through the organization of cultural
and artistic programmes, these institutions have already significantly contributed
to fostering and preservation of national identity, minority languages and cultures
of various national minorities living in Vojvodina, also contributing at the same
time to the development of multiculturalism and multilingual character of
Vojvodina, and to the accessibility of such cultures and minority languages to all
citizens. The funds for the activities and programmes of the institutions of culture
are provided from the budget (90%), and from the income of their own operations
and funds, foundations, donations, contributions, etc.

319.

The Table below contains the data about the funds provided from the budget of
AP of Vojvodina for the activities of the institutions of culture of national
minorities.

Name
The Institute of Culture of Hungarians of Vojvodina –
Vajdasági Magyar Művelődési Intézet, Senta
The Institute of Culture of Romanians of Vojvodina –
Institutul de Cultuã al Românilor din Vojvodina, Zrenjanin
The Institute of Culture of Ruthenians of Vojvodina – Завод
за културу войводянских Руснацох, Novi Sad
The Institute of Culture of Slovaks of Vojvodina – Ústav pre
kultúru vojvodinských Slovákov, Novi Sad
The Institute of Culture of Croatians of Vojvodina – Zavod
za kulturu vojvoñanskih Hrvata, Subotica

2008
12,000,000.00

2009
8,300,000.00

8,000,000.00

4,000,000.00

6,500,000.00

3,250,000.00

10,000,000.00

5,000,000.00

5,500,000.00

4,150,000.00

4.5.1.3. Protection of cultural goods (cultural monuments, museums and archives)

175

320.

In the Republic of Serbia there is no difference in protection of cultural goods on
origin basis. The laws governing this area, including also the activities of the
institutions for protection of cultural monuments, museums, galleries, archives
and libraries, as well as the standards of protection of cultural heritage impose that
cultural goods are treated and protected equally regardless of the time of their
making and cultural origin. On the other hand, bearing in mind that cultural
heritage and its complexity make an important part of modern identity of local
communities fostering it and that it plays an important role in fostering of cultural
diversities and development of intercultural dialogue, the Ministry of Culture paid
attention to this aspect of cultural heritage, fully respecting the principles
mentioned in the UNESCO Convention on Protection of Diversities of Cultural
Expressions in the previous period. In this sense, the most important project is the
development project of the Vekovi Bača, which includes protection and
maintenance of rich multicultural heritage in the territory of Bač and the material
heritage – the Franciscan Convent, the Boñani Orthodox Monastery, the medieval
tower, the remains of the Turkish bath, etc. and also the maintenance of various
traditions related to well preserved and live non-material heritage being fostered
by about 20 different ethnic groups. Because of its historical and cultural values
of the heritage and its multiculturalism, in 2008 this project was selected as one of
the three projects of the Republic of Serbia to participate in the Ljubljana Process,
which presents a common initiative of the Council of Europe and the European
Commission for Protection of Cultural and Natural Heritage in the South-East
Europe. The aim of the project Vekovi Bača is a social-economic development of
the municipality based on wise utilization of rich heritage, implying preservation
of material and non-material culture of diversities with a particular stress on the
development of intercultural dialogue.

321.

In the previous three years the funds in the total amount of 7,080,000.00 dinars
were provided from the provincial budget for the project Vekovi Bača in the field
of protection of cultural heritage including the manifestation of the European
Heritage Days.

322.

Under the support of the Ministry of Culture the following projects contributing to
the preservation and protection of cultural heritage of national minorities and
minority languages have also been implemented:

•

The Ethnographic Museum in Belgrade – the Đelem, ñelem programme
promoting the culture of the Roma in Serbia and the promotion of the book
Islamski spomenici i islamska zajednica Prijepolja arranged by the National
Museum in Prijepolje;

•

The Historic Archive of Bela Crkva – the project Predstava izmeñu Nere i
Karaša, which through an exhibition of the archive documents and theatrical
performance, presented the history of Bela Crkva stressing its multiculturalism;

176

•

The Historic Archive of Novi Pazar – the project of publishing of the Izbice od
davnina monography documenting and reflecting the multicultural community of
Novi Pazar and the exhibition of archive documents and photographs under the
subject Novi Pazar, Sjenica and Tutin kroz vreme, thus contributing to building a
dialogue between cultures and ethnic communities living in this environment;

•

The Historic Archive of the Town of Novi Sad – the project Meñuetnički dijalozi
na teritoriji Vojvodine, which included the research of the archive stock and field
works..

4.5.1.4. Theatres
323.

Theatre art in minority languages is of a particular importance for fostering of
minority languages and promotion and development of cultures they represent,
which is financially supported by the state.

324.

Theatre performances in Albanian language performed by two amateur theatres,
one with the Jehona Cultural-Artistic Society from Veliki Trnovac, financed by
the local self-government and the other, the Town Amateur Theatre from Preševo.

325.

On tender basis for the projects/programmes the quality of which contributes to
the development and the presentation of art and culture, in 2007, the Ministry of
Culture supported the Jehona Cultural-Artistic Society drama programme with
80,000.00 dinars and the Dani albanske komedije manifestation with 200,000.00
dinars.

326.

Performances in Bosniak language are performed by one professional theatre. In
addition to performances in Serbian language, the Regional Theatre in Novi Pazar
also has two annual premiers in Bosniak language.

327.

On tender basis for co-financing of the projects/programmes the quality of which
contributes to the development and the presentation of art and culture of national
minorities the Ministry of Culture supported the performance of the following
theatre performances in Bosniak language:

Beneficiary
The Regional Theatre, Novi Pazar
The Sjenica Amateur Theatre and the
National Council of the Bosniak
National Minority, Novi Pazar

Project
Žute dunje i limuni – theatre
performance
Ramiza – theatre performance

Granted Funds
240,000.00

150,000.00

328.

The Hristo Botev theatre from Dimitrovgrad has performances in Bulgarian
language. This theatre also has an annual premier in Bulgarian language.

329.

On tender basis for co-financing of the projects/programmes the quality of which
contributes to the development and the presentation of art and culture of national
177

minorities the Ministry of Culture supported the performance of the following
theatre performances in Bulgarian language:
Beneficiary

Project
Doživljaji Pričalice Brbljiković, theatre
performance

Granted Funds
70,000.00

Princeza Fina Žozefina, princ Hrabrić i
još poneko, theatre performance

170,000.00

The Cultural Centre Dimitrovgrad

330.

•
•
•
•

In the territory of AP of Vojvodina theatre performances in Hungarian language
are conducted by 4 professional and 30 amateur theatres.
Professional theatres are:
The National Theatre - Népszinház in Subotica including the Drama in Hungarian
language
The Theatre of Novi Sad - Ujvídéki színház in Novi Sad
The Children’s Theatre - Gyermekszinház in Subotica also has a group in
Hungarian language
The Doll’s Scene of the Toša Jovanović National Theatre in Zrenjanin, also has
performances in Hungarian language.

331.

The entire activities of the National Theatre – Népszinház are financed from the
budget of AP of Vojvodina. In 2007, 30,988,043.00 dinars were granted from the
budget of AP of Vojvodina for the activities of the Drama in Hungarian language
of this theatre. In 2008, 34,636,028.00 dinars were granted and 32,991,350 dinars
were granted in 2009.

332.

The Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina also co-financed from
the budget the activities of other theatres performing in Hungarian language. The
Table below contains the examples of such financing.

Theatre
The Salašarsko Theatre, Novi Sad
The Theatre of Novi Sad - Ujvídéki
színház, Novi Sad
The Kostolanji Deže Theatre –
Kosztolányi Dezső Színház, Subotica

333.

Programme
Performances in Hungarian language
Co-financing of visiting performances
in different places of Vojvodina
Tramvaj Dezire, project

Granted Funds
3,275,000.00
660,000.00

Co-financing of visiting performances
in different places of Vojvodina

596,000.00

1,400,000.00

On tender basis for co-financing of the projects/programmes the quality of which
contributes to the development and the presentation of art and culture of national
minorities the Ministry of Culture supported theatre festivals and performances in
Hungarian language.

Beneficiary
The Theatre of Novi Sad, Novi Sad
The Most Fund, Subotica

Project
Mizantrop, theatre performance
Isus Hrist Superstar, theatre

Granted Funds
100,000.00
100,000.00

178

The Cultural Association of
Hungarians of Vojvodina, Subotica

334.

performance
13th Festival of Hungarian Amateur
Theatres of Vojvodina

60,000.00

The Table below contains the data about the funds granted for theatre
performances and theatre manifestations in Hungarian language according to the
individual applications submitted to the tenders issued by the Provincial
Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina.

Beneficiary
The Mara Amateur Theatre, Bačka
Topola
The Petefi Šandor Cultural
Association, Bezdan
The Kucko Children’s Club,
Doroslovo
The Petefi Šandor Cultural-Artistic
Association, Mužlja
The Madach Amateur Theatre,
Zrenjanin
Association of Hungarian Pre-School
Teachers and Teachers of Vojvodina,
Mali Iñoš
Parents’ Forum, Novi Sad

Purpose
Preparation of two theatre
performances
Theatre performance in Hungarian
language
2nd Drama Festival of Pre-School
Children of the West-Banat District
14th Festival of Hungarian Amateur
Theatres of Vojvodina
Мi, muzičke duše, Operetta Scene

Granted Funds
35,000.00

Festival of Amateur Doll’s Theatre

15,000.00

Establishment of doll’s theatre for
children
Pupil’s Scene theatre performance:
Mrožek, Udovice

50,000.00

Pupils Scene: Shakespeare, Much Ado
about Nothing

40,000.00

25,000.00
60,000.00

50,000.00
45,000.00

45,000.00

The Theatre of Novi Sad, Novi Sad

Association of Hungarian Teachers of
Vojvodina, Novi Sad
Turzo Lajoš, Cultural-Educational
Centre, Senta
TsT, Association of Citizens, Senta
The Berta Ferenc, Theatre, Sombor
The Kostolanji Deže Theatre –
Kosztolányi Dezső Színház, Subotica
The Cultural Alliance of Vojvodina’s
Hungarians, Subotica
The National Theatre, Subotica
The Petefi Šandor Cultural
Association, Telečka
The Orfeus Amateur Theatre, Čoka
Association of Hungarian Reciters of
Vojvodina, Feketić
Association of Hungarian Drama
Pedagogues in Vojvodina, Feketić

Children’s Theatre Festival
Activity of Senta Theatre
Performance for children
Susreti, performance
Theatre performances: Pilinski Janoš,
Urbi et orbi, Mrožek, Tango and Brad
Fraser, Prava priroda ljubavi ili
neidentifikovani ljudski ostaci
12th and 13th Festival of Hungarian
Amateur Theatres of Vojvodina
Days of Hungarian Acting in
Vojvodina
13th Festival of Hungarian Amateur
Theatres of Vojvodina
Još živimo, theatre days
Biti Mañar, visiting performance
Workshops of Children’s Theatre
Production

30,000.00
125,000.00
30,000.00
40,000.00
250,000.00

130,000.00
80,000.00
150,000.00
30,000.00
25,000.00

80,000.00

179

335.

Theatre performances in Romani language in the territory of AP of Vojvodina are
performed by one professional and three amateur theatres.

336.

The Romani Theatre Suno e Rromengo in Novi Karlovci, which was established
in 2007 as a professional theatre, has performances in Romani language. The
theatre has one or two premier performances and ten replay performances
annually. In addition to performances in various places of Vojvodina and Serbia,
it also has performances in the neighbouring and other European countries. The
Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina subsidized the activities of
Suno e Rromengo theatre. In 2007, the subsidy amounted to 800,000.00 dinars, in
2008 it amounted to 2,450,000.00 dinars and in 2009 it amounted to 1,200,000.00
dinars. The profesionalisation of activities and the training of actors and actresses
of this theatre were financed by the Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of
Vojvodina with 625,000,000.00 dinars in 2008.

337.

On tender basis for co-financing of the projects/programmes the quality of which
contributes to the development and the presentation of art and culture of national
minorities the Ministry of Culture supported the projects related to theatre
activities and theatre performances in Romani language.

Beneficiary
Kulturmobil, Association of Citizens,
Belgrade
Bare jaga, Association of Culture and
Education of Roma, Mačvanska
Mitrovica
Multimedia Centre of Serbian Roma,
Trstenik

Project
Čarninin poj, performance

Granted Funds
350,000.00

Educational workshop of the youth
theatre

120,000.00

Establishment of the ROM-drom
Theatre

300,000.00

338.

In 2008, the Ministry of Human and Minority Rights granted 295,000.00 dinars
for the organization and the implementation of the musical Molitva za jug.

339.

According to the individual applications submitted to the tenders, the Provincial
Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina granted 60,000.00 dinars to the Beočin,
Association of Roma from Beočin for the performance Zvono in Romani
language.

340.

In the territory of AP of Vojvodina theatre performances in Romanian language
are conducted by one professional and 12 amateur theatres. The Sterija National
Theatre in Vršac, which is a professional theatre, has a department in Romanian
language successfully performing plays in the country and abroad. It has two
premier performances and 20 replay performances annually. The Provincial
Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina subsidized the programme of this
department in Romanian language. In 2007 subsidy amounted to 2,500,000.00
dinars, in 2008 it amounted to 2,650,000.00 dinars and in 2009, it amounted to
1,200,000.00 dinars.

180

341.

On tender basis for co-financing of the projects/programmes the quality of which
contributes to the development and the presentation of art and culture of national
minorities the Ministry of Culture supported the performance of the following
theatre manifestations and theatre performances in Romanian language.

Beneficiary
Romanian Community in Serbia – the
Alibunar Branch, Alibunar
Association of Romanian Amateur
Theatres in AP of Vojvodina,
Alibunar

342.

Project
Theatre performance
35th and 36th Festival of Theatres of
Romanians in Vojvodina

Granted Funds
60,000.00
200,000.00

The Table below contains the data about the funds granted for theatre
manifestations and theatre performances in Romanian language according to the
individual applications submitted to the tenders issued by the Provincial
Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina.

Beneficiary
Association of Romanian Amateur
Theatres in AP of Vojvodina,
Alibunar
Romanian Community in Serbia,
Vršac

Purpose
35th, 36th and 37th Festival of Theatres
of Romanians
Šta se, doñavola, dešava sa ovim
vozom, theatre performance

Granted Funds
600,000.00

25,000.00

343.

In the territory of AP of Vojvodina theatre performances in Ruthenian language
are conducted by one professional and 15 amateur theatres. The Đaña, Ruthenian
National Theatre in Ruski Krstur has two premier performances and 20 replay
performances, subsidized by the Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of
Vojvodina. In 2007 subsidy amounted to 2,500,000.00 dinars, in 2008 it
amounted to 2,650,000.00 dinars and in 2009, it amounted to 1,200,000.00 dinars.

344.

On tender basis for co-financing of the projects/programmes the quality of which
contributes to the development and the presentation of art and culture of national
minorities the Ministry of Culture financially supported the event of the Petar
Riznič Đaña Drama Memorial in Ruski Krstur with 250,000.00 dinars.

345.

The Table below contains the data about the funds granted for theatre
manifestations and theatre performances in Ruthenian language according to the
individual applications submitted to the tenders issued by the Provincial
Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina.

Beneficiary
The Karpati, Cultural Centre, Vrbas
The Žetva, Cultural-Artistic
Association, Kucura
The Matica Srpska Town Board, Novi
Sad
Association of Ruthenians of Novi Sad

Purpose
Trilingual drama performance
Prva ljubav, drama performance and
Bunda od medveda, youth theatre
perfromance
5th Monodrama Festival
6th and 7th Monodrama Festival and 2nd

Granted Funds
15,000.00
50,000.00

50,000.00
70,000.00

181

The Matka, Novi Sad
Cultural Centre, Ruski Krstur

Duodrama Festival
39th and 40th Petar Riznič Đaña Drama
Memorial
Theatre performances Šeregij, Gladni
and Đorñe Milosavljavić, Instant

400,000.00

90,000.00

346.

In the territory of AP of Vojvodina theatre performances in Slovak language are
conducted by one professional and 20 amateur theatres. Nowadays, the successful
and long tradition of theatre performances dating back to 1866, when the first
theatre performance was played in Bački Petrovac, is represented by the Slovak
Theatre of Vojvodina. For two premier performances and 20 replay performances
in 2007 the Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina subsidized this
theatre with 2,500,000.00 dinars. In 2008 subsidy amounted to 2,650,000.00
dinars and in 2009, it amounted to 1,200,000.00 dinars. In addition in the course
of 2007 and 2008 the funds in the amount of 4,100,000.00 dinars were granted to
this theatre from the budget of AP of Vojvodina for the project of acting studies in
Slovak language.

347.

The Hleba i igara Art Centre, amateur theatre from Stara Pazova was granted the
amount of 4,300,000.00 dinars from the budget of AP of Vojvodina for the
activities of the centre (premiers and replays) as well as for the visits to Cairo and
Tehran (2008) and Budapest (2009).

348.

The Table below contains the data about the funds granted for theatre
manifestations and theatre performances in Slovak language according to the
individual applications submitted to the tenders issued by the Provincial
Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina.

Beneficiary
3. Oktobar, Cultural Club, Kovačica
Janko Čeman, Amateur Theatre,
Pivnice
Jan Kolar, Cultural-Artistic
Association, Selenča
Heroj Janko Čmelik, Slovak CulturalArtistic Association, Stara Pazova

Purpose
Theatre performance: А. Čehov, Višnjik
DIDA Theatre Festival

Granted Funds
60,000.00
310,000.00

Festival of Slovak Amateur Thatres
Theatre performance

75,000.00
40,000.00

Festival of Slovak Amateur Thatres

300,000.00

15th Festival of Children’s Theatres

100,000.00

349.

In the territory of AP of Vojvodina theatre performances in Croatian language are
conducted by 2 amateur theatres.

350.

On tender basis for co-financing of the projects/programmes the quality of which
contributes to the development and the presentation of art and culture of national
minorities, in 2008 the Ministry of Culture financially supported the Ljutovo,
Croatian Cultural-Artistic Association from Ljutovo with 80,000.00 dinars for the
Festival of Amateur Theatres.
182

351.

In 2007 the Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina co-financed the
Stanislav Preprek, Croatian Cultural-Artistic Association from Novi Sad with
100,000.00 dinars for the preparation of the performance Atentatori.

352.

The Table below contains the data about the funds granted by the Provincial
Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina for theatre performances in Croatian
language.

Beneficiary
Mostonga, Croatian Cultural-ArtisticSinging Association, Bač
Lemeš, Croatian-Bunjevac CulturalArtistic Association, Svetozar Miletić
Bunjevačko kolo, Croatian Cultural
Centre, Subotica

Purpose
Iz domovine u domovinu, theatre
performance
U gostima, theatre performance
Sunce, djever i Neva Nevičica, theatre
performance for children

Granted Funds
25,000.00
13,000.00
40,000.00

4.5.1.5. Publishing (literary works)
353.

The State continues to support financially the publishing of books in minority
languages. Since 2008, the tender for co-financing of the projects/programmes the
quality of which contributes to the development and the presentation of art and
culture of national minorities, which is issued annually by the Ministry of Culture,
also relates to publishing activities in minority languages. The Provincial
Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina annually issues a tender for publishing
of new books in minority languages and for the translations of books from
Serbian language into minority languages or from minority languages into Serbian
language. The examples of the support concerned are contained in the following
paragraphs.

354.

Feniks from Preševo is the only publishing house for books in Albanian language,
which published twelve books written by the authors from Preševo and Bujanovac
in the previous three years.

355.

The Centre of Bosniak Studies from Tutin is the largest publisher of books in
Bosniak language. In addition of publishing of twelve text books for Bosniak
language with elements of national culture as a subject for primary schools, this
publisher also publishes two books in Bosniak language annually. For the project
of publishing of the book Pjesme od behara, on the basis of the tender for cofinancing of the projects/programmes the quality of which contributes to the
development and the presentation of art and culture of national minorities, the
Ministry of Culture granted the amount of 50,000 dinars to the Centre of Bosniak
Studies.

356.

In 2007 the Agency of Human and Minority Rights granted 200,000.00 dinars for
the publishing of the Sandžački Bošnjaci monography.

183

357.

The Bratstvo Newspaper Publishing Agency from Niš, which was founded by the
National Council of the Bulgarian National Minority issues from 3-5 books
annually in Bulgarian language. Until 2009 the Bratstvo Newspaper Publishing
Agency was financed from the republic budget.

358.

On tender basis for co-financing of the projects/programmes the quality of which
contributes to the development and the presentation of art and culture of national
minorities the Ministry of Culture supported the publishing activities in Bulgarian
language.

Beneficiary
The Detko Petrov, Public Library,
Dimitrovgrad
The Caribrod, Cultural-Information
Centre

Project
Publishing of the book: Muzejska
zbirka u Dimitrovgradu
Crkva i manastiri u caribrodskom
(dimitrovgradskom) kraju
Sabrani stripovi Metodi Petrova

Granted Funds
120,000.00
200,000.00

60,000.00

359.

Forum, Publishing Institute – Forum Könyvkiadó Intézet from Novi Sad is the
largest publishing company publishing books in Hungarian language. In the
middle of 2008, the founding rights of this company were transferred to AP of
Vojvodina. The activities of this institute, which annually publishes from 30 to 35
books in Hungarian, as well as the magazines in culture, the Híd and the Üzenet,
are entirely financed from the budget of AP of Vojvodina. In 2008, the funds in
the amount of 5,639,330.00 dinars were provided for the activities of Forum and
in 2009 the founds amounted to 13,078,595.00 dinars.

360.

Magyar Szó (which was founded by the National Council of the Hungarian
national Minority) also deals with the publishing of books in Hungarian language
as secondary activity. In 2007 it published 7 books, in 2008 it published 5 books
and in 2009 it published 3 books.

361.

In 2008 the Ministry of Human and Minority Rights allocated 150,000,000.00
dinars for the publication under the title Hungarian Civilization –Introduction to
Chronology.

362.

On tender basis for co-financing of publishing of books in Hungarian language,
the Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina granted the funds for the
issuance of the following publications:

Publisher
Lavik 92 Timp,
Bačка Topola
Petefi Šandor,
Hungarian Cultural
Association, Bečej
Knesa, Kanjiža

Author/Title
Eva Harkai Vaš, Južno od Šarsega
Česak Balaž and Aniko Korčik, Cika ide párom-népi
gyermekjátékok Óbecséről – Dečije narodne igre iz
Bečeja
Group of authors, Antologija kolonije književnika u
Kanjiži

Granted Funds
60,000.00
50,000.00

60,000.00

184

Siveri Janoš, Art
Scene, Mužlja
Collegium of
University
Education of
Hungarians of
Vojvodina, Novi
Sad
Magyar Szó, Novi
Sad

Zetna, Association
of Citizens, Senta

Institute of Culture
of Hungarians of
vojvodina, Senta

Publikum, Sombor
Social Organization
of the Arač Village
Culture, Subotica

Open University,
Subotica

Christian Youth of
Vojvodina, Subotica
The Town Library,
Subotica
Arač, Association
for Tradition
Forstering, Тоrda
Čokaški dobošari,
Cultural
Association, Čoka

Bela Tot, Dečije pesme
Eva Hoža, Novela u Vojvodini
Scientific student works, Konturi

20,000.00
50,000.00
150,000.00

Dr Žombor Labadi, Monografija o Janošu Siveriju

80,000.00

Group of authors, Kralj Matija je živ

60,000.00

Jožef Fekete, Mit ér az irodalom, ha magyar?

70,000.00

Kristijan Tobijaš, Vasjani

50,000.00

Оtо Тоlnai, Knjižioca iz Sente

70,000.00

Ištvan Besedeš, VasionAzurna

30,000.00

Oto Fenjveši, Čitajući pokojnih Vojvoñana
Group of authors, Društvena istraživanja iz aspekta
mañarske nacionalne zajednice – zajednička
perspektiva

50,000.00
70,000.00

Group of authors, Istorijski identitet – kulturološko
sećanje
Zoltan Kalapiš, Tragom prošlosti – ljudi, sudbine,
životopisi

80,000.00
70,000.00

Gubas Agata, Kamen temeljac – almanah društva

70,000.00

Geza Čat, Hátra maradt naplók

70,000.00

Geza Čat, Porodična pisma 3

40,000.00

Mesaroš Zoltan, Propaganda ranog titoizma

40,000.00

Olga Kovačev Ninkov, Lepkék és repúőlogépek avagy
farkasok és angyalok

35,000.00

Hosza Eva, Csath alle és kitérők

35,000.00

Deak Ferenc, Légszomj

25,000.00

Herceg Janos, Viharban

25,000.00

Ekumenski teološki rečnik
Eva Hozka, Ninkov Kovačev Olga, Likovni album
Geze Čata
Mese Titku

80,000.00
90,000.00

Legende o crkvi Arač
Konja Šandor, Pesme za decu

35,000.00
30,000.00

20,000.00

185

363.

The Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina supported the
publishing activities in Hungarian language (first editions of books, magazines,
assistance to publishing activities of publishing houses). In 2007 it granted funds
in the total amount of 8,644,604.00 dinars, in 2008 it granted 13,297,298.00
dinars and in 2009 it granted 13,996,028.00 dinars.

364.

On tender basis for co-financing of the projects/programmes the quality of which
contributes to the development and the presentation of art and culture of national
minorities the Ministry of Culture supported the publishing activities in
Hungarian language.
Beneficiary

Forum, Publishing Institute, Novi Sad
Collegium of University Education of
Hungarians of Vojvodina, Novi Sad
Zetna, Association of Citizens, Senta
The Town Library, Subotica
Kiš Lajoš, Ethnological Association,
Subotica
Open University Ltd. Radionica
Eletjel, Subotica

Project
Publishing of the book: Kornelije
Fargo, Komparativne poetike,
relacionalna značenja
Publishing of the book:Ironija lebdenja

Granted Funds
100,000.00

Projekat Makropolj, proze na četiri (ili
više) ruke
Publishing of the collected works from
the Seminar Dani Dežea Kostolanjija
Publishing of the book: Ј. Cvijić,
Balkansko poluostrvo i južnoslovenske
zemlje
Preporodi

80,000.00

Mesaroš Zoltan, Propaganda ranog
titoizma

50,000.00

50,000.00
100,000.00

100,000.00
110,000.00

365.

Them, Newspaper Publishing Association from Novi Sad, which publishes 5-6
books annually receives subsidies for publishing activity in Romani language
from the Provincial Secretariat of AP of Vojvodina. For these purposes,
200,000.00 dinars were allocated in 2007, in 2008 the granted funds amounted to
228,000.00 dinars and in 2009 they amounted to 228,000.00 dinars.

366.

The Table below contains the data about the co-financing of publishing activities
in Romani language by the Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP.

Publisher
RRomanine Jakha,
Romani Association
Vršac
Association of
Romani Teachers of
Vojvodina, Deronje

Author/Title
Dragica Tobej Kaldaraš, Tradicionalna poezija Roma
iz Vršca i okoline

Granted Funds
15,000.00

Ranko Rajko Jovanović, Аntologija pesama romskih
pesnika vojvodine

60,000.00

Ranko Rajko Jovanović, Мi danas

50,000.00

Ranko Rajko Jovanović, Romske ptičice

20,000.00

Ranko Rajko Jovanović, Hoću da poletim

35,000.00

186

RRomaninokhero,
Association of
Citizens, Sombor
RRomanino PustikaRomske knjige,
Publishing House,
Subotica
Romani Youth, Stari
Banovci

367.

Piroška Kovač, Romske bajke

40,000.00

Alija Krasnići, Romske bajke

100,000.00

Group of authors, Znameniti Romi

20,000.00

On tender basis for co-financing of the projects/programmes the quality of which
contributes to the development and the presentation of art and culture of national
minorities the Ministry of Culture supported the publishing activities in Romani
language.

Beneficiary
Romani emancipacija, Centre for
Education , Research and Social Care
for Roma, Belgrade
Bare jaga, Association of Culture and
Education of Roma, Mačvanska
Mitrovica
Bahtale RRomani, Association of
Roma, Sombor
RRomanine Pustika – Ромске књиге,
Publiching Company, Subotica
Multimedia Centre of Roma of Serbia,
trstenik

Project
Romani abecedari – Romski bukvar

Granted Funds
150,000.00

Velike vatre

50,000.00

Ciganska majka, collection of poems

80,000.00

Ciganin na konju a konja nema

50,000.00

Basne I bojanka (in Serbian and
Romani languages)

60,000.00

368.

In 2008 the Ministry of Human and Minority Rights allocated 80,000.00 dinars
for the publishing of the book Bajke i bojanke, in Romani and Serbian languages.

369.

The Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina subsidizes the
publishing activity in Romanian language by Libertatea, Newspaper Publishing
Association from Pančevo, which was founded by the National Council of the
Romanian National Minority. This association publishes from 10-13 book a year.
In 2007 this association was subsidized with 600,000.00 dinars and in 2008 the
subsidy was in the amount of 1,600,000.00 dinars and in 2009 it amounted to
1,500,000.00 dinars.

370.

On tender basis for co-financing of publishing of books in Romanian language,
the Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina granted the funds for the
issuance of the following publications:

Publisher
Association of
Romanian Language
of Vojvodina, Vršac

Author/Title
Marioara Baba, Аntologija poezije Marije Vojnović

Granted Funds
20,000.00

Petru Krdu, Saučesništvo

70,000.00

Ileana Ursu Nenedić, Riblji jezik

60,000.00

187

Libertatea,
Newspaper
Publishing
Association,
Pančevo

Tibiskus, Uzdin

Marioara Stojanović, Veronika

60,000.00

Kosta Rošu, Bibliografija nedeljnika Libertatea

60,000.00

Florin Caran, Demokratija u saksiji

62,500.00

Aurel Miok, Тečno polje
Pavel Gatajancu, Paralelna čitanja

50,000.00
30,000.00

George Lifa, Doprinosi za monografiju folklore:doine I
pesme

30,000.00

Pavel Gatajancu, Izabrane pesme

20,000.00

Ioan Čipu, Viñeniji ljudi iz srpskog dela Banata

20,000.00

Vasile Barbu, Stare reči banatskog govora Uzdina

17,500.00

371.

The Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina supported the
publishing activities in Romanian language (first editions of books, magazines,
assistance to publishing activities of publishing houses). In 2007 it granted funds
in the total amount of 1,842,000.00 dinars, in 2008 it granted 2,220,000.00 dinars
and in 2009 it granted 2,073,500.00 dinars.

372.

On tender basis for co-financing of the projects/programmes the quality of which
contributes to the development and the presentation of art and culture of national
minorities the Ministry of Culture supported the publishing activity in Romanian
language.

Beneficiary
Andrej Šaguna, Literature-Artistic
Association of Romanians, Pančevo

Project
Lepši deo naših sela
Upoznajmo prošlost da bi bolje
sagledali budućnost

Granted Funds
50,000.00
30,000.00

373.

Ruske slovo, Newspaper Publishing Association from Novi Sad, which is founded
by the National Council of the Ruthenian National Minority, is the largest
publisher of books in Ruthenian language. It published 21 books in the previous
three years. In 2007, the Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina
subsidized this publishing association with 600,000.00 dinars, in 2008 with
1,600,000.00 dinars and in 2009 with 1,500,000.00 dinars.

374.

On tender basis for co-financing of publishing of books in Ruthenian language,
the Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina granted the funds for the
issuance of the following publications:

Publisher
The Prometej,
Publishing House,
Novi Sad

Author/Title
Mihajlo Fejsa, Pravopisni rečnik rusinskog jezika

Granted Funds
30,000,00

188

The Ruske slovo,
Newspaper
Publishing
Association, Novi
Sad

The Faculty of
Philosophy –
Department of
Ruthenian Studies,
Novi Sad
The Đura Kiš,
Kultural-Educational
Association, Šid

Havrijal Nañ, Sabrane pesme Havrijala Naña

70,000,00

Stevan Konstantinović, Rusinska proza od Hnačuka do
1941

80,000.00

Mihal Ramač, Povist o Danilovi i Ferkovi i Gabrovi

50,000.00

Vladimir Kočiš, Boršč za Ševčenka
Julijan Tamaš, Еvangelista Mihajlo Kovač

50,000.00
50,000.00

Havrijil Kosteljnik, Proza
Aleksandar D. Duličenko, Jugoslavo-rutenika 2

50,000.00
100,000.00

Mihajlo Fejsa, Funkcionisanje oblika V u prenošenju…

30,000.00

Leona Hajduk, Rusini u Šidu u prvoj polovini
dvadesetog veka

25,000.00

375.

The Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina supported the
publishing activities in Ruthenian language (first editions of books, magazines,
assistance to publishing activities of publishing houses). In 2007 it granted funds
in the total amount of 1,089,000.00 dinars, in 2008 it granted 2,170,000.00 dinars
and in 2009 it granted 1,959,000.00 dinars.

376.

On tender basis for co-financing of the projects/programmes the quality of which
contributes to the development and the presentation of art and culture of national
minorities the Ministry of Culture supported the publishing activity in Ruthenian
language.

Beneficiary
DOK Kucura, Cultural-Educational
Association, Kucura

Project
Русини/Руснаци/Ruthenians
(1745-2005) 2nd and 3rd book
Pravopisni rečnik rusinskog jezika

Granted Funds
100,000.00

30,000.00

377.

Within the previous three years, the Slovak Publishing Centre from Bački
Petrovac published 40 books in Slovak language. For this publishing activity the
subsidies by the Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina amounted to
600,000.00 dinars in 2007, in 2008 they amounted to 5,000,000.00 dinars and in
2009 they amounted to 2,000,000.00 dinars.

378.

Hlas L’udu, Newspaper Publishing Association from Novi Sad which is founded
by the National Council of the Slovak National Minority, within the same period
issued 9 books, 3 books under the financial support by the Provincial Secretariat
of Culture and 6 were funded from the fund of the Republic of Slovakia.

189

379.

On tender basis for co-financing of publishing of books in Slovak language, the
Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina granted the funds for the
issuance of the following publications:

Publisher
The Kultura,
Printing Company,
Bački Petrovac

Slovak Publishing
Centre, Bački
Petrovac

Slovak Evangelistic
Church, bingula
Cultural Centre,
Zrenjanin
The Hlas Ljudu,
Newspaper
Publishing
Association, Novi
Sad
Širka Projects Ltd.,
Padina
The Hleba i igara,
Art Centre, Stara
Pazova

Author/Title
Andrej Kopčok, Filozofsko-sociološke studije

Granted Funds
60,000,00

Adam Svetlik, Poezia vojvodinskih slovakov v druhej
polovici 20. Storočia
Marija Kotvašova Jonašova, Маmа, ајde da se igramo

90,000,00
50,000.00

Jan Marko, Rečnik slovačkih univerzitetskih pedagifga

32,500.00

Ana Kukučkova, Chostik a kamarati

20,000.00

Adam Svetlik, Аntologija slovačke vojvoñanske
postmoderne proze

40,000.00

Mihal Harpanj, Predslovy a doslovy

30,000.00

Stanislav Stupavski, Slovaci u Binguli

40,000.00

Marija Harmat, Pogled sa mirisom vanile
Marija Kotvaš Janoš, Striptiz

70,000.00
40,000.00

Vićezoslav Hronjec, Аntologija poezije časopisa Vzlet

50,000.00

Martin Slivka, Život u pustinji

40,000.00

Ružena Kraćica, Zbirka poezije

15,000.00

Vićezoslav Hronjec, Pesma - Granica I

40,000.00

380.

The Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina supported the
publishing activities in Slovak language (first editions of books, magazines,
assistance to publishing activities of publishing houses). In 2007 it granted funds
in the total amount of 3,602,000.00 dinars, in 2008 it granted 5,615,000.00 dinars
and in 2009 it granted 2,435,500.00 dinars.

381.

On tender basis for co-financing of the projects/programmes the quality of which
contributes to the development and the presentation of art and culture of national
minorities the Ministry of Culture supported the publishing activity in Slovak
language.

Beneficiary
The Selenča , Association for
Preservation of Culture, Tradition and
Art, Selenča

Project
Selenča 1758-2008, monography

Granted Funds
200,000.00

190

382.

Ridne slovo, Newspaper Publishing Association from Novi Sad, which is founded
by the National Council of the Ukrainian National Minority publishes books in
Ukrainian language.

383.

On tender basis for co-financing of publishing of books in Ukrainian language,
the Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina granted the funds for the
issuance of the following publications:

Publisher
The Ridne slovo,
Newspaper
Publishing
Association, Кula
The Prosvita,
Association of
Ukrainian Language,
Literature and
Culture, Novi Sad
Ivan Terljuk

Author/Title
Zbirka poetskih i proznih dela Eugena Kuleba

Granted Funds
35,000.00

Oleg Rumjancev, Istorija Ukrajinaca na prostorima
bivše Jugoslavije

65,000.00

Kaća Dejanović, Do zabavi
Paša u blatu

70,000.00
40,000.00

384.

The Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina supported the
publishing activities in Ukrainian language (first editions of books, magazines,
assistance to publishing activities of publishing houses). In 2007 it granted funds
in the total amount of 65,500.00 dinars, in 2008 it granted 90,000.00 dinars and in
2009 it granted 130,000.00 dinars.

385.

In the previous three years, Hrvatska riječ, Newspaper Publishing Association
from Subotica published 18 books in Croatian language. The Provincial
Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina subsidized the publishing of the books
in Croatian language of this publisher with 300,000.00 dinars. In 2008 the subsidy
amounted to 300,000.00 dinars and in 2009 to 750,000.00 dinars.

386.

On tender basis for co-financing of publishing of books in Croatian language, the
Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina granted the funds for the
issuance of the following publications:

Publisher
The Stanislav
Preprek, Croatian
Cultural-Artistic
Association, Novi
Sad
The Matica
Hrvatska, Subotica

Author/Title
Jelisaveta Buljovčić, Draga sićanja

Granted Funds
15,000.00

Zvonimir Vuković, Petrovaradin juče, danas i sutra

30,000.00

Group of authors, Matica hrvatska u Subotici

40,000.00

Lazar Merković, Bio-bibliografija književnog časopisa
Klasja naših ravni

40,000.00

Milovan Miković, Аntologija hrvatskog romana u
Vojvodini
Group of authors, Leksikon podunavskih hrvata,

35,000.00
40,000.00

191

The Croatian
Academic Society,
Subotica

The Hrvatska riječ,
Newspaper
Publishing
Association,
Subotica

The Croatian
Library, Subotica

Bunjevaca i šokaca, 7th and 8th books
Group of authors, Leksikon podunavskih hrvata,
Bunjevaca i šokaca, 9th and 10th books

70,000.00

Group of authors, Leksikon podunavskih hrvata,
Bunjevaca I Šokaca
Publishing Programme

40,000.00
40,000.00

Sanja Vulić, Subotički književni hrvatski krug

40,000.00

Balint Vujkov, Izabrane pripovetke

30,000.00

Matija Evetović, Кulturna povjest bunjevačkih i
šokačkih Hrvata

50,000.00

Balint Vujkov, Bunjevačke narodne pripovijetke

45,000.00

Group of Authors, Dani Balinta Vujkova

35,000.00

387.

The Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of Vojvodina supported the
publishing activities in Croatian language (first editions of books, magazines,
assistance to publishing activities of publishing houses). In 2007 it granted funds
in the total amount of 567,000.00 dinars, in 2008 it granted 810,000.00 dinars and
in 2009 it granted 1,129,000.00 dinars.

388.

On tender basis for co-financing of the projects/programmes the quality of which
contributes to the development and the presentation of art and culture of national
minorities the Ministry of Culture supported the Croatian Academic Association
from Subotica with 90,000.00 dinars for the publishing of Leksikon podunavskih
Hrvata – Bunjevaca i Šokaca (7th and 8th book).

389.

In order to promote awareness and tolerance in the Serbian society as a whole in
respect of minority languages and cultures they represent, publishing of books in
several languages is co-financed in the Republic of Serbia. On tender basis for cofinancing of publishing of books in AP of Vojvodina, the Provincial Secretariat of
Culture granted the funds for the co-financing of the issuance of the following
book in several minority languages:

Publisher
The Jedinstvo,
Bajmok
The Bačka
Topola,
Publishing
Company, Bačka
Topola
Association of
Romanian

Author/Title
Ranko Radulović, 50 godina zajedno

Publishing
Language
Serbian, Hungarian

Granted Funds
25,000.00

Group of authors, Bačкоtopolski kipovi
i spomen ploče

Serbian, Hungarian

40,000.00

Aurora Rotariu Planjanin, Seča drva
(Dedin konj)

Serbian, Romanian

20,000.00

192

Language of
Vojvodina, Vršac

Association of
Romani Teachers
of Vojvodina,
Deronje

The Jovan
Popović Public
Library, Kikinda
CulturalEducational
Association,
Kucura
The Public
Library, Novi
Bečej
The Matica
Romska, Novi Sad
Association of
Ruthenians and
Ukrainians, Novi
Sad
The Faculty of
Philosophy, Novi
Sad
Association for
Ruthenian
Language,
Literature and
Culture, Novi Sad
Association for
Ukrainian
Language, Novi
Sad
The Faculty of
Technical
Sciences, Novi
Sad
The Pančevo
Cultural Centre,
Pančevo
The
RRomaninokhero,
Association of
Citizens, Sombor
Bahtale Romani,
Sombor
The Eureka,

Duško Radović, Ženski razgovori

Serbian, Romanian

15,000.00

Ofelija Meza, Кnjiški izazovi
Rajko Ranko Jovanović, Аntologija
pesama romskih pesama Vojvodine I

Romanian, Serbian
Romani, Serbian

15,000.00
60,000.00

Rajko Ranko Jovanović, Мi danas

Romani, Serbian,
Hungarian, Slovak

50,000.00

Rajko Ranko Jovanović, Hoću da
poletim

Serbian, Romani

35,000.00

Group of authors, Zbornik festivala
Kikinda šort 2006
Mihajlo Fejsa, Nova Srbija i njena
rusinska manjina

Serbian,
Hungarian,
Macedonian,
Slovak
Serbian, Ruthenian

95,625.00

15,000.00

Karolj Andre, Iz prošlosti Novog
Bečeja

Serbian, Hungarian

Trifun Dimić, Тradicija romske
književnosti u Vojvodini

Romani, Serbian

Group of authors, Dečije pesme

Ukrainian, Serbian

70.000.00

Mihajlo Fejsa (ed), Zbornik Rusnaci

Serbian, Ruthenian

50,00.00

Rusinsko-srpski rečnik

Ruthenian, Serbian

100,000.00

Melanija Pavlović, Plavi let

Serbian, Ukrainian

20,000.00

Oleg Rumjancev, Istorija Ukrajinaca
na prostorima bivše Jugoslavije

Ukrainian,
Serbian

50,000.00

Magični dečji svet

Zoltan Nañšivo, Nekdašnje Pančevo

Serbian,
Hungarian,
Romani,
Romanian,
Ruthenian, Slovak
Hungarian,
Serbian, Slovak

Piroška Kovač, Romske bajke

Serbian,
Hungarian, Romani

Manjika Nikolić, Put ljubavi

Serbian, Romani

Piroška Kovač, Elizabeta Stojko,

Serbian,

40,000.00

120,000.00

50,000.00

40,000.00

40,000.00

7,500.00
20,000.00

193

Association of
Citizens, Sombor
The Moravički
Intelektualni krug,
Stara Moravica
The Romska
omladina danas –
ROD, Stari
Banovci
The Bunjevačka
Matica, Subotica
Marija Cindori
Šinković, Subotica
Grafoprodukt
Ltd., Trade,
Production and
Services
Company,
Subotica

Istinite priče naših života

Hungarian, Romani

Olga Kovačev Ninkov, Мultietnička
kolonija 9+1-30godina postojanja

Serbian, Hungarian

40,000.00

Znameniti Romi Srema

Serbian, Romani

20,000.00

Ivan Bašić Palković, Dida pripovidaj
mi
Мonografija časopisa Neven sa
bibliografijom
Marija Cindori, Eva Bažant and
Nevenka Bašić Palković, Кalendari za
Bunjevce I Šokce (1851-1914)
bibliografija sa uvodnom studijom

Bunjevac, Serbian

50,000.00

Bunjevac,
Serbian
Serbian, Bunjevac

70,000.00
35,000.00

Serbian, Hungarian

40,000.00

Marija Cindori, Poglavlje vojvoñanske
avangarde – subotički dadaistički
matine 1922

4.5.1.6. Cultural manifestations
390.

Various cultural manifestations held in all communities with the speakers of
minority languages also contribute to preservation, affirmation and availability of
minority languages in the Republic of Serbia. The following paragraphs of this
Report contain the data about the cultural manifestations related to minority
languages encouraged and financially supported by the State.

391.

On tender basis for co-financing of the projects/programmes the quality of which
contributes to the development and the presentation of art and culture of national
minorities, the Ministry of Culture supported the cultural manifestation related to
Albanian language – The 2009 Festival of Albanian Comedy with 70,000.00
dinars, which is organized by the Abdula Krašnica, Cultural Centre from Preševo.

392.

On tender basis for co-financing of the projects/programmes the quality of which
contributes to the development and the presentation of art and culture of national
minorities, the Ministry of Culture supported the cultural manifestations related to
Bosniak language.
Beneficiary

The National Council of the Bosniak
National Minority, Novi Pazar

Project
Festival sandžačke sevdalinke Fess
2007
Smotra bošnjačkih narodnih igara
SBONI

Granted Funds
1,960,000.00

1,500,000.00

Sandžački književni susreti SAKS 2007

950,000.00

Bajramske svečanosti 2008

500,000.00

194

393.

On tender basis for co-financing of the projects/programmes the quality of which
contributes to the development and the presentation of art and culture of national
minorities, the Ministry of Culture supported the cultural manifestations related to
Bulgarian language.

Beneficiary
The Carska Bara Foundation, Belo
Blato
The Detko Petrov Public Library,
Dimitrovgrad
The Balkan Association, Niš

394.

Granted Funds
50,000.00

Susret pod starom lipom, manifestation
Senokos 2009

50,000.00
50,000.00

50,000.00

The Table below contains the data about the funds granted for co-financing of the
manifestations related to Bulgarian language according to the individual
applications submitted to the tenders issued by the Provincial Secretariat of
Culture of AP of Vojvodina.
Beneficiary

Association for Bulgarian Language,
Literature and Culture, Novi Sad

395.

Project
The Bugarijada – Festival of Bulgarian
Culture in the Central Banat
Kroz vrata reči

Purpose
The Bugarijada in Vojvodina

Granted Funds
140,000.00

150th Anniversary of the Dnevnica
Bulgarian newspaper

30,000.00

Sombor u očuvanju bugarske kulture

10,000.00

On tender basis for co-financing of the projects/programmes the quality of which
contributes to the development and the presentation of art and culture of national
minorities, the Ministry of Culture supported the cultural manifestations related to
Hungarian language.

Beneficiary
The Sarvaš Gabor, Association for
Hungarian Language, Ada
The Petefi Šandor, Cultural Club,
Bečej
The Petefi Šandor, Cultural Club,
Dobričevo
The Egyseg, Cultural Club, Kikinda
The Public Library, Mali Iñoš
The Domboš, Association of Citizens,
Mali Iñoš
Association of Hungarian Teachers of
Vojvodina, Novi Sad
The Abbazia, Association of Citizens,
Palić

Project
The Sarvaš Gabor Ada 2007 Linguistic
Manifestation
44th Folklore Festival Gyöngyösbokréta and 31st Festival
Durindó

Granted Funds
100,000.00

Festival of Hungarian Cultural-Artistic
Associations of the South Banat
45th Folklore Festival Gyöngyösbokréta and 32st Festival
Durindó
Days of Hungarian Culture in Mali Iñoš
Domboš fest 2008

30,000.00

Mother Tongue Fostering Summer
Camp
2nd Carpathian Festival of Hungarian
Choirs

200,000.00

200,000.00
10,000.00
140,000.00
100,000.00
30,000.00

195

Cultural Association of Hungarians of
Vojvodina, Subotica
The Nepker, Hungarian Cultural
Centre, Subotica

396.

14th, 15th and 16th Days of Culture of
Hungarians of Vojvodina
The Nepker – 135th Anniversary

190,000.00

Interetno Festival 2009

300,000.00

50,000.00

Within the tenders issued by the Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of
Vojvodina the below stated manifestations related to Hungarian language were
supported.

Beneficiary
The Sarvaš Gabor, Association for
Hungarian Language, Ada
The Kodalj Zoltan, Hungarian Cultural
Centre, Bačka Topola
The Puls, Association of Citizens,
Bezdan
The Carska Bara Foundation, Belo
Blato
The Petefi Šandor, Hungarian
Cultural-Artistic Association, Bečej
The Petefi Šandor, Cultural-Artistic
Association, Budisava
The Petefi, Cultural-Artistic
Association, Zrenjanin
The Lavanda , Folklore Manufacture,
Kanjiža
The Petefi Šandor, Cultural-Artistic
Association, Mali Iñoš
Association of Hungarian Teachers of
Vojvodina, Novi Sad
Association of Hungarian Civil
Organizations of the South-Bačka and
Srem, Novi Sad

Association of Hungarian
Organization of the South-Bačka and
Srem, Novi Sad
The Petefi Šandor, Hungarian
Cultural-Artistic Association, Novi
Sad

The Theatre of Novi Sad, Novi Sad
The Feher Ferenc , Hungarian
Cultural-Artistic Association,
Rumenka
The Turzo Lajoš, Cultural-Educational
Centre, Senta
The Zetna, Association of Citizens

Purpose
The Sarvaš Gabor Linguistic
Manifestation
5th and 6th Festival of National
Minorities
Festival of Hungarian Poetry
Festival of Hungarian Artists in Belo
Blato
Durindó and 44th Gyöngyösbokréta

Granted Funds
110,000.00
75,000.00
30,000.00

30,000.00
250,000.00

The Barangolo, 3rd and 4th Festival of
Diaspora Reciters
The B. Sabo Đerña Manifestation

60,000.00

7th and 8th Manifestation of Tradition in
Kanjiža
Durindó and 46th Gyöngyösbokréta

60,000.00

11th and 12th Festival of Children’s
Folklore Groups
4th Festival of Cultural Clubs from
Srem

90,000.00

150,000.00

85,000.00
45,000.00

3th Festival of Cultural Clubs from the
South Bačka

85,000.00

Hungarian Cultural Festivals in Srem
Hungarian Cultural Festivals in the
South Bačka

90,000.00
40,000.00

5th Regional Festival of Hungarian
Cultural Clubs of the South Bačka and
Srem

95,000.00

Reč čuva jezik, manifestation
8th and 9th Competition of Hungarian
Drama Writers of Vojvodina
Festival of Hungarian Culture
The Kalamanj Lajoš 13th, 14th and 15th
Ethno-novel Competition
The Živa antologija autora Zetna

35,000.00
155,000.00
81,000.00

95,000.00
90,000.00

196

The Senteleki, Hungarian CulturalSinging Association, Sivac
Cultural Association of Hungarians of
Vojvodina, Subotica

Razgovori pod vulkanom
The Senteleki’s Days

90,000.00
205,000.00

14th and 15th Cultural Festival of
Hungarians of Vojvodina

200,000.00

The Town Library, Subotica

Festival of Hungarian Culture
The Kostlanji Deže’s Days

220,000.00
145,000.00

Christian Youth of Vojvodina,
Subotica
Hungarian Youth of Vojvodina,
Subotica
The Petefi Šandor, Cultural-Artistic
Association, Torda
The Torontaltorda, Town
Development Foundation, Torda
Association of Hungarian Recitors of
Vojvodina, Feketić
The Adi Endre, Cultural-Singing
Association, Šušara

397.

Festival of Hungarian Cinematography
Festival of Hungarian Christian Culture

30,000.00
30,000.00

Festival of Hungarian Film

550,000.00

6th Festival of Torda Culture

30,000.00

8th Festival of Torda Culture

25,000.00

Semi-finals of International
Competition of Recitors
20th Festival of Cultural Clubs of the
South Banat

35,000.00
50,000.00

On tender basis for co-financing of the projects/programmes the quality of which
contributes to the development and the presentation of art and culture of national
minorities, the Ministry of Culture supported the cultural manifestations related to
Romani language.

Beneficiary
The Sećanje, pomirenje i budućnost,
the Roma Holocaust Foundation,
Belgrade
Association of Citizens of Veliko
Gradište, Veliko Gradište
Association of Roma Teachers of
Vojvodina, Deronje
The Pharlipe-Novi Sad, Association of
Citizens, Novi Sad
The Polis Fest, Associationof
Citizens, Subotica
Association of Roma Democratization
and Education, Trstenik
The Daydream, Association of
Citizens, Užice

Project
Romani Literature
Roma Festival of the Danube Countries
Festival of Romani Recitors

Granted Funds
80,000.00
300,000.00
50,000.00

The Trifun Dimić’s Poetry Days

100,000.00

ROMART, International festival of
Romani Culture
The Dr Sava Stanojević’s Days

100,000.00

Festival of Romani Literature
Production

355,000.00
50,000.00

398.

In 2009 the Ministry of Human and Minority Rights allocated 50,000.00 dinars to
the Association of Roma of the Pčinjsko-Jablanički District to organize the Eighth
Festival of Cultural Achievements of Roma.

399.

The Table below contains the data about the funds granted for co-financing of the
cultural manifestations related to Romani language according to the individual
197

applications submitted to the tenders issued by the Provincial Secretariat of
Culture of AP of Vojvodina.
Beneficiary
The Romani Cultural Centre, Beočin
The Beočin, Association of Roma,
Beočin
The Ciganske oči, Association of
Roma, Vršac
The RRomanine jakha, Association of
Roma, Vršac
Association of Roma Teachers,
Deronje
The Amaro Kham, Association of
Citizens, Kikinda
The Romani Network of Novi Sad,
Novi Sad
The Danica, Association of Roma,
Pančevo
Forum of Romani NGOs, Sombor
The Rom, Cultural-Artistic
Association, Srbobran
Centre of Romani Culture, Subotica
Romska Omladina Danas, Stari
Banovci

400.

Cultural Manifestation of the Roma of
Vršac
Cultural Manifestation of the Roma of
Vršac
Festival of Romani Recitors of
Vojvodina
Romani Festival

Granted Funds
20,000.00
20,000.00
15,000.00
17,500.00
120,000.00
40,000.00

Cultural Manifestation of the Roma of
Vojvodina
Romani Literature Evening

80,000.00

Modern Culture of the Roma of the
Municipality of Sombor
The Ciganske vatre

20,000.00

The First Poetry Festival of the Roma
of Vojvodina
Preservation of Culture

15,000.00

15,000.00

55,000.00

25,000.00

On tender basis for co-financing of the projects/programmes the quality of which
contributes to the development and the presentation of art and culture of national
minorities, the Ministry of Culture supported the cultural manifestations related to
Romanian language.

Beneficiary
The Tibiskus, Literature-Artistic
Association, Uzdin

401.

Purpose
Preservation of Culture and Tradition
The Roma Day

Project
The Putevi Klasja, International Poetry
Festival

Granted Funds
75,000.00

The Znameniti Banaćani, International
Symposium

15,000.00

Within the tenders issued by the Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of
Vojvodina the below stated manifestations related to Romanian language were
supported.

Beneficiary
Association for Romanian Language
of Vojvodina, Novi Sad

The Vikentije Petrović Bokaluc,

Purpose
The Radu Flora Memorial

Granted Funds
75,000.00

The Jon Nice Sekošan, 1st and 2nd
International Festival of Production in
Romanian Banat Dialect

45,000.00

1st and 2nd International Festival of

40,000.00

198

Cultural Club, Torak

Romanian Epigram Writers
8th and 9th International Humour and
Satire Festival
The T. Krecu Toša P. Dimčea Festival
of Literature in the Banat Dialect

The Tibiskus, Cultural-Artistic
Association, Uzdin

The Doina, Cultural Club, Uzdin
Festival of Romanian Music and
Folklore of Vojvodina, Uzdin

402.

30,000.00

The Putevi Klasja, International Poetry
Festival

95,000.00

The Trebali su ime poneti, Literature
Seminar

30,000.00

Meeting of Writers in the Banat Dialect
Cultural Week
Festival of Romanian Music and
Folklore of Vojvodina

20,000.00
95,000.00
650,000.00

On tender basis for co-financing of the projects/programmes the quality of which
contributes to the development and the presentation of art and culture of national
minorities, the Ministry of Culture supported the cultural manifestations related to
Ruthenian language.
Beneficiary

Culture Club, Ruski Krstur

Project
The Crvena Ruža, 46th and 47th Festival
of Ruthenian Culture
The Kosteljnikova jesen, 14th and 15th
and 16th Cultural Manifestation

403.

75,000.00

Granted Funds
480,000.00

210,000.00

The Table below contains the data about the funds granted for co-financing of the
cultural manifestations related to Ruthenian language according to the individual
applications submitted to the tenders issued by the Provincial Secretariat of
Culture of AP of Vojvodina.

Beneficiary
The Žetva, Cultural-Artistic
Association, Kucura
The Kucura, Cultural-Artistic
Association, Kucura
The Ruthenian Cultural-Educational
Association, Novi Sad

The Ruski Krstur, Culture Club, Ruski
Krstur

The Pact Ruthenorum, Association of
Citizens, Ruski Krstur
Association of Ruthenians in Subotica

Purpose
The Kucurska Žetva, Festival of
Original Ruthenian Production
The Kucurski klip, International
Festival of Humour and Satire
The Veselinka, 6th Festival of
Children’s Production
The Kosteljnikova jesen, 14th and 15th
and 16th Cultural Manifestation
The Crvena Ruža, 46th and 47th Festival
of Ruthenian Culture
The Dnjovka, Multimedia Festival of
Young People
The Proleće Dr Mafteja Vinaja,
Cultural Manifestation

Granted Funds
180,000.00
20,000.00
200,000.00
350,000.00

650,000.00

60,000.00
20,000.00

199

404.

On tender basis for co-financing of the projects/programmes the quality of which
contributes to the development and the presentation of art and culture of national
minorities, the Ministry of Culture supported the cultural manifestations related to
Slovak language.

Beneficiary
The Matica Slovačka, Bački Petrovac
The Kisač, Cultural-InformationEducational Centre, Kisač
The Zvolen, Cultural-Artistic
Association, Kulpin
The Pivnice, Slovak Cultural-Artistic
Association

405.

Project
Slovak Traditional Festivities 2007
The Zlatna brana, 14th Festival of
Children’s Folklore
Festival of New Slovak Lyric Poems –
Kulpin 2009
The Susret u pivničkom polju, 42nd and
43rd of Solo Singers of Slovak Original
Songs

Granted Funds
70,000.00
50,000.00
50,000.00
230,000.00

Within the tenders issued by the Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of
Vojvodina the below stated manifestations related to Slovak language were
supported.

Beneficiary
The Matica Slovačka, Bački Petrovac
The Kisač, Cultural-InformationEducational Centre, Kisač
The Zvolen, Cultural-Artistic
Association, Kulpin
The Mihail Babinka, Cultural Club,
Padina
The Heroj Janko Čemelik, Slovak
Cultural-Artistic Association, Stara
Pazova

Purpose
Slovak Traditional Festivities
The Zlatna brana, 14th, 15th and 16th
Festival of Children’s Folklore
Festival of New Slovak Lyric Poems
Cultural Festival in Padina
The Tancuj, tancuj, Folklore Festival

Granted Funds
390,000.00
300,000.00
900,000.00
70,000.00
220,000.00

406.

On tender basis for co-financing of the projects/programmes the quality of which
contributes to the development and the presentation of art and culture of national
minorities, the Ministry of Culture supported the National Council of the
Ukrainian National Minority, Novi Sad to organize the Kalina Festival of
Ukrainian Culture with 400,000.00 dinars.

407.

The Table below contains the data about the funds granted for co-financing of the
cultural manifestations related to Ukrainian language according to the individual
applications submitted to the tenders issued by the Provincial Secretariat of
Culture of AP of Vojvodina.

Beneficiary
The Kalina, Cultural-Artistic
Association, Inñija
The Ivan Senjuk, Cultural-Artistic
Association, Kula
The National Council of the Ukrainian
National Minority, Novi Sad

Purpose
The Taras Ševčenko Days

Granted Funds
20,000.00

The Taras Ševčenko Days

40,000.00

The Kalina, 4th Festival of Ukrainian
Culture

60,000.00

200

The Prosvita, Association for
Ukrainian Language, Literature and
Culture, Novi Sad
The Kozbar, Ukrainian CulturalArtistic Association, Novi Sad
The Kolomejka, Ukrainian Culture
Fostering Association, Sremska
Mitrovica

408.

An Evening Devoted to the Music and
Works of Ukrainian Poet Lesja
Ukrajinka
Festival of Ukrainian Culture

20,000.00
20,000.00

Project
Month of Culture
The Dužijanca, traditional harvesting
festivity, Sombor 2007 and 2009
The Dužijanca 2007, traditional
harvesting festivity, Subotica
Days of Balint Vujkov
Meetings with writers from Croatia

Granted Funds
40,000.00
100,000.00
150,000.00
130,000.00
95,000.00

Within the tenders issued by the Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of
Vojvodina the below stated manifestations related to Croatian language were
supported.

Beneficiary
The Silvije Strahimir Kranjčević,
Croatian Cultural Singing Club, Bački
Breg
The Duukat, Croatian Cultural-Artistic
Association, Vajska-Boñani
The Matija Gubec, Hungarian Cultural
Singing Club, Ruma
The Vladimir Nazor, Croatian
Cultural-Artistic Association, Sombor
The Šokadija, Croatian Cultural
Singing Club, Sonta
The Bunjevačko kolo, Croatian
Cultural Club, Subotica
The Matica hrvatska, Subotica
The Hrvatska čitaonica, Subotica

Purpose
Šokačko prelo

Granted Funds
30,000.00

Mikini dani
Šokačko prelo
In vajska
Manifestation of the Matija Gubec
Clubs
The Dužijanca, traditional harvesting
festivity
Šokačko veče in Sonta
вече у Сонти
The Dužijanca 2007

80,000.00
30,000.00

Days of the Matica hrvatska in Bačka
6th and 7th Festival of Balint Vujkov

30,000.00
126,000.00

7th Provincial Festival of Reciters in
Croatian Language

410.

10,000.00

On tender basis for co-financing of the projects/programmes the quality of which
contributes to the development and the presentation of art and culture of national
minorities, the Ministry of Culture supported the cultural manifestations related to
Croatian language.

Beneficiary
The Ljutovo, Croatian Cultural Artistic
Association, Ljutovo
The Vladimir Nazor, Croatian
Cultural-Artistic Association, Sombor
The Bunjevačko kolo, Croatian
Cultural Club, Subotica
The Hrvatska čitaonica, Subotica
The Town Library, Subotica

409.

The Taras Ševčenko Days

25,000.00
30,000.00
70,000.00
46,000.00

20,000.00

Within the tenders issued by the Ministry of Culture, the projects affirming and
promoting multilingual character and multiculturalism were financially supported.
The Table below contains the examples of such co-financing.
201

Beneficiary
The Mass Entertainment Group,
Association of Citizens, Novi Pazar
The Dunavski talasi, Associations of
the Danube Radio Stations,
Smederevo
The Milan Ajvaz, Cultural-Artistic
Club, Srpski Krstur

411.

Project
The Stari Grad Culture Week 2008 and
2009
Festival of the Danube Folklore

Granted Funds
700,000.00
650,000.00

7th festival of Folklore of National
Minorities

150,000.00

Within the tenders issued by the Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of
Vojvodina, the below stated programmes or projects affirming and promoting
multilingual character of Vojvodina were financially supported.

Beneficiary
The Jedinstvo, Cultural Singing Club,
Bajmok
The Dositej Obradović Škola Plus,
Bela Crkva
Association of Gusle-Players of
Vojvodina, Vrbas
The Vinogradi, Cultural Club –
Cultural-Artistic Asscociaition,
Gudurica
The Veljko Vlahović, Development
Association, Zrenjanin
The Club of Romanians of Kovin,
Kovin

Centre of Folk Art and General
Education of Hungarians in
Vojvodina, Novi Sad
The Muzička Omladina Vojvodine,
Novi Sad
The Matija Gubec, Hungarian Cultural
Singing Club, Tavankut

Purpose
45th and 46th International Folklore,
Bajmok
Ethnic Tolerance as Permanent Attitude

Granted Funds
110,000.00

16th Festival of Epic Poetry and Gusle
The Zlatna jesen, Ethno festival

40,000.00
50,000.00
100,000.00

The Banatska priča, 2nd Ethno Festival

40,000.00

Festival of Traditional Customs with
Serbs, Roma, Hungarians, Romanians,
Czechs and Vlachs
The Upoznajmo jedni druge – series of
interactive lectures on cultural heritage
of ntions living in Novi Sad

70,000.00

International Folklore Festival of Novi
Sad
The Muzička priča za decu
The Deca su ukras sveta, 12th Festival
of Folklore for Children

220,000.00

325,000.00
50,000.00

40,000.00

4.5.2. Encouragement of access to works produced in minority languages
412.

For sustainability and status of minority languages, it is of extreme importance
that the works produced in minority languages become known to large public. In
order to accomplish this objective, the projects providing translations of the works
produced in minority languages are financially supported in the Republic of
Serbia, thus making them accessible to the speakers of not only majority
languages but to the speakers of other minority languages as well. On tender
basis, for the translations of books written in minority languages to Serbian
language or some other minority language, the Provincial Secretariat of Culture of
AP of Vojvodina supported the projects mentioned in the Tables below:
202

•

Language of the original - Hungarian

Publisher
The Žarko
Zrenjanin Public
Town Library,
Zrenjanin
The Agora,
Zrenjanin
The Branislav
Nušić Public
Library, Novi
Kneževac
The Town
Library, Novi Sad
The Prometej,
Publishing
Company, Novi
Sad
The Adresa,
Publishing
Company, Novi
Sad
The Zadužbina
mreža za slobodu
informacije,
Segedin
The Subotičke
novine Ltd.,
Subotica

•

Language
Translation

of

Granted Funds

Ferenc Nemet, Istorija fotografije

Serbian

60,000.00

Ferenc Feher, Izabrane pesme
Tibor Deri, Jednouhi ubica i ja
Šandor Marai, Sibad se rvaća kući
Peter Nadaš, Sopstvena smrt

Serbian
Serbian
Serbian
Serbian

30,000.00
25,000.00
25,000.00
20,000.00

Bogdan Jožef, Szirmok es tovisek

Serbian

40,000.00

Ferenc Deak, Sova i čizme

Serbian

70,000.00

Imre Madač, Čovekova sudbina

Serbian

70,000.00

Alpar Lošonc, Studija o moći

Serbian

75.000,00

Lajoš Faro, Neoznačeni grobovi

Serbian

20,000.00

Ištvan Ivanji, Istorija Subotice kao
slobodnog kraljevskog grada I 1886, II
1892.

Serbian

300,000.00

Language of the original - Romani

Publisher
Ромско
удружење
RRomanine Jakha,
Vršac
Association of
Romani Teachers
of Vojvodina,
Deronje
The RRomanine
pustika, Subotica

•

Author/Title

Author/Title
Tradicionalna poezija Roma iz Vršca i
okoline

Language
Translation
Serbian

of

Granted Funds
15,000.00

Rajko Ranko Jovanović, Romske
ptičice

Serbian

20,000.00

Alija krasnići, Romske bajke

Serbian

100,000.00

Language of the original - Romanian

Publisher
The Vršac

Author/Title
Jon Luka Karañale, Izgubljeno pismo

Language
Translation
Serbian

of

Granted Funds
70,000.00

203

Književna
Opština, Vršac
Kopno Ltd. Novi
Sad
The Evropa Fund,
Novi Sad

•

Konstantin Nojka, Molite se za brata
Aleksandrua
Virgil Georgiu, Dvadeset peti čas

Serbian

75,000.00

Serbian

30,000.00

Katalina Kadinoju, Iz novije rumunske
poezije

Serbian

12,500.00

Language of the original - Ruthenian

Publisher
The Town
Library, Novi Sad

•

Author/Title
Irina Hardi Kovačević, Mesečeve suze

of

Language
Translation
Serbian
Serbian

of

Granted Funds
40,000.00

Language of the original - Slovak

Publisher
The Agora,
Zrenjanin
The Town
Library, Novi Sad
The Hlas Ljudu,
Novi Sad
The Hleba i igara
Art Centre, Stara
Pazova

•

Language
Translation
Serbian

Author/Title
Dušan Dušek, Hladne ruke
Dušan Mitana, Patagonija
Vićazoslav Hronjec, Čisti utorak
Pavlov Dobšinski, Slovačke narodne
priče
Miroslav Demak, Zodijak

Granted Funds
60,000.00
25,000.00

Serbian
Serbian

70,000.00
60,000.00

Serbian,
Hungarian,
Romanian,
Ruthenian

50,000.00

Language of the original - Croatian

Publisher

Author/Title

The Zetna, Senta

Robert Tili, Polumjesec i čekić

Language
Translation
Hungarian

of

Granted Funds
20,000.00

4.5.3. Promotion of access of minority languages to works produced in other
languages
413.

•

In order to promote the use of minority languages and enable the speakers of the
languages concerned to have access to cultural heritage of the majority
population, translations of the works written in Serbian into other languages are
also provided in the Republic of Serbia. The Provincial Secretariat of Culture of
AP of Vojvodina also issues annual tenders for the translations of books written in
Serbian language into minority languages. The Tables below contains examples
of such support.
Translation into Bulgarian language

Publisher
Association for Bulgarian

Author/Title
Milorad Gerov, Šareni torbičak

Granted Funds
25.000,00

204

Language, Literature and Culture,
Novi Sad

•

Translation into Hungarian language

Publisher
The Zetna, Senta

•

Author/Title
Manjika Nikolić, Zbirka pesama
Dušan Radović, Poštovana deco

Granted Funds
30,000.00
36,000.00

Translation into Romanian language

Publisher
The Libertatea, Pančevo

•

Granted Funds
35,000.00

Translation into Romani language

Publisher
The Bahtale RRomani, Sombor
The Sunce Kham, Vršac

•

Author/Title
Horvat Oto, Јеdan plus jedan

Author/Title
Matija Bečković, Vera Pavlodoljska

Granted Funds
25,000.00

Translation into Ruthenian language

Publisher
The Dnevnik novine i časopisi,
Novi Sad

Author/Title
Svetozar Petrović, Ogledi o teoriji
književnosti

Granted Funds
70,000.00

4.5.4. Encouragement of direct participation of the users of minority languages in
provision of the conditions and planning of cultural activities
414.

The Republic of Serbia encourages direct participation of the users of minority
languages in provision of conditions and planning of cultural activities. The newly
adopted Law on the National Councils of the National Minorities, in Articles 1618, governs the competences of the national councils of national minorities in the
field of culture. The national councils establish cultural institutions to maintain
cultural specific properties and national identity of the national minority
concerned and exercise the rights and obligations of the founders. The Republic,
the Autonomous Province and the unit of local self-government may, either
entirely or partially, transfer the founding rights to the national council. The
national councils have the power to appoint one member of the board of directors
of the institution concerned, give opinions on the proposed members of the board
of directors and give opinion in the procedure of appointment of the director of
the institution concerned to be established by the national council as an institution
of particular importance for preservation of identity of the national minority. The
national councils establish the strategy of cultural development of the national
minority, prescribe what institutions and manifestations in the field of culture are
of particular importance for preservation, promotion and development of
specificies and national identity of a certain national minority, propose at least
one candidate for the common list of candidates for the election of the National
Council of Culture and have other competences in the field of culture.
205

415.

In practice, through the issuance of annual tenders for co-financing of projects,
the Ministry of Culture and the Provincial Secretariat of Culture of AP of
Vojvodina ensure direct participation of the users of minority languages in
provision of conditions and planning of cultural activities. Also, the national
councils of national minorities are active participants in adoption of the final
decision on co-financing in each tender procedure.

4.5.5. Encouragement and provision of cultural activities in the territories different
from those where minority languages are not traditionally used
416.

Through the issuance of annual tenders, the Ministry of Culture co-finances the
projects ensuring the exchange of cultural activities in the territories different
from those where minority languages are not traditionally used. This is mainly
about visits of cultural-artistic associations and theatre groups performing in
minority languages. The examples of such encouragement are mentioned in the
previous paragraphs of this Report.

206

4.6.

Article 14
Trans-National Exchanges
Selected paragraphs and sub-paragraphs

The Parties undertake:
a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with
the States in which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if
necessary to seek to conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster
contracts between the users of the same language in the States concerned in the
fields of culture, education, information, vocational training and permanent
education;
b) for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or promote
co-operation across borders, in particular between regional or local authorities
in whose territory the same language is used in identical or similar form.
4.6.1. Application of bilateral and multilateral arrangements
417.

The Republic of Serbia is the Contracting Party to the international multilateral
and bilateral agreements, on the grounds of succession, which encourage the use
and protection of regional or minority languages. These include, inter alia,
bilateral agreements on protection of national minorities, as well as the
agreements on cultural and educational co-operation as stated in the Section 3.1.9.
of this Report. The Republic of Serbia meets the requirements of the above
mentioned agreements in good faith and is willing to conclude new agreements
with other interested countries.

4.6.2. Facilitation and improvement of co-operation between regional and local
authorities
418.

In the Section 5.7.2. of the First Periodic Report on the implementation of the
Charter, it is stated that the Republic of Serbia does not oppose to international
cross border regional and local co-operation and that the co-operation of the
competent authorities of AP of Vojvodina and many other local self-governments
is accomplished without problems and contributes to good neighbouring relations
between the Republic of Serbia and the neighbouring countries.

419.

The Provincial Secretariat for Regulations, Administration and National
Minorities of AP of Vojvodina have established co-operation with the
Government of the Republic of Hungary. This co-operation has been in progress
since 2006 and has been implemented in the form of financial donations to the
project of the Executive Council of the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina under
the title of Affirmation of Multiculturalism and Tolerance in Vojvodina. In 2006
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Hungary granted the donation
207

to the project Affirmation of Multiculturalism and Tolerance in Vojvodina in the
amount of 13,028,692.00 dinars or EUR 150,275.00. The co-operation continued
in the following years. In 2007 the Government of the Republic of Hungary
financially supported the project Affirmation of Multiculturalism and Tolerance in
Vojvodina, namely the project Media Campaign in the amount of 1,561,146.00
dinars or EUR 19,031.00, as well as the sub-project Tolerance Cup with
4,720,660.00 dinars or EUR 57,734.00; in 2008 it provided donations for the subprojects Tolerance Cup and Living Together – A Multimedia Exhibition with
4,863,739.00 dinars or EUR 51,606.00; in 2009 it supported by a donation the
sub-projects Tolerance Cup and the Zajedno documentary TV series with
5,344,341.00 dinars or EUR 56,569.00.
420.

The Provincial Secretariat for Regulations, Administration and National
Minorities of AP of Vojvodina has also accomplished the successful co-operation
with the civil sector of the Republic of Hungary. The Šansa za stabilnost, Public
Foundation supported financially: the project Affirmation of Multiculturalism and
Tolerance in Vojvodina, the sub-project the Role of Territorial Units, National
Councils and Civil Organizations in Accomplishment of Stability in A Place – A
Community, Conference held in Palić, in 2007, with 2,210,677.00 dinars or EUR
27,871.00; the sub-project Ethno Day, with 2,475,073.00 dinars or EUR
31,978.00. In 2008 this Foundation supported the continuation of the sub-project
Ethno Day with EUR 59,890.00.

421.

According to the data obtained from the units of local self-government, almost all
border local self-governments in the Republic of Serbia accomplish co-operation
with towns from the neighbouring countries. The examples of such co-operation
are contained in the following paragraphs.

422.

The municipality of Kikinda has signed the agreements on international cooperation with the following towns: Nagzdobos, Kiskunfélegyháza, Kondoros and
Szolnok from the Republic of Hungary; Silistra from the Republic of Bulgaria;
Žilina from the Republic of Slovakia; Jimbolia and Medgidia from the Republic
of. These agreements are based on the mutual co-operation of towns in the field of
economy, society, culture, sports, education, health care and tourism.

423.

In the municipality of Odžaci, two local communities have established
international co-operation with places in other countries. The local community of
Bogojevo has established co-operation with the local authorities of Оcsen in the
neighbouring country, in the Republic of Hungary, in the fields of: local selfgovernment, culture and sports. The local community of Lalić has had cooperation with the town of Mošovce in the Republic of Slovakia since 1968,
through the Štefanik, Cultural-Artistic Association and the Panonija, Football
Club, and since 2003, when the Charter on Co-operation and Fraternization of the
two local communities was signed, this co-operation has been constantly
expanding. Each year the inhabitants of these local communities visit each other
208

taking turns, and the co-operation has also been established between churches,
women’s associations, voluntary fire fighting brigades, etc.
424.

The municipality of Sečanj has established co-operation with the municipality of
Fenj and the town of Temishvar in Romania and Csongrád in Hungary. With the
Romanian municipalities, the projects have been implemented in the field of
communications, infrastructure, states of emergencies, ecology, as well as
educational projects within the project Ljudi s ljudina, concerning the renewal of
old craftsmen works. Radio Sečanj and radio Banat link from Temishvar,
broadcasting programmes in Serbian language have the national frequency and
signed the co-operation agreement. Under the initiative of the local selfgovernment, under the approval of the Republic of Serbia, the Jaša Tomić – Fanj
border crossing from transferred from the border crossing of local category into
the category of an international border crossing. This will intensify all forms of
co-operation (information, economic, co-operation in the fields of ecology,
culture and education). Talks on the forms of co-operation have been held with
the town of Csongrád in Hungary and it is expected that they will be verified
soon.

425.

The town of Subotica has established co-operation with the towns from the
Republic of Croatia: Osjek – in the field of culture, sports, agriculture and
economy; Križevci - in the field of economy and culture and Zagreb - in the field
of culture. The co-operation has also been established with the towns from the
Republic of Hungary: Szeged, Mórahalom, Győr, Érd, as well as with the local
self-governments from Kiskunhalas and Bácsalmás.

426.

The signing of the Protocol on Co-operation between the municipality of Šid and
the Vukovarsko-Srijemske county in the Republic of Županija is for the purpose
of implementation of co-operation in social, economic, cultural and other fields
where there are possibilities and mutual interests of the signatories to this
Protocol.

427.

The following municipalities have also established co-operation: Dimitrovgrad
with the local authorities in the neighbouring country of Bulgaria, which is
implemented at the cultural, educational, economic levels; Kanjiža with the local
authorities in the Republic of Hungary in the field of culture, sports, education, as
well as through mutual implementation of the projects in the fields concerned;
Plandište with the cross border municipalities in the field of project co-operation.

209

5. SUPPLEMENTS
5.1. Supplement of the National Council of the Bosniak National Minority
I. INTRODUCTORY NOTES
Bosniaks are a national community living in the Central Serbia, especially in the region
of Sandžak. There is also a considerable number of Bosniaks living in Vojvodina,
Belgrade and in the majority of municipalities in Serbia. According to the 2002 census,
there are 136,087 of Bosniaks in Serbia, and the majority of this number lives in the
municipalities of Novi Pazar, Sjenica, Tutin, Prijepolje, Priboj and Nova Varoš.
The Sandžak Bosniaks are of South Slavic origin and a part of the Bosniak national
corpus, Bosnia and Herzegovina being their native country, whereas their national
identity and autochthony in the territory of the Republic of Serbia are indisputable and
taken for granted.
The Bosniak National Council is the highest representative authority and legitimate
representative of the Bosniak national community in the Republic of Serbia.
Accomplishment of the rights of the Bosniak national minority is encouraged and
exercised through the Bosniak National Council, namely through the National Council of
the Bosniak National Minority, which was established in 2003 in Novi Pazar.
Accomplishment of the rights of Bosniak national minority in the Republic of Serbia and
considerable support in this sense, have started with the activities of the National Council
of the Bosniak National Minority, through participation of the international institutions
(OESC, EU, CE) and through political action of the representatives of executive power,
at both local and national levels.
The Bosniak national community has started accomplishing its rights only after the
democratic changes on 5 October 2000. Within this period, the Law on Protection of
Rights and Freedoms of National Minorities, the Charter on Human and Minority Rights
were adopted and the Framework Convention of the Council of Europe on Protection of
the Members of National Minorities and the European Charter for Minority or Regional
Languages were ratified, as the two most important documents in the field of
international law concerning protection of national minorities. Bosniaks, as a national
community, although they were a nation-building and constitutive nation in the former
Yugoslavia, found themselves to be in the position to fight for their national rights
without anybody’s assistance and support and keep space with the level of achievement
of minority rights with other minorities, in Vojvodina in particular.
Since 2002, when the First State report on the Implementation of the Framework
Convention was submitted to the Council of Europe, up to now, essential steps have been
made in the minority policy of the Republic of Serbia.

210

Within several previous years, the State of Serbia and its organizations and institutions
have made considerable efforts to improve and promote the status and the rights of the
Sandžak Bosniaks in the Republic of Serbia.
The Bosniak National Council is of the opinion that more complete and more
comprehensive accomplishment of the minority rights of the Sandžak Bosniaks in the
Republic of Serbia is possible through strengthening of the mechanism of their
application at the central, regional and local levels, as well as through co-ordinated action
of all representatives, organizations and institutions of the Sandžak Bosniaks at the state
level.
II. CURRENT STATUS OF ACCOMPLISHMENT OF THE RIGHTS OF THE
BOSNIAKS
1. Official Use of Bosnian Language and Script
By the ratification of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages at the
Parliament of the State Union on 21 December 2005, Bosnian language was verified as
one of 10 minority languages in Serbia.
Mother tongue of the Sandžak Bosniaks, Bosnian language and script are officially used
in the municipalities of Novi Pazar, Tutin, Sjenica and Prijepolje. In spite of existence of
all legal grounds, the local authorities in Priboj have been refusing for several years
already to make it official and introduce the official use of Bosnian language and script
into the statute of the municipality. In the municipality of Nova Varoš, Bosniaks live in a
considerable percentage so the official use of Bosnian language in this municipality
would be of particular importance.
Court and administrative proceedings before the local courts have not been conducted in
Bosnian language and script yet.
In case of issuance of personal documents (passport, identity cards, driving licences),
orthography and tradition of mother tongue and script of the Bosniaks are not complied
with.
Writing of public names of streets, squares, parts of dwelling areas, local and state
authorities and agencies and of names of toponyms and traffic signs is neither in
accordance with the provisions of the Law on Official Use of Language and Script, nor
with the Law on Rights and Freedoms of National Minorities. In the municipality of
Tutin, this right has been applied to a considerable extent, while in other municipalities,
in spite of the fact that Bosnian language had been introduced into official use, this right
is not exercised and complied with.
More complete and more efficient accomplishment of the right to officially use Bosnian,
as mother tongue and as one of the essential elements of the national identity of the
Sandžak Bosniaks, is possible if it is made official in all the municipalities and towns of
211

the Republic of Serbia where the Sandžak Bosniaks live in considerable percentage,
pursuant to the law.
2. Education in Bosnian Language as Mother Tongue
Concerning the issue of introduction of Bosnian language into the school system and its
treatment, based on the provisions of the Law on Protection of Rights and Freedoms of
National Minorities, Bosniaks have started, under great resistance of the state authorities,
to exercise the right to education in their mother tongue only at the beginning of the
second half of the 2004/2005 school year, with much efforts and under still considerable
resistance of some nationalistic conservative circles, political parties and academic
circles. For the time being, Bosniaks exercise this right with two classes weekly of
Bosnian language with elements of national culture as an optional subject at primary
schools in the municipalities of Novi Pazar, Tutin and Sjenica only and at one school in
Prijepolje.
There is no teaching of Bosnian language at pre-school institutions in the Republic of
Serbia or in the territories where Bosniaks live in a larger number. At pre-school
institutions founded by the State, the language of the majority nation is used (Serbian)
although the percentage of Bosniak children at these institutions in Novi Pazar, Tutin and
Sjenica even reaches 90%.
Concerning secondary education, there is no organized teaching in Bosnian language in
the Republic of Serbia. As for the university education, since November 2006 at the State
University in Novi Pazar the mixed Department of Bosnian and Serbian Language has
been established.
In the territory of the Republic of Serbia, the state authorities arranged no study of history
and culture in Bosnian language.
In order to ensure equal treatment in the field of education, it is necessary that the State,
through its mechanisms, ensures and provide the teaching in Bosnian language to the
members of the Bosniak national minority in primary and secondary education in the
units of local self-government where Bosnian language is officially used, pursuant to the
law, according to the Model of Education for the Sandžak Bosniaks in the Republic of
Serbia, as an official document of the Bosniak National Council.
The State is also obliged to ensure that the textbooks are made for teaching in Bosnian
language, according to the adopted Model.
In order that this right is also exercised in the municipalities of Priboj and Nova Varoš,
the Bosniak National Council requires the competent local and regional authorities in the
Republic of Serbia to introduce Bosnian language into official use as well.
3. Information in Bosnian Language as Mother Tongue
212

In 2008 the Ministry co-financed the weekly informative newspaper in the Bosnian
language – the Sandžačke novine, an independent weekly, but not to the extent as in case
of some other national communities.
In 2009 the Ministry co-financed the weekly Sandžačke novine with almost 30 %.
The State adopted no adequate provisions in order that radio broadcasting companies
offer programmes in Bosnian language. The State Public Radio Broadcasting Agency
(RTS) has no second of programme in Bosnian language.
The Bosniak National Council requires the competent state authorities to stop
discriminating Bosnian language in the public information media.
The State of Serbia is obliged to ensure that the Sandžak Bosniaks have necessary
conditions for information in Bosnian language as their mother tongue, through cofinancing and improving the circumstances in the field of printed media and publishing
industry, more adequate representation in the programmes of the Public Radio
Broadcasting Agency by establishing a special editorial office in Bosnian language with
this Agency, as well as through co-financing of a special production with the Bosniak
National Council, which would broadcast its own programmes in local and regional
media.
In order to secure more adequate information at the regional level, the Bosniak National
Council stresses as necessary the need to redefine the existing radiobroadcasting areas in
Serbia so that the area of six Sandžak municipalities where the Sandžak Bosniaks are
concentrated in the largest percentage will be classified into one radiobroadcasting area,
and not in two as so far. The Republic Radio Broadcasting Agency (RBA) stipulated no
frequency to be granted to the media broadcasting programmes in Bosnian language.
4. Protection of Cultural Heritage
Immovable cultural goods of the Republic of Serbia in the municipalities of Novi Pazar,
Tutin, Sjenica, Nova Varoš, Prijepolje and Priboj are another very important issue. The
State of Serbia and its authorities and institutions have not so far undertaken necessary
measures and activities, nor built adequate mechanisms to ensure more complete
protection of the Bosniak cultural heritage. Consequently, there is an ongoing devastation
of the Bosniak cultural heritage, it is being destroyed and programmes and measures for
its protection by the existing institute for protection of monuments are not properly
applied.
In order to secure its equal treatment, it is necessary that the State of Serbia, its
representatives, institutions and other bodies treat all immovable cultural goods of the
Sandžak Bosniaks as the cultural heritage of the Bosniaks, and to define it, accept it and
treat it as such.

213

In order to protect the Bosniak cultural heritage more properly, it is necessary to adopt
urgently the programme of measures to protect and improve this heritage.
All the governments constituted so far have had a selective approach to the issue of
protection and preservation of the cultural heritage of the Sandžak Bosniaks. The Bosniak
National Council finds that preservation of cultural heritage of the Bosniaks is not only
good for the Bosniak community but for the State as a whole.
There is a trend of appropriation of the cultural heritage of the Bosniaks, especially of
musical tradition, national clothes, kitchen, architecture and other cultural specificies of
the Sandžak Bosniaks by other nations and there are attempts to present these elements of
the Bosniak culture and tradition as a part of the culture and tradition of the other.
In the territory of six municipalities where the Bosniaks live, the Bosniak National
Council established eight buildings or localities witnessing on the history and culture of
the Bosniak national community, which should be protected under the support of the
State as priorities. These are the Isa-beg Turkish Bath, the Amir-aga Tavern and the 15th
Century Tower in Novi Pazar, the Gluhavica archaeological site in Tutin, the ambiance
Spahović’s House in Sjenica, the Musala in Prijepolje, the medieval Bosnian standing
tomb-stones near Priboj and the Mejtaš monument in Nova Varoš.
Within the several previous years, the State of Serbia, through the Ministry of Culture cofinanced the traditional national manifestations of the Sandžak Bosniaks, implemented by
the Bosniak National Council (Festival of the Sandžak Songs – FES, festival of the
Bosniak Folklore Dance – SBONI and the Sandžak Literature Manifestation– SAKS), as
well as several other projects in the field of culture and approved several projects of nongovernmental organizations and associations, as recommended by the Bosniak National
Council.
In 2007 the Ministry of Culture co-financed the Bošnjačka riječ, a magazine in culture
and social life of the Sandžak Bosniaks, as a quarterly magazine.
In 2009 there was no co-financing of the Bošnjačka riječ magazine by the Ministry of
Culture.
In 2009 the Ministry of Culture provided almost no support for any of the projects of the
Bosniak National Council in the field of culture, while the funds very granted to nongovernmental organizations and associations for the projects financed for the national
minorities without asking for the opinion of the Bosniak National Council.
5. Effective Participation in Public Life
The Sandžak Bosniaks participate in the public life of the Republic of Serbia in a still
unsatisfactory way. There is no state strategy for the inclusion of minorities in all
structures and their possible inclusion is more the result of political arrangements and
214

coalitions, depending on the current interest of the elites in power, frequently to the
detriment of national minorities and their interests.
In order to achieve more complete national equality in the field of participation in public
life, the Sandžak Bosniaks must also be provided, in addition to representation in the
National Assembly and in the Government of the Republic of Serbia, with adequate
representation in judiciary, police and other institutions, organizations and institutions at
all power levels, in accordance with the European standards and proportionally to their
participation in population.
The basic form of employment of the Bosniaks is still in the private sector.
Representation of the Bosniaks in the state administration, except for the units of local
self-government, is at a very low level and it does not even approximately correspond to
the national structure of the population. In this respect the status is particularly bad with
the Ministry of Internal Affairs, where the Bosniaks make irrelevant percentage at police
administrations and police stations. University educated Bosniaks, who had gained their
education out of the Republic of Serbia, and who qualified to work with the police, have
no opportunities to get jobs in police service, due to the reasons that cannot be explained
and that are not grounded on law, thus being absolutely discriminated in relation to the
members of other nationalities.
A large number of university educated Bosniaks of all professions is registered with the
Employment Agency and have no clear or certain perspectives and future.
Based on the official information, the percentage of representation of the Bosniaks at the
state institutions in towns where the Bosniaks make the majority is considerably lower in
relation to the percentage of the total share in the population.
In the towns where the Bosniaks make the minority, there is a very low percentage of
representation at the state authorities. The composition in the police, judiciary, education,
health care and other institutions of the republic has not been balanced yet, where the
Bosniaks have no share according to their share they have in the structure of local
communities or at the level of the Republic.
The State institutions, such as the Police, the District Court, the District Public
Prosecution Office, the Municipal Public Prosecution Office, the Municipal
Misdemeanour Authority, the tax Administration in Novi Pazar, the Electricity
Distribution Company, PTT, Telekom, etc. are still inaccessible to a large extent for the
Bosniaks to get employment with them. For example, out of the total number of
employees at the Police in Novi Pazar, there are only 30% of the Bosniaks, although the
members of the Bosniak national community make more than 80 % of the total
population. Likewise, there is an inadequate structure of employees with the judicial
authorities, too, at the Tax Administration, where there are about 50% of the employed
Bosniaks. Also, in Novi Pazar, there is an inadequate structure of employees and there is
no opportunities for the employment of the Bosniaks, in spite of the existence of all
215

required conditions and qualifications (required level of education) and the things are the
same at the state institutions and authorities in Tutin, Sjenica and Prijepolje.
6. Economic Status
The region where the Sandžak Bosniaks were concentrated in the largest number in all
state communities used to be one of most underdeveloped regions. The things are the
same at present, too.
According to the official data, in 2005 in 6 Sandžak municipalities in Serbia, the road
network was built in the percentage of only 10% in relation to the average in Serbia. Novi
Pazar, as the town where the Bosniaks live in the largest number in the Republic of
Serbia has no railway line, although there is an expressive need to have it due to
economic and all other reasons.
All large investments and all capital projects have so far missed Sandžak and among
economic branches there is predominance of low profit industries, such as light textile
industry. Although it has exceptional natural advantages and potentials in respect of
development of agricultural industry, this region is not proportionally developed and the
state investments in it were not adequate and in relation to other regions where the
members of the national minorities live the investments were insignificant.
The investments in utilities, sports, school, health, telecommunication and other buildings
and infrastructure were at rather low level and they do not meet the requirements of the
population, for which reason there is constant uncertainty among the Bosniaks, which
results in ongoing migrations, together with unconsolidated political factor.
In order to overcome the neglect and underdevelopment for many decades, it is necessary
for the State of Serbia to actively encourage and intensify economic development of the
region of Sandžak, through all its available mechanisms and institutions of the system
making significant investments in the Sandžak municipalities, especially in the field of
infrastructure, and in order to achieve more equal regional development and for the
harmonization of our country with the standards of the European Union.
7. Decentralization
The region where the Sandžak Bosniaks are predominantly concentrated has always been
administratively divided into different administrative areas. According to the latest
administrative division of the Republic of Serbia to districts, Novi Pazar and Tutin are
within the Raška District, and Sjenica, Prijepolje, Nova Varoš and Priboj are within the
Zlatibor District.
The branch offices of many state institutions and their organization do not meet the
requirements of the local population and aggravate the accomplishment of their
fundamental human rights to a large extent. For example, the inhabitants of the
municipality of Sjenica must go to the Health Centre in Užice for certain health services,
216

which is the regional health centre, although Novi Pazar is twice nearer and there they
may get health services much easier and without additional expenses for travelling and
accommodation.
The members of the Bosniak national minority are traditionally orientated towards Novi
Pazar, and the population of the entire region has been within the same administrative
area for centuries, which kept the name of Sandžak.
For all these reasons, in order to ensure the maximum efficient and effective
accomplishment of the minority rights of the Sandžak Bosniaks, it is necessary to make
conditions, both according to the Constitution and law, that in the process of
decentralization and regionalization, namely in the process of new territorial organization
of the Republic of Serbia, the towns of Novi Pazar and the municipalities of Tutin,
Sjenica, Nova Varoš, Prijepolje and Priboj be within one region.
5.2. Supplement of the National Council of the Bunjevac National Minority
Nowadays the Bunjevac are the autochthonous population of Vojvodina the origin of
which is still subject to many opposing opinions.
The Bunjevac have migrated and settled in the territory of the present Serbia, namely of
Vojvodina, in the course of the 16th and the 17th centuries. The largest migrations were in
1686 from the regions of Lika, Dalmatinska zagora, Dalmatia and Herzegovina, which
were not constituted as states at that time. After they had come to this territory, they
settled in three towns: Subotica and Sombor and in their surroundings and in the town of
Baja, which today belongs to the Republic of Hungary. These places present the cultural
and historic centres of the Bunjevac.
According to the official statistical data about the history of the 20th century and at the
beginning of the 21st century, the following numbers of the Bunjevac were registered in
these areas:
- 43,832 persons in 1931;
- 21,434 persons (only in Vojvodina) in 1991 and in other parts of Serbia they were
not officially registered;
- 20,012 persons in total in 2002, of whom 19,766 persons in Vojvodina and 246
persons in the Central Serbia.
There are further more Bunjevac in the territory of Vojvodina than the above mentioned
numbers, but the Bunjevac exercised their democratic right and declared themselves to be
either Croatians or Yugoslavs in 1991 as well as in 2002. This relates to the territories of
the towns of Subotica and Sombor.
We claim this on the grounds of the data on numerous families from our surroundings,
where, for example, in Subotica, big families such as Dulić, Stantić, Vuković,
Skenderović, or in Sombor, families Parčetić, Matarić, Bošnjak, Patarčić, declare
217

themselves to be the members of the Bunjevac national community, that is some of them,
and the other declare themselves to be the members of the Croatian national community.
Not going into the details of the political or some other dimension of this fact, in spite of
an enormous progress the Bunjevac have achieved within the last 7 years since the time
the institution of the National Council of the Bunjevac National Minority, there is still the
need to stress bad or unacceptable status of accomplishment of the mentioned four
constitutional and legal rights of the Bunjevac and the relevant problems to make efforts
to analyze an adequate model of resolution of certain problems.
The Statute of Vojvodina clearly establishes that the Bunjevac is an independent national
minority. However, in practice, and in particular in the territory of Subotica and Sombor
it is still said, especially by the Croatian national minority that the Bunjevac are an ethnic
group of the Croatian nation, as well as that the Bunjevac speech with elements of
national culture, which is taught as an optional subject in the first four classes of the
primary school, is a dialect of the Croatian language.
The documents you have received indicate that the process of standardization of the
Bunjevac speech has started. However, this process was started more seriously only in
2009. The implementation of this task was set up in the project including, in addition to
the representatives of the Bunjevac from these two towns, the professors of the Faculty of
Philology from Novi Sad and the Institute of Balkan Studies from Belgrade. The project
will be completed in 2012, and the preparation of the grammar and orthography of the
Bunjevac language will follow. It is only then it can be expected that the Bunjevac
language as a standard language of the Bunjevac population will be ratified.
Financing of activities of the cultural institutions for the Bunjevac national minority has
been slightly improved in relation to the First Report.
However, since the Bunjevac only have the state of Serbia to back them up, applications
for financial recourses are to be submitted according to the same criteria as for other
national communities having their mother countries, meaning that the Bunjevac do not
have an equal status in the Republic of Serbia.
There are still certain difficulties when submitting tender documentation for financing of
publishing and information activities. National minorities having their own mother
tongue officially used have the priority in financing, while the Bunjevac are
underprivileged because the Bunjevac language has not been standardized yet and,
therefore, it is not officially used.
The financing of teachers of the Bunjevac as an optional subject, which optional teaching
is carried out at 11 primary schools with 171 pupils attending the teaching of this optional
subject, two classes a week, namely 72 classes annually, is explicitly provided from the
funds of the National Council of the Bunjevac National Minority. This problem has not
been resolved yet for the reason that teaching is carried out in one class of the school
218

concerned, and these classes are not included in the monthly fund of classes carried out
by the teachers for the payment of salaries.
Managers of primary schools do not pay sufficient importance to this optional subject on
the occasion of enrolment of children, especially in the surroundings where the Bunjevac,
and where there are grounds for the attendance of this teaching and for its expansion as
well. At present the managers of schools in the above mentioned surroundings mainly
belong to Croatian national minority, and exercising their right of affiliation they favour
the enrolment of children into Croatian classes, while the enrolment of children to attend
classes of the Bunjevac speech with elements of national culture is of secondary
importance or neglected.
The relations among the Bunjevac national minority at the local level in the town of
Subotica have been improved, because the Bunjevac party of Vojvodina has a
representative in the Town Assembly, so the decisions of the Town Assembly may be far
more influenced concerning the funds or the rights related to the Bunjevac. However, this
is not sufficient because the town of Sombor has no representative in the Town Assembly
belonging to the Bunjevac national minority.
In the towns of Subotica and Sombor where the Bunjevac declaring themselves only as
the Bunjevac or as the Croatians live, the marking of cultural manifestations has not been
defined yet, such as the Dužijanca – harvesting festivity. The Dužijanca is the tradition
present with the Bunjevac for more than one hundred years as a public manifestation,
also being one of the national holidays of the Bunjevac national minority at the same time
(out of four recognized holidays). However, the Dužijanca has been traditionally
presented as the harvesting festivity of the Bačka Croatians, and it is organized by the
Bunjevačko kolo, Croatian Cultural Centre.
The same is with the marking of the Dan velikog Prela – on 2 February every year, which
was adopted by the Bunjevac as their national holiday, and the Bačka Croatians mark it
as a holiday of the Croatian national community (the Croatians in Subotica and Sombor).
We underline the above two examples as one of the main elements of attempts to
assimilate the Bunjevac national minority into the Croatian national minority. The funds
for these manifestations are also provided by the town of Subotica and Sombor, the
budget of AP of Vojvodina and the budget of the Republic of Serbia.
This phenomenon has a negative impact on inter-ethnic relations in the subject two
towns, so it is necessary to eliminate it by making a final distinction between these two
national communities, that is, there are the Bunjevac national minority and the Croatian
national minority, and disclaimer or assimilation of one minority into another must be
prohibited by law.
In respect of information, this Report contains positive results, in case of both the
monthly issue of the Bunjevačke novine and the Tandrčak, supplement for children.
However, there are still problems in the sphere of information by the public media – the
219

Radio Subotica local station and by radio and television information for the Bunjevac
national minority in general.
The financing of the Bunjevačka rič radio programme is accomplished with the funds of
the National Council of the Bunjevac National Minority, through a provisions editorial
office. The editorial office prepares a radio programme of half an hour, which is
broadcasted once a week via the Novi Sad II Radio, on Fridays from 9.30 p. m. to 10.00
p. m. This time is very bad fro listeners, in particular because it cannot be listened to in
Subotica at all. It can only be listened to in Sombor and Bačka Topola. The Radio
Subotica local station has radio programmes in Serbian, Hungarian, Croatian and German
languages, while no programme is provided for the requirements of the Bunjevac. The
problem of the lack of standardization of the Bunjevac language is constantly quoted,
although it is the obligation of the local self-government pursuant to the law to also
provide information to those national minorities having their own language within the
frame of the speech only.
The television programme for the Bunjevac national minority is prepared in the duration
of half an hour only twice a month by the Public Radio Broadcasting Agency of
Vojvodine, which is not satisfactory, and in this area the problem of the official use of the
language is also stressed, and the Bunjevac is not a language yet.
The members of the Bunjevac national minority have not made significant progress in
employment, either, in relation to the Report submitted in 2007. This problem also exists
in politics, where political parties make agreements on employment of their members at
key positions in the towns of Subotica and Sombor, too. No care is taken about the
structure of the members of the Bunjevac national minority, whose share in the town of
Subotica amounts to over 11%, which should be governed by adequate legal provisions
and not by the will of political parties.
An attempt of the Bunjevac national minority in the Republic of Hungary to accomplish
their minority self-government in 2008 was not successful, so we propose that the State
of Serbia ensures the protection of the members of this national minority through its
activities, namely that an adequate aid is rendered to a new attempt, which has now been
in progress in the neighbouring country of Hungary.
It may be generally concluded that the State of Serbia renders positive assistance to the
Bunjevac national minority in accomplishment of its rights guaranteed by the
Constitution and the law in the field of the rights addressed in this Report. However, we
have stated some still pressing problems on the way to accomplish essential rights of the
Bunjevac, for which reason this supplement is submitted as a review and we ask the State
to intervene, in order to preserve national identity of the Bunjevac on permanent grounds.
5.3. Supplement of the National Council of the Romanian National Minority
According to the 2002 census, there are 34,576 citizens of the Republic of Serbia who
declared themselves as members of the Romanian national minority. 30,419 citizens of
220

this number live in AP of Vojvodina and 4,157 of them in Central Serbia including the
City of Belgrade. Members of the Romanian national minority live in the entire territory
of AP of Vojvodina and in North-East Serbia. The biggest number of the members of the
Romanian national minority live in the municipalities of South Banat, where there are
21,618 citizens who are the members of the Romanian national minority or in percents, in
the Municipality of Alibunar there are around 30% or 6,000 Romanians and in the
Municipality of Vršac there are around 11% or 6,000 Romanians.
The Romanian national minority is one of the traditional minorities in this area which has
built educational, cultural, informative, religious and other institutions, as well as its own
tradition in these areas.
EDUCATION
Education in Romanian language in this area has a tradition that lasts more than a
century.
At primary schools in Vojvodina, the teaching in Romanian as instruction language is
carried out in 9 municipalities at 13 eight-year schools, of which three schools are
detached classes and at 14 four-year schools. Of 13 eight-year schools in total, at 5 of
them the teaching is only performed in Romanian language (the dwelling places of
Kuštilj, Grebenac, Barice, Lokve and Nikolinci) and 8 of them are mixed schools (Vršac,
Alibunar, Seleuš, Vladimirovac, Banatsko Novo Selo, Torak, Ečka and Uzdin).
At secondary schools the teaching in Romanian as instruction language is performed at 2
schools and in 2 municipalities, namely in Vršac and Alibunar. Besides primary and
secondary schools, there is the Higher School for Education of Pre-School Teachers in
Vršac, the Teacher Training Faculty – Belgrade (Department of Vršac) and two
Departments of Romanian Studies at the Faculties of Philosophy in Belgrade and Novi
Sad.
In the 2009/2010 school year, at primary schools where the teaching is carried out in
Romanian language, there were 1,266 pupils enrolled and at secondary schools there
were 238 pupils enrolled. One of the biggest problems of the Romanian national minority
is the decrease in the number of inhabitants which results in the decrease in the number of
pupils as well. Many parents enrol their children, especially from the mixed marriages
into classes where the teaching is carried out in Serbian language, many have moved to
towns or abroad and dispersion made an impact, too. Accordingly, there are only around
60% of children of Romanian Nationality who attend eight-year school in their mother
tongue.
For pupils who declared themselves to be Romanians and who attend school in Serbian
language, mother tongue with elements of national culture as an optional subject has been
introduced. All national councils propose that this subject is introduced into teaching as a
compulsory subject and not as an optional subject.
221

The schools lack teachers in the following subjects: history, geography, mathematics,
chemistry, physics, biology, English language. In order to resolve this problem, the
National Council of the Romanian National Minority granted scholarships to insufficient
teachers and with two schools it signed employment contracts for teachers upon the
completion of education (one of these contracts is already enforced at the primary school
in Tork. We have also proposed to the Ministry of Education of Romania to grant better
scholarships a sa stimulus, to the Romanian students from Serbia to study the relevant
subjects in Romania. Unfortunately, we received no response from them. We expect that
the Mixed Commission will be more efficient.
At schools where the teaching is carried out in Romanian language, the major problems
are: textbooks, attendance registries, registry books, certificates, pupils' books,
competition test papers and seminars for professional training of teachers, class teachers
and secondary school teachers.
The schools do not receive textbooks on time and they are more expensive than the
textbooks in Serbian language. The Ministry of Education of the Republic of Serbia
approved the use of textbooks from the native country but these textbooks may only be
used auxiliary textbooks for teachers and pupils.
Attendance registries are bilingual and for this reason they are three times more
expensive than the attendance registries in Serbian language, and the Institute of
education also delivers attendance registries to schools with delay of two or even three
months after the commencement of the school year. The same is with the registry books,
certificates, pupils' books and test papers for qualification exam in Romanian language
and mathematics in the eighth grade.
The problem that occurred in 2009 concerns rationalization of the school system.
Regardless of the political statement of the Minister of Education that rationalization
shall not be carried to the detriment of teaching in minority languages, the decision was
adopted to merge classes at the primary school in Kuštilj (II and IV grades) due to the
smaller number of interested pupils. In spite of the decision of the National Council of the
Romanian Minority that the primary school in Kuštilj is of particular importance for the
Romanian national minority, that its development is sustainable, as well as that it will
mark its 100th anniversary in 2011, which data were submitted to the Ministry of
Education, the Ministry sent no reply. The merger of classes is the first step to school
closing. On the other hand, the Ministry of Education has had a request for independent
operations of the primary school in Tork for three years. Neither any positive nor
negative replies were received concerning this school.
The adoption of the Law on Pupils' and Students' Standard is a good example of the lack
of partnership relations with the Ministry of Education. In the draft of the above
mentioned law, the powers of the national councils prescribed by the Law on the National
Councils of the National Minorities were derogated.

222

The Book of Rules on Ongoing Professional Training and Qualifications of Teachers,
Pre-School Teachers and Expert Associates (the Official Gazette of RS, nos. 14/2004 and
56/2005) prescribes that ongoing professional training and qualifications of teachers, preschool teachers and expert associates is implemented according to special programmes,
which might be optional and compulsory (Article 4) and that a teacher, pre-school teacher
and expert associate are obliged to attend at least 100 classes of the programmes in 5
years' time, as follows: at least 60 classes from the list of compulsory classes and up to 40
classes from the list of optional programmes (Article 10). Since only one seminar was
organized for the teachers and secondary school teachers in Romanian language, we
expect that this problem will be resolved through the Mixed Commission of Serbia and
Romania, and that seminars from Romania will be accredited with the Ministry of
Education.
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICES
The Romanian language is in official use in 9 municipalities, namely: Alibunar, Bela
Crkva, Kovin, Kovačica, Sečanj, Zrenjanin, Žitište, Plandište and Vršac as well as in the
place of Banatsko Novo Selo in the Municipality of Pančevo.
Traditional names of the places in Romanian language where the Romanian language is
in official use are not respected. This in particular tackles the towns, which, except of
Zrenjanin, do not also have names in Romanian language.
In the municipality of Plandište the name of the municipality is not also written in
Romanian language.
In the municipality of Sečanj, the name of the municipality and the name of the only
place with Romanian inhabitants, Sutjeska, are not written also in Romanian language. In
the municipality of Bela Crkva, the name of the municipality is not also written in
Romanian language. In the municipality of Žitište, the name of the municipality is not
also written in Romanian language, as well as in the municipality of Kovin.
In the municipality of Kovačica, the name of the municipality is not also written in
Romanian language. In the place of Uzdin, where the members of the Romanian national
minority live, road signs are written in Serbian and English languages! In the
municipality of Alibunar, the names of places Nikolinci and Vladimirovac are not also
written in Romanian language and the name of the municipality is written in the same
way as in the Serbian language.
Names of streets, squares and other toponyms are not also written in Romanian language
in any of the municipalities where the Romanian language is in the official use. (In some
places, such as Torak, Uzdin, etc., there are still names of streets written in Romanian
language, as the leftover from the Eighties of the last century). Except for the buildings of
the Municipal Assemblies, it is rare that the institutions established by the municipality
have multilingual signs.
223

The members of the Romanian national minority are not proportionally present in the
republic bodies, as well as in the bodies of local self-government. In 2006, the
Government of the Republic of Serbia adopted the Conclusion on measures for the
increase of share of the members of national minorities at the bodies of the state
administration, by which it shall directly and through its competent authorities and
services undertake permanent measures to increase the share of the members of the
national minorities in civil services. The conclusion should have been implemented in cooperation with the Personnel Management Agency, but nothing has been done about it.
There is no report on the implementation of this Conclusion, or the national councils of
national minorities may not have received it. At present no member of the Romanian
national minority is employed with the Ministry of Human and Minority Rights, or any
Romanian speaker.
Translation pools do not exist at the levels of the Republic or municipalities where the
Romanian language is officially used, namely, there is no option to apply to the
authorities in Romanian language. AP of Vojvodina is an exception because there
applications may also be submitted in Romanian language.
On the occasion of appointment of judges and prosecutors in the Republic of Serbia, the
National Council established that the constitutional and legal provisions on an adequate
representation of the members of the Romanian national minority were not properly
complied with (Article 77 of the Constitution of RS and Article 46 of the Law on
Judges). No member of the Romanian national minority was appointed a judge at the
Magistrate Court in Vršac, and in Zrenjanin neither at the Magistrate nor at the Higher
Court, and there are no members of the Romanian national minority with the Prosecution
Office, either. It is also similar at the level of AP of Vojvodina. The National Council is
of the opinion that there are experts who fulfil all the relevant conditions for the
appointment.
The adoption of the Law on the National Councils of the National Minorities made a
significant step forward in legal regulations and a stable ground for further activities. The
basic problem of the implementation will be to accept partner relations with the
competent ministry (it exists at present) as well as with the ministries dealing with the
issues of minorities, such as the Ministry of Culture, the Ministry of Education, the
Ministry of Youth and Sports, the Ministry of Local Self-Government, namely the
activities of the Council of the Republic of Serbia fro National Minorities. Financing of
the activities of national councils is an important component of this (in 2010 financing
will be reduced because another four new national councils are being established and the
funds were not increased in relation to 2009, either, not even for the inflation percentage).
The resources of the Budgetary Fund for National Minorities are symbolic this year,
namely no major project may be financed from these funds of each national minority.
PUBLIC INFORMATION MEANS
Tradition initiated at the end of the 19th century and at the beginning of the 20th century
in particular, resulted in the fact that the Romanians are nowadays the minority leaders,
224

in respect of the local printed media. Almost every villages has its own periodicals or
other publications. It also applies to the majority of the Romanian organizations.
The main problem of them is how to resolve systematic financing. Modest funds are
obtained from the local communities, the National Council of the Romanian National
Minority and from other sponsors.
The founding rights of the Libertate, Newspaper Publishing Institution from Pančevo
have been transferred to the National Council of the Romanian National Minority. The
Executive Council of Vojvodina still co-finances publishing of the Libertate, weekly
newspaper, but small or no funds are allocated for publishing, as well as for the Lumina,
periodical in literature, art and culture.
The programme in Romanian language is broadcasted by the Public Broadcasting
Agency – RTV Vojvodina. On television there is an increase of programmes (duration of
programmes) but there no adequate personnel training and technical equipment.
Audibility and viewing of programmes in Romanian language is extremely bad, so that
the programmes cannot be properly watched in the South Banat, or two thirds of the
Romanian population cannot watch it or listen to it. Radio Television of Vojvodina does
not fully perform the function of the public agency of citizens because neither the signal
nor the contents of programmes cover the territory concerned.
There is one private radio channel and one private television (RTV Viktorija from Vršac)
broadcasting daily programme in Romanian language only. In addition to this
programme, the programmes in Romanian language are also broadcasted by TV Pančevo,
TV Kovačica and TV Banat from Vršac. Some other local televisions also broadcast
programmes in Romanian language, either within paid periods (wedding parties, other
parties – TV Lav from Vršac) or on the grounds of projects, such as TV Kladovo, TV
Santos Zrenjanin. Private radio stations broadcast programmes in Romanian language for
two hours daily (Radio Far Alibunar) or for one hour weekly, and there are several of
them. Their basic problem is the scope and the quality. The request to obtain frequency
was exactly grounded on the idea to also broadcast programmes in the languages of
national minorities.
Information in Romanian language is also affected by transition Serbia is going through.
The field of information have the most important role in this period. Intolerance and
conflicts on ethnic grounds are also caused by ignorance and because of the lack of
information, and not only the information media in minority languages, but also the
information media in majority languages have the objective to incite tolerance, cooperation and establishment of mutual confidence in building of a multi-ethnic society.
Solutions to be adopted in this area may not be partial but systematic and just.
CULTURAL ACTIVITIES AND ADVANTAGES
225

In the domain of cultural manifestations in the territory of Vojvodina, there are very
many of them and they are organized by various associations or institutions of the
Romanians. It often happens that within one calendar year the dates of two similar or
different manifestations coincide. It is the same with the Romanians, all cultural
manifestations, including the largest ones, such as the Major Festival of Romanian
Folklore from Vojvodina-Serbia or the Theatre festival of the Romanians suffer from the
lack finances to organize cultural contents. Partial solutions are not sufficient. In addition
to budgetary subsidies, there are always appeals to additional sponsors and donators, but
the bad feeling of begging at all times remains.
As regards the conditions of the buildings of cultural institutions, in some places they are
in good or in satisfactory conditions and in some places they are in very bad or warn out
conditions. Naturally, things are much better in places where adequate cultural clubs had
been built than in the places where the buildings are old and not adapted in time.
Technical equipment is very rare. Due to the lack of financial resources and personnel as
well, village libraries are closed, except for the libraries in Banatsko Novo Selo, Tork,
Kovin and Alibunar, which are open from time to time.
Non-governmental organizations are especially active in organizing cultural
manifestations, which are, as a rule, always a step forward in definition of the cultural
concept of the Romanians of Serbia, and also in respect of numerous manifestations they
organize.
In the field of publishing of books and magazines, things with the Romanians in
Vojvodina are slightly better. In addition to the Libertatea from Pančevo, there are
another four publishing companies. More than 50 periodicals are published, so almost
every village has its own newspaper, and the village of Torak publishes 5 magazines.
The Department in Romanian language of the Sterija National Theatre from Vršac, as a
professional theatre, which is financed from the provincial budget, has two premier
theatre performances annually, but it is necessary that it has its co-ordinator and at least
two actors who will be permanently employed with it.
We have proposed to the Ministry of Culture of the Republic of Serbia to purchase a part
of books to be delivered to the libraries all over Serbia thus improving their book stocks,
on one side, and to ensure a portion of funds to the publishers for new editions, on the
other. We have also proposed that it co-finances the activities of the professional theatre
in Romanian language. Our proposals have not been accepted.
The establishment of the Institute of Culture of the Romanians of Vojvodina, which is cofounded by the Assembly of AP of Vojvodina and the National Council of the Romanian
national Minority, means the appearance of a new cultural scientific institutions of
Romanians.
The newly established National Orchestra of the National Council of the Romanian
national Minority is a new phenomenon on the Romanian cultural scene, which already
226

proved to be a true place where talented people meet and also the place of already
distinguished musicians contributing a lot by its concerts to the affirmation of Romanian
folk music, folklore and numerous performers and singers.
It is necessary that in future this Orchestra, as well as the Choir of the National Council
of the Romanian National Minority have better working conditions and obtain systematic
financing.
In other fields of cultural-artistic activities, there are problems, weak points (galleries,
village orchestras do not have some instruments, lack of professional choreographers,
lack of funds to produce theatre performances, etc.). However, efforts are made to
overcome such problems by enthusiasts who are present in almost all communities who
give necessary positive attitudes in the field of culture and art of the Romanians of
Serbia. We expect a lot from the Mixed Commission in this field, too.
TRANSNATIONAL EXCHANGE
Although in 2003 a bilateral agreement on protection of minorities has been signed
between Serbia (then Serbia and Montenegro) and Romania and it has been ratified by
the respective Parliaments one year later, the Mixed Commission has been only
established few months ago, but it has not yet started its work. We expect the most of this
Commission in solving the problems in the areas of education, culture and information
particular.

227

