Strasbourg, 5 December 2003

MIN-LANG/PR (2003) 8

EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL OR M INORITY LANGUAGES

Initial Periodical Report
presented to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe
in accordance with Article 15 of the Charter

SLOVAK REPUBLIC

Report on the Implementation of the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages in the Slovak Republic

Bratislava 2003

2

PART I

1. General information on the accession process:
The Charter was signed in the name of the Slovak Republic in Strasbourg on 20 February 2001. The
National Council of the Slovak Republic gave its consent with the European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages by its Resolution No. 1497 of 19 June 2001. The President of Slovakia ratified
the Charter on 20 July 2001 and the instrument of ratification was deposited and registered with the
depositary, the Secretary General of the Council of Europe, on 5 September 2001. The Charter
entered into force on 1 March 1998 on the basis of Article 19, paragraph 1. For the Slovak
Republic, the Charter entered into force on 1 January 2002 on the basis of Article 19, paragraph 2.
The text of the Charter was published in the Collection of Laws under the No. 588/2001.
Accession to the Charter by the Slovak Republic is based on the Slovak Government Policy
Statement (Part IV. 4. D. Foreign Policy) of 1998, where is enacted its support for the signature of
the Charter. Section 39 of the minutes of the Government’s meeting of 12 July 2000 specifies the
Government’s decision to authorize the Ministry of Foreign Affairs as a coordinator of negotiations
regarding international agreements to discuss any issues concerning Slovakia’s accession to the
Charter with the relevant ministries and sectors.
Under the provisions of Article 15 of Part IV (Application of the Charter), the Parties are to present
to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe reports on the implementation of their
undertakings, and the first report is to be submitted within one year following the entry into force of
the Charter and the other reports at three-yearly intervals.
Upon the depositing of its instrument of ratification, the Slovak Republic made the following
statement:
1. The Slovak Republic declares that it will apply the adopted Charter in compliance with the
Constitution of the Slovak Republic and relevant international treaties, which ensure the
equality of citizens before law irrespectively of their origin, race, religion or nationality,
aiming at supporting the European linguistic heritage without detriment to the application of
the state language.
2. The Slovak Republic declares that according to Article 1, sub-paragraph b) of the Charter
the notion "territory in which the regional or minority language is used" applies to
municipalities according to Slovak Government Ordinance No. 221/1999 Coll. issuing the list
of municipalities in which citizens of the Slovak Republic belonging to a national minority
represent at least 20 per cent of the population as of 25 August 1999. The above specified
also applies to the application of Article 10 of the Charter.
3. Under Article 3, paragraph 1 of the Charter, the "regional or minority languages" in the
Slovak Republic are as follows: Bulgarian, Czech, Croatian, Hungarian, German, Polish,
Roma, Ruthenian, and Ukrainian; the application of the provisions of the Charter according
to its Article 2, paragraph 2, in case of

3

Bulgarian, Czech, Croatian, German, Polish, and Roma:
Article 8, paragraph 1, sub-paragraph a) indent iii, sub-paragraph b) indent iii, subparagraph c) indent iii, sub-paragraph d) indent iii, sub-paragraph e) indent
ii, sub-paragraph f) indent ii, sub-paragraphs g), h), and i);
Article 9, paragraph 1, sub-paragraph a) indents ii and iii, sub-paragraph b) indents ii and iii,
sub-paragraph c) indents ii and iii, sub-paragraph d ;
Article 10, paragraph 1, sub-paragraph a) indents iii and iv, paragraph 2, sub-paragraphs b),
c), d), f), and g),
paragraph 3, sub-paragraph c), paragraph 4, sub-paragraphs a) and c), paragraph 5;
Article 11, paragraph 1, sub-paragraph a) indent iii, sub-paragraph b) indent ii, subparagraph c) indent ii, sub-paragraph d), sub-paragraph e) indent i,
sub-paragraph f) indent ii, paragraphs 2 and 3;
Article 12, paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a), b), c), d), e), f), and g), paragraphs 2 and 3;
Article 13, paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a), b), and c), paragraph 2, sub-paragraph c);
Article 14, sub-paragraph a);
Article 14, sub-paragraph b) only in case of the Czech, German, and Polish languages;
Ruthenian and Ukrainian:
Article 8, paragraph 1, sub-paragraph a) indent ii, sub-paragraph b) indent ii, sub-paragraph
c) indent ii, sub-paragraph d) indent ii , sub-paragraph e) indent ii,
sub-paragraph f) indent ii, sub-paragraphs g), h), and i);
Article 9, paragraph 1, sub-paragraph a) indents ii and iii, sub-paragraph b) indents ii and iii,
sub-paragraph c) indents ii and iii, sub-paragraph d), paragraph 3;
Article 10, paragraph 1, sub-paragraph a) indents iii and iv, paragraph 2, sub-paragraphs b),
c), d), f), and g), paragraph 3, sub-paragraph c), paragraph 4 sub-paragraphs a) and c),
paragraph 5;
Article 11, paragraph 1, sub-paragraph a) indent iii, sub-paragraph b) indent ii, subparagraph c) indent ii, sub-paragraph d), sub-paragraph e) indent i,
sub-paragraph f) indent ii, paragraphs 2 and 3;
Article 12, paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a), b), c), d), e), f), and g), paragraphs 2 and 3;
Article 13, paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a), b), and c), paragraph 2, sub-paragraph c);
Article 14, sub-paragraph a);
Article 14, sub-paragraph b) only in case of the Ukrainian language;
Hungarian:
Article 8, paragraph 1, sub-paragraph a) indent i, sub-paragraph b) indent i, sub-paragraph
c) indent i, sub-paragraph d) indent i, sub-paragraph e) indent i, sub-paragraph f) indent i,
sub-paragraphs g), h) and i);
Article 9, paragraph 1, sub-paragraph a) indents ii and iii, sub-paragraph b) indents ii and iii,
sub-paragraph c) indents ii and iii, sub-paragraph d), paragraph 2, sub-paragraph a),
paragraph 3;
Article 10, paragraph 1, sub-paragraph a) indent ii, paragraph 2, sub-paragraphs a), b), c),
d), f), and g), paragraph 3, sub-paragraphs b) and c), paragraph 4, sub-paragraphs a) and c),
paragraph 5;
Article 11, paragraph 1, sub-paragraph a) indent iii, sub-paragraph b) indent ii, subparagraph c) indent ii, sub-paragraph d), sub-paragraph e) indent i, sub-paragraph f) indent i,
paragraphs 2 and 3;
4

Article 12, paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a), b), c), d), e), f), and g), paragraphs 2 and 3;
Article 13, paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a), b), and c), paragraph 2, sub-paragraph c);
Article 14, sub-paragraphs a) and b).

5

4. The Slovak Republic states that Article 8, paragraph 1, sub-paragraph e) indent i applies to
the training of pedagogues, theologians, cultural and educational staff without detriment to
the training provided in the state language. In this respect, most subjects, including major
subjects, are taught in the relevant minority language fully complying with the Slovak
legislation governing university education.
5. The Slovak Republic states that Article 10, paragraph 1, sub-paragraph a) indent ii, Article
10, paragraph 2, sub-paragraph a) and Article 10, paragraph 3, sub-paragraph b) will be
interpreted without detriment to the use of the state language in accordance with the
Constitution of the Slovak Republic and in compliance with the legal system of the Slovak
Republic.
6. The Slovak Republic states that Article 12, paragraph 1, sub-paragraph e) and Article 13,
paragraph 2, sub-paragraph c) can be applied if the effects of such application do not
contradict other provisions of the Slovak legislation banning discrimination of Slovak
nationals in labour law relations within the territory of the Slovak Republic.
The main tasks with regard to the fulfilment of the commitments of the Charter have been determined
by the Government’s Resolution No. 27 of 17 January 2001 on the proposal of signature of the
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, wherein the Government of the Slovak
Republic inter alia:
- Stated its consent with the signature of the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages,
- Established the Council of the Government of the Slovak Republic for National Minorities
and Ethnic Groups as its consultative body in accordance with Article 7, paragraph 4 of the
Charter,
- Tasked the Vice-Prime-Minister P. Csáky to submit the comprehensive report on
legislative, financial and other measures adopted in order to ensure fulfilment of the
commitments of the Slovak Republic arising from the applied provisions of the
Charter, in co-operation with the Minister of Culture, Minister of Education, Minister of
Justice, Minister of Interior, Minister of Economy, Minister of Labour, Social Affaires and
Family, Minister of Health, Minister of Environment and the Minister of Construction and
Regional Development until 30 September 2001,
- Tasked the Minister of Foreign Affaires to ensure submission of the aggregate report on
fulfilment of the commitments of the Slovak Republic arising from the Charter to the
Secretary General of the Council of Europe,
- Tasked the Minister of Education, Minister of Justice, Minister of Interior, Minister of
Culture, Minister of Economy, Minister of Labour, Social Affaires and Family, Minister of
Health, Minister of Environment and the Minister of Construction and Regional Development
to ensure implementation of the respective provisions of the Charter in their area of
responsibility.

6

2. Minority and regional languages in the meaning of Article 3, paragraph 1 of the
Charter and the notion of territory:
In accordance with Article 3, paragraph 1 of the Charter, the "regional or minority languages" in the
Slovak Republic are as follows: Bulgarian, Croatian, Czech, German, Hungarian, Polish, Romany,
Ruthenian, and Ukrainian.
The Slovak Republic declares that according to Article 1, sub-paragraph b) of the Charter the notion
"territory in which the regional or minority language is used" applies to municipalities according to the
Slovak Government Ordinance No. 221/1999 Coll. issuing the list of municipalities in which citizens
of the Slovak Republic belonging to a national minority represent at least 20 per cent of the
population, of 25 August 1999. The above specified also applies to the application of Article 10 of
the Charter.
According to paragraph 2 of the Slovak Republic Declaration related to the deposit of its instrument
of ratification of the Charter, the notion "territory in which the regional or minority language is used"
means the territory of any municipality listed in the Appendix to the Slovak Government Ordinance
No. 221/1999 Coll. issuing the list of municipalities in which citizens of the Slovak Republic
belonging to a national minority represent at least 20 per cent of the population. There are 638
municipalities (towns and villages) meeting the above-specified criterion. Such municipalities are
located in six regions and 38 districts in the Slovak Republic. Nine of them are municipalities where
district bodies of state administration are based and in 15 of them branches of such bodies are
based. Local government bodies are based in all of the above-mentioned municipalities.
3. Non-territorial languages
There are no provisions on territorial and non-territorial languages in the legislature of the Slovak
Republic. The relevant criterion is the list of the minority languages and the number of inhabitants of
the municipality using a minority language (as above).
4. Demographic parameters:
The demographic parameters of the structure of the population indicate that 14.2 per cent of
Slovakia’s population recognize themselves as members of national minorities and/or ethnic groups.
According to the above-referred demographic characteristics, the Slovak Republic could be
considered a standard European country with a portion of its population represented by national
minorities and/or ethnic groups.
The demographic indicators serve as the basis for Slovakia’s policy towards so-called
autochthonous national minorities. The dominant role of the state policy in this area is to preserve the
cultural and linguistic identity of citizens belonging to national minorities and to provide for their nondiscriminatory treatment in the social, cultural and educational systems. It is indisputable that language
as one of the key signs of cultural identity plays a token role in the preservation and development of
minority communities which pass the values and attributes of their culture from generation to
generation.
The following table of the demographic distribution of the population indicates that the largest
national minority is Hungarian (9.7 per cent) living mainly in the Southern part of the country
7

bordering with Hungary. As far as the territorial concentration is concerned, the Ruthenian (0.4 per
cent) and the Ukrainian (0.2 per cent) minorities are concentrated in the Prešov region, where these
communities are found farther north towards the Polish border and east towards the Ukrainian
border respectively, as well as the Polish national minority residing in the northern regions, especially
in the High Tatras’ area, but spread out also in other localities. In respect of other autochthonous
national minorities – Roma (1.7 per cent), German (0.1 per cent), Bulgarian (0,02 per cent) and
partially Croatian (0.01 per cent) – their pattern of territorial occupation is more or less
concentrated, dispersed and uneven.
The census carried out in May 2001 shows that 763,601 citizens (14.2 per cent) out of the total
population of 5,379,455 declared themselves as belonging to other than the Slovak nationality. The
following chart shows the numbers of persons declaring themselves as belonging to each national
minority according to the census results of 1980, 1991 and 2001. It should be pointed out that the
census of 1980 and 1991 were carried out under the conditions of the Czechoslovak Federation.

Nationality
Slovak
Hungarian
Roma
Czech
Ruthenian
Ukrainian
German
Moravian
Croatian
Polish
Bulgarian
Jewish
Other
Unidentified
Total:

1980
4 317 008
559 490
57 197
36 850
2 918
2 053
2 898
10 344
4 991 168

1991
86,5 %
11,2%
1,1%
0,7%
0,1%
0,04%
0,1%
0,2%
100%

4 519 328
567 296
75 802
52 884
17 197
13 281
5 414
6 442
2 659
1 400
134
3 476
8 782
5 274 335

2001
85,7%
10,8%
1,4%
1,0%
0,3%
0,3%
0,1%
0,1%
0,05%
0,02%
0,002%
0,06%
0,16%
100%

4 614 854
520 528
89 920
44 620
24 201
10 814
5 405
2 348
890
2 602
1 179
218
5 350
56 526
5 379 455

85,8%
9,7%
1,7%
0,8%
0,4%
0,2%
0,1%
0,1%
0,02%
0,04%
0,02%
0,004%
0,1%
1,1%
100%

5. Bodies and organisations dealing with the protection of the languages of the minorities
in the Slovak Republic
The Slovak Republic has not created a special public power body to be concentrated solely on the
implementation of the Charter including on the issue of the protection of the regional or minority
languages. The protection of the minority languages constitutes a component of a broader protection
of the national minorities provided on different levels in connection with the protection of the
fundamental human rights and freedoms. On the level of Government the issues of the national
minorities and ethnic groups including protection of minority languages fall under the responsibility of
the Vice-Prime-Minister of the Slovak Government for the European Integration, Human Rights and
Minorities. As a consultative body on the issues concerned acts the Council of the Government of
the Slovak Republic for National Minorities and Ethnic Groups, where the members are
representatives of the national minorities (the Government’s Resolution No. 27 of 17 January 2001).
The ministries in the scope of their responsibilities take into consideration the issues concerned while
implementing the judicial regulations mentioned in the section 1. of this part. The Constitutional Court
8

of the Slovak Republic adjudicates on the filings pertaining to the constitutional rights of the citizens
including the right to use a language of a national minority.
6. Legal protection (Legislation):
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages according to Article 7 paragraph 5 of the
Slovak Constitution enjoys preference before laws. At the same time it is an international treaty and
more elaborate national legal regulation is required for its implementation. Most of the relevant
internal regulations relating to the issues embedded in the Charter have been adopted before its
signature. Many of them have been amended afterwards.
Among internal legal regulations relating to the subject matter for use of the languages of national
minorities or foreign languages and use of foreign names and surnames, names of settlements, streets
and other public places are relevant mainly:
A) Constitutional law:
1. Constitutional Law No. 23/1991 Coll. introducing the Bill of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms
(notably Articles 25, and 27);
2. Constitution of the Slovak Republic No. 460/1992 Coll. as amended by Constitutional Law No.
244/1998 Coll., Constitutional Law No. 9/1999 Coll. and Constitutional Law No. 90/2001
Coll. (hereinafter referred to as the "Slovak Constitution") in Article 6, Article 34 Section 1 and
2 and Article 47 Section 4;
3. Linguistic aspect of the exercise of the fundamental rights and freedoms - PL. of the
Constitutional Court 8/96 (Collection of the Findings and Resolutions of the Constitutional Court
of the Slovak Republic No. 14/97)
B) Education
1. Act No. 29/1984 Coll. on the system of primary and secondary schools as amended,
republished in the Act No. 350/1994 Coll. (Section 3 and 3a);
2. Ministry of Education Decree No. 536/1991 Coll. on establishment and operation of the clerical
schools;
3. Act No. 542/1990 Coll. on state administration in the education sector and school self
government as amended;
4. Government Ordinance No. 113/1991 Coll. on the provision of subsidies from the state budget
to private schools;
5. Decree of Ministry of Education and Science No. 102/1991 Coll. on the completion of
education at secondary schools, secondary vocational schools, and apprentice schools as
amended;
6. Act No. 279/1993 Coll. on school facilities as amended (Sections 2 and 2a);
7. Ministry of Education Decree No. 280/1994 Coll. on private schools (Sections 3 and 6);
8. Ministry of Education Decree No. 353/1994 Coll. on pre-school education facilities as amended
(Section 3 paragraph 3, Sections 4 and 7);
9. Ministry of Education Decree No. 145/1995 Coll. on enrolment at secondary schools as
amended;
10. Ministry of Education Decree No. 217/1999 Coll. on pedagogic documentation;
11. Ministry of Education Decree No. 32/2000 Coll. on school inspection;
9

12. Act No. 416/2001 Coll. on the delegation of certain powers and responsibilities from state
administration to municipalities and regions as amended (Section 3 paragraph 3);
13. Act No. 334/2002 Coll., Article II that amends Act No. 29/1984 Coll. as amended (School
Law) (Section 51a)

10

C) Judiciary:
1. Act No. 141/1961 Coll. on criminal judicial procedure (Code of Criminal Procedure) (Section 2
paragraph 14, Section 28, Section 55, Section 434);
2. Code of Civil Judicial Procedure No. 99/1963 Coll. (Section18, Section 141);
3. Act No. 38/1993 Coll. on the organization of the Constitutional Court of the Slovak Republic,
procedure before the Constitutional Court and the status of its judges as amended by Act No.
293/1995 Coll. (Section 23);
4. Act No. 335/1991 Coll. on courts and judges (Section 7 paragraph 3);
5. Act No. 36/1967 Coll. on experts and interpreters as amended;
D) State and Public Administration:
1. Act No. 71/1967 Coll. on administrative law procedure (in continuation of Act No. 184/1999
Coll. on use of the languages of national minorities);
2. Act No. 83/1990 Coll. on assembly of citizens as amended;
3. Act No. 84/1990 Coll. on the right of assembly as amended by Act No. 175/1990 Coll.;
4. Act No. 85/1990 Coll. on the right of petition as amended;
5. Act No. 300/1993 Coll. on first name and surname as amended;
6. Act No. 154/1994 Coll. on registers;
7. Act No. 191/1994 Coll. on the names and signs of municipalities in minority languages;
8. Act No. 270/1995 Coll. on the state language of the Slovak Republic as amended by the
Finding of the Constitutional Court published under No. 260/1997 Coll. and Act No. 5/1999;
9. Act No. 52/1998 Coll. on the protection of personal data in information systems as amended by
Act No. 241/2001 Coll.
10. Act No. 152/1998 Coll. on complaints;
11. Act No. 184/1999 Coll. on the use of the languages of national minorities;
12. Government Ordinance No. 221/1999 Coll. issuing the list of settlements in which citizens
belonging to a national minority constitute at least 20 per cent of population;
13. Act No. 211/2000 Coll. on free access to information;
14. Act No. 564/2001 Coll. on public defender of rights;
15. Act No. 612/2002 Coll. - full version of Act No. 369/1990 Coll. on municipal establishment
(Section 1a. Section 2b and Section 4 paragraph 3 r)
E) Media:
1. Act No. 254/ 1991 Coll. on Slovak Television;
2. Act No. 255/1991 Coll. on Slovak Radio;
3. Act No. 308/2000 Coll. on broadcasting and retransmission and on amendment of Act No.
195/2000 on telecommunications (Section 16 g, Section 49 paragraph 4 f);

F) Cultural, economic and social life:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Act No. 634/1992 Coll. on consumer protection;
Act No. 270/1995 Coll. on the state language of the Slovak Republic as amended;
Act No. 384/1997 Coll. on theatres (Section 3 paragraph 3)
Act No. 312/2002 Coll. on civil service as amended (Section 14);
11

5. Act No. 313/2002 Coll. on public service as amended;
6. Government Ordinance No. 117/2002 Coll. on special requirements in respect of safety and
health at work in mining and extraction of unlisted minerals;
To provide a full picture in this respect, the following are international multilateral conventions, which
are binding upon the Slovak Republic (in addition to the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages published under No. 588/2001 in the Slovak Collection of Laws):
a) Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms published under No.
209/1992 Coll.;
b) International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination published
under No. 95/1974 Coll.;
c) International Pact on Civil and Political Rights published under No. 120/1976 Coll.;
d) International Pact on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights published under No. 120/1976
Coll.;
e) Council of Europe Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities published
under No. 160/1998 Coll.;
f) European Outline Convention on Transfrontier Co-operation between Territorial Communities or
Authorities published under No. 78/2001 Coll.
7. Bodies contributing to the preparation of the Report on implementation:
The relevant central bodies of state administration in the Slovak Republic were involved in the
preparation of this Report, notably the Office of the Government, the Foreign Ministry, the Ministry
of the Interior, the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Culture, the Ministry
of Labour, Social Affairs and Family, the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Economy, and others.
8. Measures taken for improvement of public information on the rights and obligations
flowing from application of the Charter
The text of the Charter has been published in the Collection of Laws under No. 588/2001 in Slovak.

12

PART II
Objectives and principles pursued in accordance with Article 2, paragraph 1

Article 7 – Objectives and principles
1. "In respect of regional or minority languages, within the territories in which such
languages are used and according to the situation of each language, the Parties shall base
their policies, legislation and practice on the following objectives and principles:
a) the recognition of the regional or minority languages as an expression of cultural wealth;
b) the respect of the geographical area of each regional or minority language in order to
ensure that existing or new administrative divisions do not constitute an obstacle to the
promotion of the regional or minority language in question;
c) the need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in order to
safeguard them;
d) the facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of regional or minority languages, in
speech and writing, in public and private life;
e) the maintenance and development of links, in the fields covered by this Charter, between
groups using a regional or minority language and other groups in the State employing a
language used in identical or similar form, as well as the establishment of cultural relations
with other groups in the State using different languages;
f) the provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of regional or
minority languages at all appropriate stages;
g) the provision of facilities enabling non-speakers of a regional or minority language living
in the area where it is used to learn it if they so desire;
h) the promotion of study and research on regional or minority languages at universities or
equivalent institutions;
i) the promotion of appropriate types of transnational exchanges, in the fields covered by this
Charter, for regional or minority languages used in identical or similar form in two or
more States.
2. The Parties undertake to eliminate, if they have not yet done so, any unjustified distinction,
exclusion, restriction or preference relating to the use of a regional or minority language and
intended to discourage or endanger the maintenance or development of it. The adoption of
special measures in favour of regional or minority languages aimed at promoting equality
between the users of these languages and the rest of the population or which take due account
of their specific conditions is not considered to be an act of discrimination against the users of
more widely-used languages.
3. The Parties undertake to promote, by appropriate measures, mutual understanding
between all the linguistic groups of the country and in particular the inclusion of respect,
understanding and tolerance in relation to regional or minority languages among the
objectives of education and training provided within their countries and encouragement of
the mass media to pursue the same objective.

13

4. In determining their policy with regard to regional or minority languages, the Parties shall
take into consideration the needs and wishes expressed by the groups, which use such
languages. They are encouraged to establish bodies, if necessary, for the purpose of advising
the authorities on all matters pertaining to regional or minority languages.
5. The Parties undertake to apply, mutatis mutandis, the principles listed in paragraphs 1 to 4
above to non-territorial languages. However, as far as these languages are concerned, the
nature and scope of the measures to be taken to give effect to this Charter shall be
determined in a flexible manner, bearing in mind the needs and wishes, and respecting the
traditions and characteristics, of the groups which use the languages concerned."
Policy:
Through its minority policy the Slovak Government strives to attain its key objectives in this area and
the foremost principle of the protection of individuals belonging to national minorities, notably:
§

to provide for the equality of all citizens before law, which means to provide for the fundamental
rights and freedoms of all citizens in the Slovak Republic irrespectively of sex, race, colour of
skin, language, creed and religion, political or other beliefs, national or social origin, affiliation to a
nation of ethnic group, property, descent, or another status.

§

to provide for the full integration of all citizens into the society;

§

to provide for the preservation of the cultural values of the national minorities as a part of the
cultural heritage of the state.

The national minorities living in the Slovak Republic enjoy a vibrant cultural life expressed through the
existence and activities of the minorities’ culture associations. Such organisations freely,
independently and actively co-ordinate the activities of many active ensembles and companies and a
rich gamut of various valuable educational and cultural events. The broad range of interesting
activities carried out by amateur ensembles and companies is accompanied with the activities of
professional theatres, professional dance and singing groups, publishing houses, museums, the
periodic and non-periodic press of the minorities.
Legislation:
The legislative basis for the implementation and application of the Charter in the Slovak Republic are
the provisions of the Slovak Constitution (Act No. 460/1992 Coll. as amended by Constitutional
Laws No. 244/1998 Coll., 9/1999 Coll. and 90/2001 Coll.), notably Articles 6 and 34.
Article 6 of the Slovak Constitution reads as follows: "(1) The Slovak language is the state
language of the Slovak Republic. (2) The use of languages other than the state language in
official communications shall be determined by law." This constitutional provision is addressed in
detail by Act No. 270/1995 Coll. on the state language of the Slovak Republic, which regulates the
use of the state language in the fields of education (Section 4), the judiciary (Section 7), state and
public administration (Section 3), the media and culture (Section 5), economic services and health
(Section 8) and Act No. 184/1999 Coll. on the use of the languages of national minorities, which
regulates the use of minority languages, notably in the official communication.
14

Article 33 of the Slovak Constitution declares that "membership of any national minority or
ethnic group must not be to anyone’s detriment". Article 34, paragraph 1 of the Constitution
states that "Citizens forming national minorities or ethnic groups in the Slovak Republic shall
be guaranteed their full development , particularly the right to develop their own culture
together with other members of the minority or ethnic group, the right to disseminate and
receive information in their mother tongue, the right to associate in national minority
associations, and the right to establish and maintain educational and cultural institutions."
Furthermore, paragraph 2 of this Article stipulates "…in addition to the right to master the state
language, a) the right to education in their own language, b) the right to use their language in
official communications, c) the right to participate in the solution of affairs concerning
national minorities and ethnic groups." These provisions are addressed in detail by Act No.
184/1999 Coll. on the use of languages of national minorities – along with other laws which it refers
to – deals with the provisions of the Charter in the fields of state and public administration (Sections
2, 3 and 7; regarding the Czech language Sections 6 and 7), of naming streets and other local
geographic items, important information, of providing information on generally binding judicial
regulations also in the minority language (Section 4), and of the judiciary. Government Ordinance
No. 221/1999 Coll. issuing the list of municipalities in which citizens of the Slovak Republic
belonging to a national minority represent at least 20 per cent of the population indicates the
following minority languages in the Slovak Republic: Hungarian, German, Ukrainian, Ruthenian, and
Roma.
Article 44 of the Slovak Constitution subsequently lays down the obligation of everyone "to protect
and enhance the environment and the cultural heritage."
The Preamble of Act No. 184/1999 Coll. on the use of the languages of national minorities declares
the following:
"having regard to the Constitution of the Slovak Republic and international treaties by which
the Slovak Republic is bound,
respecting the protection and development of fundamental rights and freedoms of the citizens
of the Slovak Republic who belong to a national minority, …
acknowledging and appreciating the significance of the mother tongues of the citizens of the
Slovak Republic who belong to a national minority, as a manifestation of the cultural heritage
of the state, …."
The Slovak Republic applies the principle embedded in the European Charter of regional or minority
languages relating to facilitating of oral and written expression in the regional or minority language as
follows from the wording of Article 34 paragraph 2 of the Slovak Constitution and in the sense of the
valid legislation as follows:
"In addition to the right to master the state language, citizens belonging to national minorities
or ethnic groups also have, under conditions defined by law, a guaranteed
a) right to education in their own language,
b) right to use their language in official communications,
c) the right to participate in the solution of affairs concerning national minorities and ethnic
groups."

15

a) The right to education in the minority or foreign language is regulated by Act No. 29/1984 Coll.
on the system of the primary and secondary schools as amended (so called school law), particularly
in Sections 3 and 3a. According to the Section 3 "Education is conducted in the state language.
Citizens of the Czech, Hungarian, German, Polish and Ukrainian (Ruthenian) nationality have the right
of education in their own language in the extent measured to the interest of their national
development." According to the Section 3a "Education since the 5th year of primary school and on
secondary schools can be conducted also in a foreign language with the consent of the Ministry of
Education. In the schools or classes where instruction is realized in a foreign language, the subject
Slovak language and literature shall be part of it. As foreign language for the purpose of this law is
understood a language of a foreign State, with which the Slovak Republic have concluded a cultural
agreement, according to which a class or school was established with the language of that State as
the second language of instruction.
b) With regard to the right to use languages of national minorities in the official communications the
Slovak Republic in the second clause upon the depositing of its instrument of ratification declared
according to Article 1 b) of the Charter that the notion "territory in which the regional or
minority language is used" applies to municipalities according to Slovak Government Ordinance
No. 221/1999 Coll. issuing the list of municipalities in which citizens of the Slovak Republic
belonging to a national minority represent at least 20 per cent of the population as of 25 August 1999
which also applies to the implementation of Article 10 of the Charter. As follows from these
preconditions, this right can be exercised by the persons belonging to national minorities in fact only
in the relation to the local state administration bodies, i. e. to the regional offices and municipal
authorities. This applies also to issuing of decisions. The public documents can be issued only in the
state language (as mentioned below).
The rules of the use of the languages of national minorities in official communications involving
individuals belonging to a national minority are laid down by the provisions of the Act No. 184/1999
Coll. on the use of the languages of national minorities. However, in respect of the use of a national
minority language in dealings before courts Section 5, sub-section 1 of the above-specified Act
makes reference to specific laws (the Code of Civil Judicial Procedure, the Code of Criminal
Procedure, the Act on the Constitutional Court of the Slovak Republic, and the Act on courts and
judges):
(1) The right to use a national minority language in dealings before courts and in other areas
shall be governed by specific laws.
Under Article 6 of the Slovak Constitution the Slovak language is the state language within the
territory of the Slovak Republic:
(1) Slovak is the state language on the territory of the Slovak Republic.
(2) The use of other languages in dealings with the authorities will be regulated by law.
The use of the state language in judicial and administrative law procedures is governed by Section 7
of the Act No. 270/1995 Coll. on the state language, as amended:
(1) Mutual communication between courts and citizens, judicial procedure, administrative
law procedure, decisions and protocols of courts and administrative law bodies are made and
issued in the state language.
16

(2) The rights of individuals belonging to national minorities and ethnic groups or the rights
of aliens not mastering the state language laid down by specific legislation shall remain
unaffected.
In respect of these legal arrangements, the following resolution of the Constitutional Court of the
Slovak Republic of 1 April 1996 (File No. I. US 19/96) should be taken into consideration:
"The obligation to respect and comply with the provisions of the Act governing the use of the
state language does not constitute the violation of the fundamental right of a citizen
belonging to a national minority or ethnic group to use his/her own language in official
communication as the Slovak Constitution lays down that the conditions for the use of this
right will be regulated by special law.."
The above-referred indicates that the use of a regional or minority language in the Slovak Republic in
civil and criminal proceedings as well as in proceedings in administrative matters is directly linked to
the application of Section 5 of the Act on the use of the languages of national minorities and Section
7 of the Act on the state language accompanied with specific procedural law provisions providing for
the use of such languages in accordance with Article 47, paragraph 4 of the Slovak Constitution:
"Anyone who declares that he does not have a command of the language in which the
proceedings according to section 2 are conducted has the right to an interpreter."
In addition to the above-quoted Article of the Slovak Constitution, Article 47, paragraph 2 of the
Slovak Constitution says:
"Everyone has the right to legal assistance in court proceedings or proceedings before other
state or public administration bodies. He has this right from the very start of the proceedings,
under conditions defined by law."
The purpose of such Article of the Slovak Constitution is to provide for the equality of the parties to
proceedings as stipulated in Article 47, paragraph 3 of the Slovak Constitution:
"All participants in proceedings according to section 2 are equal."
The application of this principle in civil as well as penal proceedings is reflected in legislation laying
down the right to an interpreter to everyone who declares that he/she does not understand the state
language. This undoubtedly applies to any national of the Slovak Republic stating that he/she only
understands a regional or minority language. The above specified indicates that the state language is
used in proceedings before courts in the Slovak Republic, in written as well as oral communication.
Anyone stating that he/she does not understand the state language has the right to an interpreter
according to the applicable legal system. This principle is also expressed in Section 7, sub-section 3
of the Act on courts and judges:
"Everyone may communicate in his/her mother tongue in proceedings before court. The Act
stipulates when the costs of interpreting are to be borne by the state."

17

The Slovak legal system fully respects the undertaking to eliminate any unjustified distinction,
exclusion, restriction or preference relating to the use of a regional or minority language and intended
to discourage or endanger the maintenance or development of it. This is also reflected in Article 33
of the Slovak Constitution, which stipulates the following:
"The membership of any national minority or ethnic group must not be to anyone’s
detriment".
This general provision also indicates that the use of a regional or minority language as one of the
aspects of membership of a national minority or ethnic group must not be to anyone’s detriment.
Article 12 of the Slovak Constitution can also be interpreted to this end:
(1) "People are free and equal in their dignity and rights. Basic rights and liberties are
inviolable, inalienable, secured by law, and unchallengeable.
(2) Basic rights and liberties on the territory of the Slovak Republic are guaranteed to
everyone regardless of sex, race, colour of skin, language, creed and religion, political or
other beliefs, national or social origin, affiliation to a nation or ethnic group, property,
descent, or another status. No one must be harmed, preferred, or discriminated against on
these grounds.
(3) Everyone has the right to freely decide on his nationality. Any influence on this decision
and any form of pressure aimed at assimilation are forbidden.
(4) No one must be restricted in his rights because he upholds his basic rights and liberties."
The above specified indicates that the applicable legal system does not provide any legal basis for
creating differences concerning the use of a regional or minority language. In this respect, it should
also be noted that there are no legal provisions concerning proceedings before courts in the Slovak
Republic that would give rise to such differences or distinction intended to discourage the use of such
languages.
Act No. 254/1991 Coll. on the Slovak Television and Act No. 255/1991 on the Slovak Radio
contain the following regulation:
Section 3 paragraph 3 "Slovak Television ensures by means of radio broadcasting in mother
tongues the exercise of the interests of nationalities and ethnic groups living in the Slovak
Republic.”
Section 5 paragraph 2 "Slovak Radio ensures by means of radio broadcasting in mother
tongues the exercise of the interests of nationalities and ethnic groups living in the Slovak
Republic.”
Act No. 191/1994 Coll. on the names and signs of municipalities in minority languages determines
that (Section 1 paragraph 1) "Municipalities where persons belonging to a national minority constitute
at least 20 per cent of the population (hereinafter ’municipality’) shall be identified in the language of
the national minority on separate traffic signs indicating the beginning and the end of the municipality."
"(3) List of the names of the municipalities in the languages of the national minorities is in the Annex to
18

this law; names of municipalities are of local nature" "Paragraph 3 (1) A municipality may decide by
means of a vote of its inhabitants on changing the name of a municipality given in Annex to this law
and may thus determine the name of the municipality in the language of a national minority, if the
name is not stated in the Annex to this law.” According to Section 3 paragraph (3) "Provisions of
paragraphs 1 and 2 do not refer to municipalities whose name was changed in the period 1867 1918 or 1938 - 1945.” Thus the Act makes an exception from the above mentioned principle when
there is fulfilled a criterion of per cent representation. This relates e. g. to the municipalities of
Gabcíkovo, Štúrovo, Kollárovo, Sládkovicovo, Jesenské etc.
In order to provide clear overview it would be appropriate to include a basic information on the Act
No. 270/1995 Coll. on state language of the Slovak Republic, which determines:
"Section 3 Usage of the state language in official contacts
(1) State bodies and state organizations, bodies of territorial self-administration and bodies of public
and legal institutions (hereafter only public and legal organs) use obligatorily the state language while
performing their duties on the whole territory of the Slovak Republic. Showing of adequate
knowledge of the state language orally and in writing is the precondition of acceptance to work or to
a similar labour relation and the assumption of performing the agreed-upon work in determined
working activity in legal and public bodies.
(2) Employees and functionaries of public and legal bodies, transport and communication employees
as well as members of armed forces, armed security corps, other armed corps and fire corps use the
state language in official communication.
(3) In the state language
a) laws, governmental acts and other generally binding legal regulations including
regulations of the territorial self-administration bodies, decisions and other public
deeds are published,
b) negotiations of public and legal bodies are conducted,
c) entire official agenda (registers, minutes, resolutions, statistics, registers, balances,
official records, information for public, etc.) and agenda of churches and religious
communities for public is conducted,
d) official names of municipalities and their parts, names of streets and other public
spaces, other geographical names as well as data on state map works including
cadastre maps are stated; names of municipalities in other languages is treated by a
special law,
e) chronicles of municipalities are written. Possible other-language wording is
translation from the state language.
(4) Legal and public organs and organizations established by them are obligated to use the state
language in all information systems and in mutual contacts.
(5) Repealed since 4 October 1997.”
The original wording of the paragraph (5) was: "Written presentations of citizens determined for
public and legal bodies are presented in the state language.” The reason of repeal of this provision
19

was the finding of the Constitutional Court of the Slovak Republic of 1997, in which the
Constitutional Court stated that the provision of Section 3 paragraph 5 of the Act (in connection with
the provision of Section 12 in extent in which it applies to the Slovak citizens belonging to national
minorities or ethnic groups) did not correspond to Article 34 paragraph 2 b) of the Slovak
Constitution which stated that "(2) In addition to the right to master the state language, citizens
belonging to national minorities or ethnic groups also have, under conditions defined by law, a
guaranteed... b) right to use their language in official communication.” Section 12 of the Act on state
language repealed the original Act of the Slovak National Council No. 428/1990 Coll. on official
language in the Slovak Republic.
"(6) Each citizen of the Slovak Republic has the right to free adjustment of his name and surname into
Slovak spelling form.
Section 4
Usage of the state language in schools
(1) Learning of the state language is obligatory at all primary and secondary schools. Other than the
state language is the instructional language and examining language to extent determined by special
regulations.
(2) Pedagogical workers at all schools and in school facilities on the territory of the Slovak Republic
with the exception of foreign pedagogues and lecturers are obliged to speak and use the state
language in word and in writing.
(3) The entire pedagogical documentation is conducted in the state language.
(4) Textbooks and instructional texts used in the education process in the Slovak Republic are
published in the state language besides textbooks and instructional texts for study in the language of
national minorities, ethnic groups and other foreign languages. Their publishing and use is treated by
special regulations.
(5) Provisions of para 1, 2 and 4 do not refer to usage of the state language in study at universities, in
study of other languages or in education in other than the state language 8) nor for using textbooks
and instructional texts in study at universities.
Section 5
Usage of the state language in mass information media at cultural events and public gatherings
(1) Broadcasting on radio and television is performed in the state language on the whole territory of
the Slovak Republic. Exceptions are
a) other language radio programmes and foreign language television programmes
consisting
of
audiovisual
works
and
other
sound and pictorial recordings with subtitles in the state language or otherwise
fulfilling the requirement of basic understandability from the point of view of the state
language,
b) foreign language broadcasting of Slovak radio for foreign countries, television and
radio language courses and programmes with similar orientation,
20

c) music programmes with original texts.
Broadcasting in languages of national minorities and ethnic groups are treated by special regulations.
(2) Other language audiovisual works determined for children up to 12 years must be dubbed into
the state language.
(3) Operators of radio and television broadcasting, announcers, moderators and editors are
obligated to use the state language in broadcasting.
(4) Broadcasting of regional or local stations, radio stations and radio facilities si performed, in
principle, in the state language. Other languages may be used before a particular programme is
broadcast in the state language.
(5) Periodical and non-periodical publications are published in the state language. Publishing of
different language print is treated by the special regulation,
(6) Occasional print determined for public, catalogues of galleries and museums, libraries, cinema,
theatre, concert and other cultural event programmes are published in the state language. In case of
need, they may contain translations into different languages.
(7) Cultural and educational events are performed in the state language, or in another language if they
fulfil the requirement of basic understandability from the point of view of the state language. The
exception is formed by cultural events of national minorities, ethnic groups, foreign artists appearing
as guests and music works with original texts. Accompanying presentation of programmes will first
be expressed in the state language.
(8) Each participant of a gathering or lecture on the territory of the Slovak Republic has the right to
present his speech in the state language.
Section 6
Usage of the state language in armed forces, in armed corps and in fire corps
(1) The state language is used in official relations in the Army of the Slovak Republic, in the forces of
the Home Office of the Slovak Republic, in the Police Corps, in the Slovak Information Service, in
the Corps of prison and justice guard of the Slovak Republic, in Railway Police of the Slovak
Republic and in municipal police.
(2) The entire agenda and documentation of armed forces, armed security corps, other armed corps
and fire corps is carried in the state language.
(3) Provision of para. 1 does not refer to air forces during flight operation and on international
activities of armed corps.
Section 7
Usage of the state language in court and administrative proceedings
(1) Mutual contact of courts with citizens, court proceedings, administrative proceedings, decisions
and minutes from courts and administrative organs are carried and published in the state language.

21

(2) Rights of persons belonging to national minorities and ethnic groups or rights of foreigners who
does not speak the state language, following from special regulations 12) remain untouched.

22

Section 8
Usage of the state language in economy, services and health system
(1) In the interest of the consumer, the usage of the state language is obligatory in marking the
contents of domestic or imported goods, in instructions for usage of goods, especially groceries and
medicaments, in guarantee conditions and other information for consumers. 13)
(2) Written legal acts in public and legal relation or in similar labour relations are made in the state
language.
(3) Finance and technical documentation, Slovak technical standards, statutes of associations,
groups, political parties, political movements and trade companies are made in the state language.
(4) The entire agenda of health facilities is made in the state language. Contacts of health personnel
with patients is usually made in the state language; if a citizen or foreigner does not speak the state
language, also in the language in which it is possible to communicate with the patient.
(5) In proceedings before public and legal bodies on contracts treating binding relations, only
wording in the state language is acknowledged.
(6) All notices (signs), advertisements and announcements determined for informing the public,
especially in shops, at sports centres, in pubs, in streets, along roads and above them, at airports, in
bus stations and railway stations, in rail wagons and in mass transport vehicles must be stated in the
state language. They may be translated into other languages, but different language texts follow after
the equally large text in the state language.
The Government in its Resolution No. 27 of 17 January 2001 tasked Vice-Prime-Minister Pál
Csáky to submit the comprehensive report on legislative, financial and other measures adopted
in order to ensure fulfilment of the commitments of the Slovak Republic arising from the
applied provisions of the Charter, in co-operation with the Minister of Culture, Minister of
Education, Minister of Justice, Minister of Interior, Minister of Economy, Minister of Labour, Social
Affaires and Family, Minister of Health, Minister of Environment and the Minister of Construction
and Regional Development until 30 September 2001. The said Government’s Resolution also
tasked the Minister of Foreign Affaires to ensure submission of the aggregate report of the Minister
of Education, Minister of Justice, Minister of Interior, Minister of Culture, Minister of Economy,
Minister of Labour, Social Affaires and Family, Minister of Health, Minister of Environment and the
Minister of Construction and Regional Development on fulfilment of the commitments of the Slovak
Republic arising from the Charter to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe.
The new Government formed after the parliamentary elections, which took place in September 2002
declared in its Policy Statement of November 2002 (Part II, 1. Democratic State) that "the
Government is aware of the multiethnic character of the Slovak society; it therefore commits itself to
countering all forms of intolerance. The Government undertakes to apply the approved provisions of
the European Charter for Regional and Minority Languages. The Government will prepare a draft act
on minorities, which will also deal with the financing of minority cultures.
The Government sees the resolution of the Roma issue as a matter of priority and will continue to
support specific development programmes and provide appropriate funding to ensure that the
situation and integration of Roma into the society improve. The Government will deliver a
23

continuation of the strategy to address the situation of the Roma community and complete the expert
and specific capacities directly in regions with large Roma populations in the interest of reinforcing
the efficiency of implementation of individual objectives. The Government will continue to implement
successful projects in the field of education, culture, housing and infrastructure, as well as in the social
area, while paying attention to the aspects of harmonic co-existence between Roma and non-Roma
citizens.”
Further in the Chapter Education and Training / Higher Education the Policy Statement of the
Government puts forward: "To overcome the differences in the level and structure of education, the
Government undertakes to establish a university for the Hungarian minority within the first year of the
term of office.” The Government’s bill on establishment of the J. Selye’s University in Komárno and
on amendment of Act No. 131/2002 Coll. on higher education and on amendments of some acts as
amended was passed by the National Council of the Slovak Republic on 23 October 2003.
According to the Government’s Plan of Legislation for 2003 had to be prepared the new bill on the
Slovak Television and Slovak Radio in June 2003, in September the legislative intent on education
and training and in December the proposal of the legislative intent of the media law, as well as the bill
on financing of national minorities’ culture and the bill on minorities.
As follows from the above, the Government of the Slovak Republic does not consider the achieved
degree of implementation of the Charter a final one and wherever it would be necessary – including
on the basis of the assessment by the Committee of Experts and in accordance with the resolution of
the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe – the Slovak Government is ready to take
appropriate measures.

24

PART III
Application of the provisions of the Charter according to its Article 2, paragraph 2

Languages : Bulgarian, Croatian, Czech, German, Polish, and Roma:

Article 8 – Education
Paragraphs and Sub-paragraphs Chosen:
1. With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such
languages are used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without
prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
a) to make available pre-school education or a substantial part of pre-school education in
the relevant regional or minority languages at least to those pupils whose families so
request and whose number is considered sufficient,
b) to provide, within primary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or minority
languages as an integral part of the curriculum,
c) to provide, within secondary education, for the teaching of the relevant regional or
minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum,
d) to provide, within technical and vocational education, for the teaching of the relevant
regional or minority languages as an integral part of the curriculum,
e) to provide means for the study of these languages as university and higher education
subjects,
f) to offer such languages as subjects of adult or continuing education courses,
g) to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is
reflected by the regional or minority language,
h) to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of
paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party,
i) to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring these measures taken
and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority
languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be made
public.
Measures taken in order to implement these provisions:
During the discussion and ratification of the Charter important legislation governing education for
national minorities or ethnic groups in accordance Part I of the Charter were adopted. The following
arrangements were introduced:
•

the maintenance of bilingual pedagogical documentation at schools using a national minority
language as the language of instruction and the issuance of bilingual school reports;
• secondary school entry exams for pupils from primary schools using a national minority language
as the language of instruction for studies at schools using Slovak as the language of instruction on
the subject of Slovak and Slovak literature within the scope of the curriculum of the primary
25

school they have attended and another main subject in the language used by the primary school
they have attended as the language of instruction;
• the introduction of primary school zero classes into the school education system and the
establishment of the pedagogical profession of assistant teacher; the assistants work as
pedagogical staff at nursery schools, primary schools and special primary schools and promote
the success in school of children and pupils from social and educational environments that provide
lack of stimulation;
• the transfer of certain competences in the field of education from state administration authorities
to municipalities and higher territorial units, effective from 1 July 2002.
Envisaged changes:
A reform of primary and secondary education will be gradually implemented on the basis of the
National Programme for the Development of Education and Training in the Slovak Republic in the
coming 15 to 20 years, which was approved by the Slovak Government (Government Resolution
No. 1193 of 19 December 2001) and the Parliamentary Committee on education, science, youth
and sport (Resolution No. 368 of 7 May 2002).
In its Policy Statement (November 2002) the Slovak Government expressed its intention to deal with
the several aspects of minority education, notably:
• to approve a new school law governing the field of education and training,
• to establish a university offering studies to citizens of Hungarian nationality in order to overcome
differences in level of education and structure,
• to offer the possibility of choice of teaching in the mother tongue to the Ruthenian and Roma
minorities,
• to address the outstanding aspects of public school financing,
• to provide for an open school system – the equality of establishment and development of
religious and private schools, etc.
• to enhance the university education of the pedagogues belonging to the nationalities in their
mother tongue in terms of certification.
The school network in the Slovak Republic in the school year 2001/2002:
The right of national minorities to education under Article 34 of the Slovak Constitution is facilitated
by the system of schools with the following languages of instruction:
a) German (only state schools):
• kindergartens,
• primary schools,
• university (Department of German Studies of the Faculty of Arts and the Pedagogic Faculty of the
University of Constantine the Philosopher in Nitra, Department of German, Dutch and
Scandinavian Studies and the Department of the German Language and Literature of the
Comenius University in Bratislava);
b) Roma, used as an auxiliary language of instruction (only state schools):
• kindergartens,
• preparatory grades of primary and special schools with a high concentration of Roma pupils,
• Secondary School of Fine Arts in Košice,
26

• Private Gymnasium Košice
• university (Department of the Roma Culture at the University of Constantine the Philosopher in
Nitra and its facilities in Spišská Nová Ves and Lucenec).
Following is an overview of the schools and school facilities where languages of nationalities have
been taught in the school year 2001/2002. This overview does not encompass primary schools
where minority languages and literature are taught as a subject and all other subjects are taught in
Slovak. In statistics they are filed under the schools with Slovak as a language of instruction. The
following minority languages are languages of instruction:
a)
b)
c)
d)

Ruthenian - 4 primary schools attended by 134 pupils in grades 1 to 8;
German - 6 primary schools attended by 1 052 pupils in grades 1 to 9;
Ukrainian - 17 primary schools attended by 526 pupils in grades 1 to 9;
Roma – Secondary School of Arts in the city of Košice with a total of 192 students.

1. NURSERY SCHOOLS
a) state
Language of instruction

Number of
schools

Number of
classes

Number of pupils

Slovak
of which schools using Ruthenian as
the language of instruction

2804
0

6862
0

141729
8

Hungarian
Slovak-Hungarian
Ukrainian
Slovak-Ukrainian
Slovak-German
Total in Slovakia

277
101
22
3
1
3208

557

9479

34

534

1
7454

22
151772

b) other
Founder/Language of instruction

Number of
schools

municipality/Slovak
enterprise/Slovak
private/Slovak
church/Slovak
church/Hungarian
civic association/Slovak
other/Slovak
Total in Slovakia
Nursery schools in Slovakia in
total
27

Number of
classes

Number of pupils

10
20
10
10
2
1
2
55

25
56
16
19
2
1
3
122

526
1103
336
408
32
10
45
2460

3263

7576

154232

Children in nursery schools by
nationality
Total number of children in nursery
of which Slovak nationals
of which:
Slovak nationality
Czech, Moravian, Silesian
Ukrainian
Ruthenian
Hungarian
Polish
German
Roma
other
foreigners

schools

154232
154028
140546
46
120
60
12087
9
25
1016
119
204

2. PRIMARY SCHOOLS
a) state
Language of instruction

Number of
schools

Slovak
of which schools with classes using
German as the language of instruction
Hungarian
Slovak-Hungarian
Ukrainian
Slovak-Ukrainian
German
Total in Slovakia

Number of
classes

Number of pupils

2053
5

25754
39

582669
941

259
29
7
1
1
2350

2114

41957

53

579

4
27925

60
625265

b) private
Language of instruction

Number of
schools

Slovak
Bulgarian
Total in Slovakia

Number of
classes
2
1
3

28

Number of pupils
8
8
16

79
101
180

c) church
Language of instruction

Number of
schools

Slovak
Hungarian
Total in Slovakia
Total number of primary schools
in Slovakia

Number of
classes

Number of pupils

82
12
94

1088
64
1152

24498
1023
25521

2447

29093

650966

Primary school pupils by
nationality
Total number of pupils at primary
schools
of which Slovak nationals
of which :
Slovak nationality
Czech, Moravian, Silesian
Ukrainian
Ruthenian
Hungarian
Polish
German
Roma
other
foreigners

650966
650027
589791
1267
613
255
52863
48
99
4654
437
939

3. GYMNASIA
a) state
Language of instruction

Number of
schools

Slovak
Hungarian
Slovak-Hungarian
Ukrainian
Total in Slovakia

Number of
classes
137
11
8
1
157

29

Number of
students
2116
153

63325
4046

6
2275

116
67487

b) private
Language of instruction

Number of
schools

Slovak
Hungarian
other
Total in Slovakia

Number of
classes
15
1
1
17

Number of
students
104
7
4
115

2407
170
38
2615

c) church
Language of instruction

Number of
schools

Slovak
Hungarian
Total in Slovakia
Total number of gymnasia in
Slovakia

Number of
classes

Number of
students

34
4
38

333
18
351

10054
459
10513

212

2741

80615

Students of gymnasia by nationality
Total number of students
of which Slovak nationals
of which:
Slovak nationality
Czech, Moravian, Silesian
Ukrainian
Ruthenian
Hungarian
Polish
German
Roma
other
foreigners

80615
80434
74104
264
91
56
5787
15
36
3
78
181

4. SECONDARY VOCATIONAL SCHOOLS
a) state
Language of instruction

Number of
schools

Slovak
Hungarian
Slovak-Hungarian

Number of
classes
289
6
14

30

Number of
students
2970
129

81268
3285

Total

309

3099

84553

b) private
Language of instruction

Number of
schools

Slovak
Hungarian
Slovak-Hungarian
Total

Number of
classes

Number of
students

25
1
2
28

140
14

3102
259

154

3361

c) church
Language of instruction

Number of
schools

Slovak
Total
Total number of secondary
vocational schools in Slovakia

Number of
classes

Number of
students

4
4

35
35

862
862

341

3288

88776

Students of secondary vocational schools by
nationality
Total number of students
of which Slovak nationals
of which:
Slovak nationality
Czech, Moravian, Silesian
Ukrainian
Ruthenian
Hungarian
Polish
German
Roma
other
foreigners

88776
88701
81609
190
618
35
6131
5
13
62
38
75

5. SECONDARY APPRENTICE SCHOOLS AND APPRENTICES
a) state
Language of instruction

Number of
schools

Slovak
Hungarian

Number of
classes
326
5

31

Number of
students
4019
56

96093
1151

Slovak-Hungarian
Total in Slovakia

22
353

306
4381

6391
103635

b) private
Language of instruction

Number of
schools

Slovak
Hungarian
Slovak-Hungarian
Total in Slovakia

Number of
classes
5
3
2
10

Number of
students
25
33
13
71

425
683
186
1294

c) church
Language of instruction

Number of
schools

Slovak
Total in Slovakia
Total number of secondary
apprentice schools and
apprentices in Slovakia

Number of
classes

Number of
students

5
5

39
110

909
909

368

4562

105838

Students of secondary apprentice schools and
apprentices by nationality:
Total number of students
of which Slovak nationals
of which:
Slovak nationality
Czech, Moravian, Silesian
Ukrainian
Ruthenian
Hungarian
Polish
German
Roma
other
foreigners

105838
105774
96309
220
103
48
8867
6
11
180
30
64

6. SPECIAL SCHOOLS
a) state
Language of instruction

Number of
schools

Slovak

Number of
classes
339

32

Number of pupils
3192

29040

Hungarian
Slovak-Hungarian
Total

14
17
370

180

1543

3372

30583

b) private
Language of instruction

Number of
schools

Slovak

Number of
classes
2

Number of pupils
4

26

c) church
Language of instruction

Number of
schools

Slovak
Total in Slovakia

Number of
classes

Number of pupils

5

36

258

377

3412

30867

Pupils in special schools by nationality
Total number of pupils at special schools
of which Slovak nationals:
of which:
Slovak nationality
Czech, Moravian, Silesian
Hungarian
Ukrainian
Ruthenian
Polish
Roma
other
foreigners

30867
30855
26522
33
2034
9
5
5
2240
7
12

Article 9 – Judicial authorities
Paragraphs and Sub-paragraphs Chosen
1. The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents
using the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to
the situation of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded
by the present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration
of justice:
a) in criminal proceedings to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or
minority language and to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral,

33

shall not be considered inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a regional or
minority language;
b) in civil proceedings to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court,
that he or she may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring
additional expense and to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or
minority languages;
c) in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters to allow, whenever a
litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she may use his or her regional
or minority language without thereby incurring additional expense and to allow
documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages, if necessary
by the use of interpreters and translations;
d) to take steps to ensure that the application of sub-paragraphs b and c above and any
necessary use of interpreters and translations does not involve extra expense for the
persons concerned.
Measures taken in order to implement these provisions
In Article 47 of the Constitution concerning provisions for the use of a regional or minority language
in proceedings before courts, the applicable legal system of the Slovak Republic goes beyond the
framework of this provision of the Charter. This is associated with the Parties’ commitment to allow
users of regional or minority languages to use them in judicial districts located in the territory where
they live. Act No. 184/1999 Coll. specifies the 20 percent threshold for the use of a minority
language in official communication. However, by referring § 5 (1) of this Act, as regards the use of
minority languages in court proceedings, to special legal norms, the validity and subsequent
application of which is related to the whole territory of the Slovak Republic, it can be stated that the
legal system of the Slovak Republic goes beyond this particular requirement of the Charter. The
above means that, based on the application of the law on national minority languages, regional or
minority languages can be used in court proceedings even outside judicial districts complying with the
with the 20 percent threshold of population representing a national minority
a) To ensure the application of this provision, the Code of Criminal Procedure in its Section 2, subsection 14 stipulates the following:
"Every person shall have the right to use his mother tongue before the criminal justice
authorities."
To ensure the exercise of this right, the criminal justice authorities are required to engage an
interpreter in accordance with Section 28 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
"If there is a need to translate the content of a statement or a written document or if the
accused declares that he does not have a command the language of the proceedings, an
interpreter shall be engaged; the interpreter may also act as the recorder."
Similarly, the provision of Section 55, paragraph 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is to be taken
into consideration as it provides details concerning the principle laid down in Section 7, paragraph 1
of the Act on the state language.

34

"Records of oral testimony from a person who does not have command of Slovak shall also be
drawn up in Slovak; if a verbatim record of the testimony is necessary, the recorder or the
interpreter shall also enter the relevant part of the testimony into the records in the language,
in which the testimony was provided."
The above-quoted provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure apply to all parties to proceedings,
which means the accused, the defendant, any party to the case, the injured party, as well as the
witness if such a person declares that he/she does not understand the language of the proceedings.
The application of these provisions in practice is illustrated by extensive case law:
R 34/1967: "If the defendant does not have a command of the language of the proceedings,
the criminal justice authority is obliged to engage an interpreter under Section 28 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure. Failure to engage an interpreter for the proceedings constitutes a
curtailment of the right of defence and grounds for the vacation of the judgment."
R 28/1981: "If a person who does not have a command of Czech or Slovak testifies before
court as a witness, the court must engage an interpreter even if the presiding judge has a
command of the language in which the witness gives testimony."
R 48/1994: "Under Section 28 of the Code of Criminal Procedure as amended by Act No.
558/1992 Coll. an interpreter must be also engaged if the accused claims that he/she does not
have a command of the language of the proceedings. This is a subjective right of the accused
to express himself/herself in his/her mother tongue. The above-specified indicates that the
engagement of an interpreter does not depend on the opinion of the criminal justice
authorities whether and to what extent the accused has a command of the Slovak language."
The provisions of Section 2, paragraphs 14 and 28 of the Code of Criminal Procedure are not only
applied to the initial phase of criminal prosecution, but also to the period prior to the beginning of
criminal prosecution, notably to the lodging of information on crime under Section 59 in connection
with Section 158, paragraph 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure:
Information on the facts indicating the commission of criminal offence shall be filed to
prosecutor, investigator or police body; those are obliged to instruct informer on his/her
responsibility for giving deliberately false entries. Prosecutor may handover the received
information to investigator or police body for further procedures.

Similarly, if any documentary evidence that either supports or refutes the alleged facts related to the
criminal offence or the accused is provided in a regional or minority language, its translation is
provided in accordance with Section 112, paragraph 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
However, it should be noted that the applicable legislation does not provide for the reverse
procedure, i.e. the provision of translations of adopted decisions as it is indicated by the following
adjudication:
R 42/1976: "Written documents relating to the proceedings before court and issued in the
Czech or Slovak languages in the course of criminal proceedings shall be delivered by courts
to the parties to proceedings that do not command these languages, without translation into
their mother tongue."
35

According to Section 151 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the costs of criminal proceedings,
including the costs of sentence enforcement proceedings, shall be borne by the State. This provision
indicates that in addition to costs related to the individual acts, the State also bears costs related to
the engagement of an interpreter.
The above-quoted provisions show that the applicable legal system in the Slovak Republic enshrines
the right to use a regional or minority language in criminal proceedings. As this right is guaranteed to
any person stating that he/she does not have a command of the language of the proceedings, not
limited to the accused, in any phase of criminal proceedings, the Slovak legislation governing this
matter goes beyond the framework laid down by the relevant provision of the Charter. It is evident
that the exercise of this right does not result in any extra costs to be incurred by such persons. The
existing Code of Criminal Procedure thus fully respects the provisions of the Charter, which the
Slovak Republic undertook to implement.
b) In its Section 18, the Code of Civil Judicial Procedure lays down the following:
"The parties shall participate in civil proceedings on an equal footing. They have the right to
use their mother tongue in proceedings before court. The court shall have to provide them
with equal opportunities to exercise their rights."
The above-referred provision reflects and lays down details relating to Article 12 of the Slovak
Constitution, which governs the equality of participants in civil proceedings. This equality is ensured
by means of the right to act before court in one’s mother tongue, which means that participants in
proceedings have the right to make petitions and other written motions as well as to make oral
statements in their mother tongue, and the court is obliged to engage an interpreter to facilitate
communication with the participant in his/her mother tongue. Costs relating to the engagement of an
interpreter are borne by the State as stipulated by Section 141, sub-section 2 of the Code of Civil
Judicial Procedure:
"The costs of evidence that are not covered by the security, as well as cash expenses incurred
by the appointed counsel, who is not an attorney-at-law, and costs related to the use of the
party’s mother tongue in the proceedings shall be borne by the State."
The fact that this provision is applied in practise is well documented by case law:
R 21/1986: "The duty to reimburse the costs of the engagement an interpreter so that a
participant in civil judicial proceedings could act in his/her mother tongue must not be
imposed on the participant. The same applies to an interpreter appointed by court to facilitate
communication with a deaf-mute participant in proceedings."
The above-specified shows that the existing legal system and legislation in the Slovak Republic allow
for the use of a regional or minority language in civil proceedings before courts, to provide evidence
and documents in regional and minority languages without any additional costs to be borne by those
parties and thus this provision of the Charter is fully respected.
c) The provisions related to proceedings before courts in administrative matters are integral part of
the Code of Civil Judicial Procedure. Part V of the Code of Civil Judicial Procedure contains
36

provisions concerning this particular field of law. This indicates that the general provisions of the
Code of Civil Judicial Procedure, including the right to use one’s mother tongue in proceedings
before courts, analogously apply to proceedings before courts in administrative matters as it is
required by Article 9, paragraph 1, sub-paragraph b) of the Charter.
d) As the above-outlined analysis of the Slovak legal system indicates the costs of interpreting and/or
translation when a party to proceedings exercises its right to use a regional or minority language in
civil proceedings or in administrative law proceedings are borne by the State. Such requirements are
laid down by Article 9, paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs b) and c) of the Charter.

37

Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
Paragraphs and Sub-paragraphs Chosen
1. Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are
users of regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according
to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as it is reasonably possible:
a iii) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written
applications and receive a reply in these languages ; or
iv) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written
applications in these languages.
2. In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents
who are users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified
below, the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
b) the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written
applications in these languages;
c) the publication by regional authorities of their official documents also in the relevant
regional or minority languages;
d) the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in the relevant regional
or minority languages;
f) the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;
g) the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official language(s),
of traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or minority languages.
3. With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other persons
acting on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which regional or
minority languages are used, in accordance with the situation of each language and as far as
this is reasonably possible:
c) to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request in these languages.
4. With a view to putting into effect hose provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by the
them, the Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
a) translation or interpretation as may be required;
c) compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a
knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that
language is used.
5. The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or
minority languages, at the request of those concerned.
Measures taken in order to implement these provisions

38

The Slovak Republic complies with the undertakings accepted by it under Article 10 of the Charter.
Measures taken by the Slovak Republic in this respect are in accordance with the adopted
international documents as well as national legislation regulating these matters.
Slovakia makes all efforts to implement the following international documents in particular:
- the 1992 UN Declaration on the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities, particularly Article 2, paragraph 1;
- Document of the Copenhagen Conference on Human Dimension, particularly Article 321;
- Council of Europe Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities.
In Section 2 of its declaration relating to the deposit of its instrument of ratification, the Slovak
Republic stated that the notion "territory in which the regional or minority language is used" according
to Article 1, sub-paragraph a) means the territory of any municipality listed in the Appendix to
Slovak Government Ordinance No. 221/1999 Coll. issuing the list of municipalities in which citizens
of the Slovak Republic belonging to a national minority represent at least 20 per cent of the
population. The above specified also applies to the application of Article 10 of the Charter.
Ad: paragraph 1
The Bulgarian, Croatian, Polish and Czech languages are not used in any municipality due to the fact
that the population of users of any of these languages does not represent 20 per cent of the
population in any municipality. The German language is used in one municipality (village of Kunešov
in the district of Žiar nad Hronom). However, no body of state administration is based in this
municipality. The Roma language can be used in 58 municipalities; state administration bodies are
based in none of them.
Ad: paragraph 2
This undertaking under the Charter is transposed in national legislation, particularly in the fundamental
piece of national legislation – the Constitution, Article 34, paragraph 2, sub-paragraph b):
"... "In addition to the right to master the state language, citizens belonging to national
minorities or ethnic groups also have, under conditions defined by law, a guaranteed
right to use their language in dealings with the authorities…"
Act No. 184/1999 Coll. lays down detail provisions concerning the use of the languages of national
minorities living in the Slovak Republic on the use of minority languages. The Act allows

- to use a minority language in official communications;
- to submit applications to a state administrative body based in the municipality and a local
government body also in the relevant minority language, except for official instruments and
documents (such as identity cards, driving licenses, passports, etc.);
- to receive, at the request of the concerned, a decision issued in proceedings concerning
administrative matters also in the relevant minority language;
- to receive forms issued within the scope of powers and authorities of the territorial self-government
body, at the request of the concerned, also in the relevant minority language;
39

- to carry out meetings and debates of a territorial self-government body also in the relevant minority
language, upon the consent of all the present;
- members of the local council to use a minority language in their debates; the municipality is
responsible for providing interpreting into the state language;
- to maintain local chronicles also in a minority language;
- to identify and sign the building in which a local government or state administration body is based
also in the relevant minority language;
- to use the signposts of streets and other local geographic signs in the relevant minority language;
- to provide important information (warning, alerting and health-related) also in the relevant minority
language;
- to ask state administration and local government bodies to provide information on generally binding
regulations also in the relevant minority language,
- employees of local government and state administration bodies in 23 municipalities where these
institutions are based to provide instructions also in the official language of the relevant minority.
With regard to this Act, the Public Administration Section of the Ministry of the Interior issued in the
Operational Instructions Journal for regional and district offices of state administration:
- Guidelines to general internal administration units, small traders’ licensing units and fire protection
units for the use of minority languages in official communications, Issue No. 12 of 9 September
1999).
- Guidelines for the signing of buildings of state administration bodies in minority languages, Issue
No. 10 of 10 May 2000
- Guidelines for the signing of buildings of local government bodies, Issue No. 203-2001/05692 of
4 May 2001.
The Act No. 191/1994 Coll. on the names and signs of municipalities in minority languages regulates
the use of traditional place names in minority languages:
Section 1of the Act:
(1) "Municipalities in which residents belonging to a national minority represent at least 20
per cent of the population are identified in the minority language on separate traffic
signposts specifying the limits of the municipality."
(2) "Road signs under (1) shall be placed under road signs displaying the name of the
municipality in the state language."
(3) "The list of names of municipalities in national minority languages is stated in the annex
to this Act; the names of municipalities have a local character."
Under this Act the relevant bodies of local state administration, particularly traffic authorities, are
obliged to provide for the signing of the municipality in the relevant minority language. This part of the
Act came into effect in November 1994. The local state administration bodies comply with this
statutory requirement. The municipalities in which national minorities represent at least 20 per cent of
the population are identified by means of such signposts.
Ad: paragraphs 3 and 4
Implementation of this commitment of the Charter is ensured in the Act No. 184/1999 Coll. on the
Use of Minority Languages, in particular in Section 2 paragraph 3:

40

"A citizen of the Slovak Republic, belonging to a national minority shall have the right to
submit written applications to a body of state administration and a body of local selfadministration (hereinafter "body of public administration") in the municipality under
paragraph 1 also in the minority language. The body of public administration in the
municipality under paragraph 1 shall provide a reply in the state language and in the minority
language, with the exception of public documents."
Local state administration bodies or social services facilities are able to provide interpreting services
when necessary and upon the request of the concerned.
Ad: paragraph 5
This Slovakia’s undertaking related to the Charter is transposed into Act No. 300/1993 Coll. on first
name and surname and Act No. 154/1994 Coll. on registers. In this context, the following provisions
of the Act on registers are relevant:
Section 13, sub-section 4: "Upon the oral notification of a birth, the informant is obliged to
prove his/her identity. If the informant… makes such notification in a language of which the
registrar does not have a command, the presence of an interpreter is required. Should the
interpreter not be an officially appointed interpreter, the interpreter must make an oath, in
accordance with a special regulation, before the registrar for whom the interpreter will
interpret. The data on interpretation and the interpreter shall be recorded in the Birth
Register."
Section 16: "The female surname of a person other than Slovak nationality shall be recorded
without the grammatical suffix of gender indication according to the Slovak grammatical
rules,
a) if it is requested by the parents of a female child at the registration of her surname in the
Birth Register according to Section 13, sub-section 1, if it is requested by the adoptive parents
at the registration of the surname of their adopted child in case of irrevocable adoption;
b) if it is requested by a woman at the registration of her marriage in the Marriage Register
according to Section 14;
c) if it is requested by a woman in relation to the registration of the decision on a change to
surname in accordance with a special act."
Section 19, sub-section 3: "In the birth certificate of a person other than of Slovak nationality
whom this official document concerns and whose name is recorded in the Register in the
Slovak equivalent, the person’s name shall be recorded in his/her language, if he/she requests
so in writing; and such fact shall be recorded in the Register. All further modifications and
confirmations shall be made using this form of the name."
Section 19, sub-section 5: "In the birth certificate or marriage certificate of a woman whom
this official document concerns, her surname shall be recorded without the Slovak genderidentifying suffix, if she requests so in writing; this fact shall be recorded in the Register. All
further official extracts and confirmations on data recorded in the Register shall be made
using this form of the surname. Any request in writing according to the first sentence above
shall be maintained in the Register of documents."

41

The Act on first name and surname:
Section 2, sub-section 1: "A person born on the territory of the SR may have several names
given, also foreign ones, according to conditions set out in Section 1..."
Article 11 – Media
Paragraphs and Sub-paragraphs Chosen
1. The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the
territories in which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language,
to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or
play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the
media:
a iii) to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer programmes in the regional or
minority languages;
b ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;
c ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the regional
or minority languages on a regular basis;
d) to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in the regional or minority languages;
e i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one newspaper
in the regional or minority languages;
f ii) to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions in the
regional or minority languages.
2. The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a
regional or minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure
that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of
information in the written press in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional
or minority language. The exercise of the above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it
duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or
penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interest of
national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime,
for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others,
for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the
authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
3. The Parties undertake to ensure that the interests of the users of regional or minority
languages are represented or taken into account within such bodies as may be established in
accordance with the law with responsibility for guaranteeing the freedom and pluralism of the
media.
Measures taken in order to implement these provisions
42

1. Slovak Radio:
On its fifth circuit, Slovak Radio broadcasts a programme designed for national minorities – The
Minority-Ethnic Programme. This programme is prepared by a specialized desk, which was set up in
the process of transition in 1991. Programme broadcasting time reflects the results of the latest
census, i.e. the populations of the individual minorities and ethnic groups. For this reason and in order
to provide for the needs of the individual minorities, the minority-broadcasting desk has specialised
units for broadcasting in the Ruthenian, Ukrainian, German, Polish, and Roma languages.
Programmes are broadcast on AM, frequencies Prešov 1071 kHz and Stakcín 864 kHz. The
structure of radio programmes broadcast for other national minorities is as follows:
- Roma national minority
- German national minority
- Czech national minority
- Polish national minority

- 30 minutes per week;
- 30 minutes per week;
- 30 minutes, once in four weeks;
- 30 minutes, once in four weeks.

2. Slovak Television:
Programmes designed for the individual national minorities are broadcast as follows:
- Roma national minority: The Roma minority magazine; 27 broadcasts; 12.2 hours;
- Czech national minority: The Czech minority magazine; 12 broadcasts; 5.7 hours;
- Polish national minority: The Polish minority magazine; 5 broadcasts; 2.3 hours;
- German national minority: The German minority magazine; 4 broadcasts; 1.9 hours;
- Bulgarian national minority: The Bulgarian minority magazine; 2 broadcasts; 0.9 hours;
- Multi-minority magazine: 1 broadcast, 0.4 hours.
Television and radio signals of many TV and radio stations (public and private) based in the
neighbouring countries can be received in the Slovak Republic. In addition to the electronic media
operating in Slovakia, a number of periodic and non-periodic newspapers are published in Slovakia,
enjoying financial assistance from the State. Access to foreign literature is unhindered.

43

The following provisions mainly regulate the field of the media:
The Constitution
Article 34 (1): "The comprehensive development of persons belonging to national minorities or
ethnic groups in the Slovak Republic is guaranteed, particularly the right to develop their own
culture, together with other members of the minority or ethnic group, the right to disseminate
and receive information in their mother tongue, the right to associate in national minority
associations, and the right to set up and maintain educational and cultural institutions."
Act No. 308/2000 Coll. on Broadcasting and Retransmission
Section 16: "The broadcaster shall: (...)
g) ensure at broadcasting of programs and other elements of program service the use of the
state language and languages of national minorities in accordance with special regulations".
Act No. 255/1991 Coll. on the Slovak Radio:
Section 6: "Slovak Radio fulfils the following main tasks:
d) By the means of the radio broadcasting it contributes to the development of the national
culture and culture of the nationalities living in the Slovak Republic as well as to the
mediation of the cultural values of other nations."
Act No. 254/1991 Coll. on the Slovak Television:
Section 3, sub-section (3): "The Slovak Television by the means of the television broadcasting
in their mother tongue also provides for the exercise of the interests of the nationalities and
ethnic groups living in the Slovak Republic."
Section 6 (j): "Slovak Television fulfils the following tasks:
... it contributes by the means of the television broadcasting to the development of the
national culture and cultures of the nationalities living in the Slovak Republic as well as to the
mediation of the cultural values of other nations."
The above-referred overview of legislation documents that in respect of the media, the operation of
public television and radio creates good preconditions for the application and implementation of the
Charter, which are comparable with standard arrangements in the EU Member States.

Article 12 - Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraphs and Sub-paragraphs Chosen:
1. With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural
centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and
film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries,
including inter alia the use of new technologies - the Parties undertake, within the territory in

44

which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent,
have power or play a role in this field:
a) to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority languages
and foster the different means of access to works produced in these languages;
b) to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in regional
or minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronization
and subtitling activities;
c) to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages
by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronization and subtitling
activities;
d) to ensure that the bodies responsible for organizing or supporting cultural activities of
various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of
regional or minority languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for
which they provide backing;
e) to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organizing or supporting
cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of the regional or
minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest of the population;
f) to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or
minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;
g) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for collecting,
keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the regional or minority
languages;
2. In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are
traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority
language justifies so, to allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and
facilities in accordance with the preceding paragraph.
3. The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy
abroad, for regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.
Measures taken in order to implement these provisions:
Within the framework of its powers and responsibilities, the Ministry of Culture of the Slovak
Republic is engaged in a broad range of efficient co-operation with the organizations representing 12
national minorities living in the Slovak Republic. Political, organisational and financial support
provided to their activities and aiming at maintaining and developing the cultures of the national
minorities and ethnic groups ensures free use of their languages and respect for their specifics and
values.
In this respect, a special unit of the Ministry of Culture – Section of Minority Cultures – provides
systemic and planned financial support from state budget to civil associations, i.e. non-governmental
organisations of the Hungarian, Roma, Jewish, German, Croatian, Ruthenian, Ukrainian, Russian,
Polish, Czech, Bulgarian, and Moravian nationalities.
In accordance with the Government Policy Statement and minority policy, the Ministry of Culture
devised an efficient, objective and transparent procedure for the provision of purpose-tied funds
from the budget of the Ministry of Culture to promote the cultures of the national minorities.

45

The following are the key elements of this system:
1/ The Ministry of Culture Guidelines for the provision and accounting of subsidies provided
from the commitments of the Ministry’s budget to civil associations, foundations and professional
organizations of legal persons to carry out their cultural activities;
2/ The Ministry of Culture Guidelines for the provision and accounting of subsidies provided
from the commitments of the Ministry’s budget to natural persons – entrepreneurs and non-financial
entities – legal persons to support their cultural activities in accordance with Act No. 303/1995 Coll.
on budgetary rules.
3/ Rules of organization and procedure of the Committee for the transfer of purpose-tied
funds intended to support the culture of national minorities. This document sets out rules
specifying the powers and responsibilities, procedures and eligibility requirements for committees
making decision about the provision of purpose-tied funds – grants to projects submitted by the
individual entities representing national minorities.
4/ The Committee for the transfer of purpose-tied funds intended to support the culture of the
national minorities is an important element in this system. It provides for a high degree of the
autonomy of the minorities in the fields of project preparation and application, the specification of
their objectives and priorities concerning their culture, periodicals and non-periodicals. The
Committee consists of 11 representatives of the national minorities. They are appointed by the
Minister of Culture. Only the Secretary of the Committee is an employee of the Ministry. The
Committee is an advisory body to the Minister providing him with its conclusions and
recommendations in this field. This body representing the national minorities assesses the applications
of the individual national minorities for contributions and, based on the principle of majority vote,
adopts recommendations and conclusions as to the amounts of subsidies to be granted.
5/ The above-specified Committee has its sub-committees, which are formed by the individual
national minorities. This means that each national minority has its own sub-committee that makes
decisions as to the allocation of funds approved and committed for it by the Committee. Taking into
consideration its allocation, each national minority sets out its own priorities and approves projects
designed to support cultural activities, periodicals and non-periodicals.
6/ Applications for the funding of projects in the fields of cultural activities, periodicals and
non-periodicals. Each national minority submits structured applications for projects that are valid for
the whole of the calendar year.
By applying the above-referred system that has been reviewed and updated in the recent years, the
national minorities are provided with purpose-tied funds to carry out cultural activities and publish
periodicals and non-periodicals. This system is designed and operated with the intention to fulfil the
mission and objectives of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages as it provides
for the development and use of the languages of minorities and ethnic groups as symbols of their
cultural heritage and linguistic identity.
The table below provides a comprehensive review of the financing of national minority culture in
Slovakia in the specified period.

46

Table 1: The provisions of funding for minority cultures in the 1995-2002 period from the
special allocation under the Ministry of Culture budget chapter (in SKK)
Nationality
Hungarian
Roma
Czech
Ruthenian
Ukrainian
Moravian
German
Croatian
Bulgarian
Jewish
Polish
Russian
others
Total

1995
10 952 000
4 956 296
937 802
1 697 585
3 718 793
279 10
2 573 080
1 275 727
282 440
203 500
108 200

1996
7 327 200
4 079 200
1 294 000
2 360 000
4 313 000
503 800
3 784 100
1 200 000
360 300
400 200
778 000

1997
10 390 000
3 542 000
670 000
1 010 000
4 818 000
501 000
5 176 000
2 242 000
411 000
1 820 000
410 000

1998
10 976 000
3 970 000
590 000
1 250 000
3 710 000
670 000
3 495 000
2 190 000
1 380 000
250 000
250 000

28 644 200
55 628 723

21 388 000
47 787 800

13 352 000
44 342 000

6 080 000
34 811 000

1999
23 813 935
7 846 550
2 078 400
2 078 400
2 289 990
972 000
1 990 200
1 153 400
980 175
1 920 200
614 200
582 200
487 200
47 135 450

2000
23 014 000
6 054 980
2 081 700
2 390 000
2 498 000
990 000
2 067 500
1 320 000
900 000
1 780 000
830 000
580 000
1 387 000
45 893 180

2001
23 703 000
4 946 000
2 201 000
2 215 000
2 460 000
400 000
1 830 000
1 700 000
493 000
1 626 000
726 000
520 000
990 000
43 810 000

2002
39 142 300
7 303 900
2 599 200
3 399 000
2 995 000
1 000 000
2 373 000
1 879 000
900 000
2 066 400
1 300 000
520 000
1 993 000
67 470 800

In addition to the aforementioned forms of state support for national minorities culture, there are also
the following institutions falling under the competence of the Ministry of Culture: the ensemble Ifjú
Szívek [Young Hearts], the Museum of Jewish Culture, Museum of the Culture of Hungarians in
Slovakia, Museum of Culture of Carpathian Germans, the Documentation Centre of Croatian
Culture seated in Bratislava , Museum of the Ruthenian-Ukrainian Culture seated in Svidník, the
Documentation Centre of Czech Culture in Slovakia and Documentation Centre of Roma Culture in
Slovakia at the Ethnographic Museum of the Slovak National Museum in Martin.
The following institutions are financed from the budgets of the regional offices of state administration
as they were transferred from the Ministry of Culture to them under Act No. 222/1996 Coll.: the
Jókai Theatre in the town of Komárno, the Thália Theatre in the city of Košice, the Romathan
Theatre in the city of Košice, and the A. Duchnovic Theatre in the town of Prešov, the Museum of
the Hungarian Culture and Danube region in Komárno, the Departments for the Roma minority
culture of the Vihorlat Museum in the town of Humenne and the Gemer-Malohont Museum in the
town of Rimavska Sobota.

47

Table 2: Funds provided to the institutions of minority cultures under the competence of the Ministry
of Culture and regional offices of state administration in 1999-2002
Organization
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

Thália Theatre, Košice
Jókai Theatre, Komárno
Romathan Theatre, Košice
A. Duchnovic Theatre, Prešov
Museum of the RuthenianUkrainian Culture, Svidník
Museum of the Hungarian
Culture and Danube Region
Museum of the Culture of
Hungarians in Slovakia,
Bratislava
Museum of the Jewish
Culture, Bratislava
Museum of the Culture of
Carpathian Germans,
Bratislava
Ensemble Ifjú Szívek,
Bratislava
Total

1999
6 405 000
8 679 000
7 048 000
10 875 000

2000
7 550 000
9 995 000
7 078 000
11 513 000

2001
9 803 000
15 723 000
7 595 000
11 869 000

2002
9 755 000
22 094 000
7 544 000
18 078 000

5 849 000

4 895 000

4 998 000

5 776 000

4 412 000

4 116 000

3 969 000

6 983 000
10 000 000

5 460 000

5 290 000

5 430 000

5 650 000

1 950 000

2 000 000

2 000 000

2 050 000

4 429 000

5 386 000

5 997 000

6 137 000

55 107 000

57 823 000

67 384 000

74 267 000

Article 13 – Economic and social life
Paragraphs and Sub-paragraphs Chosen
1. With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole
country:
a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without justifiable
reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to economic or
social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical documents such as
instructions for the use of products or installations;
b) to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of companies and private documents of
any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or minority languages, at least
between users of the same language;
c) to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority languages in
connection with economic or social activities;
2. With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far s the public
authorities are competent, within the territory in which the regional or minority languages are
used, and as far as this is reasonably possible:
c) to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and hostels offer the
possibility of receiving and treating in their own language persons using a regional or
minority language who are in need of care on grounds of ill-health, old age or for other
reasons.

48

Measures taken in orde r to implement these provisions:
Ad paragraph 1:
No legal regulations or internal guidelines regulating social care facilities contain provisions that would
prohibit the use of regional or minority languages.
No complaints, petitions or applications concerning rules directed to the discouragement from the
use of regional or minority languages have been recorded in the Slovak Republic.
Ad paragraph 2:
Social care facilities provide for the reception and treatment of their clients in their language.
Employees of the facilities have good command of the minority language used by the clients of the
facilities. There are meeting rooms for individual minorities, religious services are provided
individually for each minority. Bilingual magazines and other publications are published. Clients are
allowed to watch television programmes in the languages of their choice. The operation is managed in
a way so as to ensure that persons of Slovak nationality are not discriminated even in areas with a
larger number of clients and employees speaking a language other than Slovak. Cultural and social
events for clients are organized in their mother tongue or regional language, as well as in Slovak.
Section 8, sub-section 4 of Act No. 270/1995 Coll. on the state language of the Slovak Republic as
amended lays down the following:
"The entire documentation of heath care facilities is maintained in the state language. The
contact between healthcare personnel and the patients is usually conducted in the state
language; if the patient is a citizen or foreigner who does not have command of the state
language, it can be conducted in a language that enables communication with the patient."
According to Act No. 634/1992 Coll. on consumer protection (Section 6, Sections 9 – 20), the
prohibition of consumer discrimination and the principle of obligatory information apply in Slovakia.
Under the above-referred Act, consumer means "a natural person purchasing products and using
services for his/her direct consumption….". In this respect, the law does not differentiate between the
nationalities of consumers, however, at the same time in case of technical documents, such as users’
guides for products or equipment the seller is obliged to inform the consumer on the properties of the
goods sold in a language comprehensible to the consumer.
With regard to health and safety at work, Government Ordinance No. 117/2002 Coll. lays down
that the employer is obliged to provide information in a language that is comprehensible to all
employees concerned.

49

Article 14 – Transfrontier exchanges
Paragraphs and Sub-paragraphs Chosen
The Parties undertake:
a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the States in
which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if necessary to seek to
conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster contacts between the users of the
same language in the States concerned in the fields of culture, education, information,
vocational training and permanent education.
only for Czech, German, and Polish:
b) for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or promote co-operation
across borders, in particular between regional or local authorities in whose territory the
same language is used in identical or similar form.
Measures taken in order to implement these provisions
The Slovak Republic entered into bilateral agreements with the neighbouring countries. These
agreements contain provisions guaranteeing the protection of national minorities and support of the
transfrontier co-operation.
1/ Treaty on Good Neighbourliness and Friendly Co-operation between the Slovak Republic and
the Republic of Hungary of 1995 (Council of Europe Recommendation No. 1201 forms a part of the
Treaty)
2/ Treaty between the Czech and Slovak Federative Republic and the Republic of Poland on Good
Neighbourliness, Solidarity and Friendly Co-operation of 1991
3/ Treaty between the Czech and Slovak Federative Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany
on Good Neighbourliness and Friendly Co-operation of 1992
4/ Treaty between the Slovak Republic and the Czech Republic on Good Neighbourliness, Friendly
Relations and Co-operation of 1992
5/ Treaty on Good Neighbourliness, Friendly Relations and Co-operation between the Slovak
Republic and Ukraine of 1993.
Polish:
On 18 August 1994, the Slovak and Polish Governments entered into an agreement on transfrontier
co-operation. On the basis of this agreement, a Slovak-Polish intergovernmental committee on
transfrontier co-operation was set up. The agreement has contributed to the strengthening of relations
between territorial self-governments and local authorities in both countries as well as the
development of economic, social, legal, scientific, cultural and other activities carried out by them. In
general, contacts between the users of the Slovak and Polish languages in both countries have grown

50

and strengthened, notably in the fields of culture, education, information, vocational and life-long
education.
In May 2000, the Slovak Ministry of the Interior organised an international conference of the Council
of Europe on Slovak-Polish cross-border co-operation aiming at strengthening this form of cooperation. The Conference took place in the towns of Dolný Kubín (Slovakia) and Szczawnica
(Poland).
Slovak-Polish transfrontier co-operation has yielded positive results and continues to develop as it is
illustrated by the existence of international associations such as Euro-region Tatras, the Carpathian
Euro-region (operating within the territories of several countries), and Euro-region Beskids
(operating within the territories of three countries, including the Czech Republic).
Czech:
On 2 November 2000, the Slovak and Czech Governments entered into an agreement on
transfrontier co-operation that encourages traditional contacts between the users of the Slovak and
Czech languages in both countries in the fields of culture, education, information, vocational and lifelong education.
Under Article 8 of the agreement, a Slovak-Czech committee on transfrontier co-operation was set
up aiming at specifying the general direction and forms of transfrontier co-operation, co-coordinating
its programmes, drafting recommendations and eliminating any obstacles hampering this cooperation.
In June 1999, the Slovak Ministry of the Interior organised an international conference of the Council
of Europe on Slovak-Czech cross-border co-operation aiming at strengthening this form of cooperation. The Conference took place in the towns of Skalica (Slovakia) and Strážnice (the Czech
Republic).
Slovak-Czech transfrontier co-operation has yielded positive results and continues to develop as it is
illustrated by the existence of international associations such as Euro-regions: Euro-region Beskids
(on the territories of three countries, including Poland), Euro-region White Carpathians, and Euroregion Morava River Valley (including also a portion of Austria).
German:
The Slovak Ministry of the Interior drafted an agreement on transfrontier co-operation between the
Slovak and Austrian Governments, which was already notified to the Austrian Ministry of Foreign
Affairs to review it. According to the draft agreement, all contacts between the users of the Slovak
and German languages are to be encouraged in both countries in the fields of culture, education,
information, vocational and life-long education.
Slovak-Austrian cross-border co-operation continues to grow as it is witnessed by the fact that the
Euro-region Morava River Valley was established within the territories of three countries (including
also a portion of the Czech Republic) and preparations are going on in order to introduce the Euroregion Bratislava-Vienna- Györ (including also a portion of Hungary).

51

On 24-25 October 2001, the Slovak Ministry organized an international conference of the Council
of Europe on Slovak-Austrian cross-border co-operation aiming at strengthening this form of cooperation. The conference took place in the towns of Pieštany (Slovakia) and Baden bei Wien
(Austria).

52

Languages: Ruthenian and Ukrainian
Article 8 - Education
Paragraphs and Sub-paragraphs chosen
1. With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such
languages are used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without
prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
a) to make available a substantial part of pre-school education in the relevant regional or
minority languages;
b) to make available a substantial part of primary education in the relevant regional or
minority languages;
c) to make available a substantial part of secondary education in the relevant regional or
minority languages;
d) to make available a substantial part of technical and vocational education in the relevant
regional or minority languages;
e) to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher education
subjects,
f) to offer such languages as subjects of adult or continuing education courses,
g) to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is
reflected by the regional or minority language,
h) to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of
paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party,
i) to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring these measures taken
and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority
languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be made
public.
Measures taken in order to implement these provisions
During the discussion and ratification of the Charter important legislation governing education for
national minorities or ethnic groups in accordance Part I of the Charter were adopted. The following
arrangements were introduced:
•

the maintenance of bilingual pedagogical documentation at schools using a national minority
language as the language of instruction and the issuance of bilingual school reports;

•

secondary school entry exams for pupils from primary schools using a national minority language
as the language of instruction for studies at schools using Slovak as the language of instruction on
the subject of Slovak and Slovak literature within the scope of the curriculum of the primary
school they have attended and another main subject in the language used by the primary school
they have attended as the language of instruction;

•

the introduction of primary school zero classes into the school education system and the
establishment of the pedagogical profession of assistant teacher; the assistants work as
pedagogical staff at nursery schools, primary schools and special primary schools and promote
the success in school of children and pupils from social and educational environments that provide
lack of stimulation;
53

•

the transfer of certain competences in the field of education from state administration authorities
to municipalities and higher territorial units, effective from 1 July 2002.

Envisaged changes:
A reform of primary and secondary education will be gradually implemented on the basis of the
National Programme for the Development of Education and Training in the Slovak Republic in the
coming 15 to 20 years, which was approved by the Slovak Government (Government Resolution
No. 1193 of 19 December 2001) and the Parliamentary Committee on education, science, youth
and sport (Resolution No. 368 of 7 May 2002).
In its Policy Statement (November 2002) the Slovak Government expressed its intention to deal with
the several aspects of minority education, notably:
- to approve a new school law governing the field of education and training,
- to establish a university offering studies to citizens of Hungarian nationality in order to overcome
differences in the levels of education and structure,
- to offer the possibility of choice of teaching in the mother tongue to the Ruthenian and Roma
minorities.
- to address the outstanding aspects of public school financing.
- to provide for an open school system – the equality of establishment and development of religious
and private schools, etc.
- to enhance the university education of the pedagogues belonging to the nationalities in their mother
tongue in terms of certification.
The school network in the Slovak Republic in the school year 2001/2002:
The right of national minorities to education under Article 34 of the Slovak Constitution is facilitated
by the system of schools with the following languages of instruction:
a) Ukrainian (only state schools):
- kindergartens,
- primary schools,
- secondary grammar school and secondary nursing school;
- university (Department of the Ukrainian Language and Literature at the Prešov University).
b) Ruthenian (only state schools):
- primary schools, secondary grammar school,
- university (Ruthenian Department of the Institute for Minority Studies and Foreign Languages
established at the Rectorate of the Prešov University).
Following is an overview of the schools and school facilities where languages of nationalities have
been taught in the school year 2001/2002. This overview does not encompass primary schools
where minority languages and literature are taught as a subject and all other subjects are taught in
Slovak. In statistics they are filed under the schools with Slovak as a language of instruction. The
following minority languages are languages of instruction:
a)
b)
c)
d)

Ruthenian - 4 primary schools attended by 134 pupils in grades 1 to 8;
German - 6 primary schools attended by 1 052 pupils in grades 1 to 9;
Ukrainian - 17 primary schools attended by 526 pupils in grades 1 to 9;
Roma – Secondary School of Arts in the city of Košice with a total of 192 students.

54

1. NURSERY SCHOOLS
a) state
Language of instruction
Slovak
of which schools using Ruthenian as
the language of instruction

Schools
2804
0

Hungarian
Slovak-Hungarian
Ukrainian
Slovak-Ukrainian
Slovak-German
Total in Slovakia
b) other
Founder/Language of instruction
municipality/Slovak
enterprise/Slovak
private/Slovak
church/Slovak
church/Hungarian
civic association/Slovak
other/Slovak
Total in Slovakia

277
101
22
3
1
3208

Schools

Nursery schools in Slovakia in
total
Children in nursery schools by
Total number of children in nursery
of which Slovak nationals
of which:
Slovak nationality
Czech, Moravian, Silesian
Ukrainian
Ruthenian
Hungarian
Polish
German
Roma
other
foreigners

nationality
schools

Classes
6862
0

Pupils
141729
8

557

9479

34

534

1
7454

22
151772

Classes

Pupils

10
20
10
10
2
1
2
55

25
56
16
19
2
1
3
122

526
1103
336
408
32
10
45
2460

3263

7576

154232

154232
154028
140546
46
120
60
12087
9
25
1016
119
204

55

2. PRIMARY SCHOOLS
a) state
Language of instruction
Schools
Slovak
of which schools with classes using
German as the language of instruction
Hungarian
Slovak-Hungarian
Ukrainian
Slovak-Ukrainian
German
Total in Slovakia
b) private
Language of instruction
Schools
Slovak
Bulgarian
Total in Slovakia
c) church
Language of instruction
Slovak
Hungarian
Total in Slovakia

Classes
2053
5
259
29
7
1
1
2350

82
12
94

Total number of primary schools
in Slovakia
Primary school pupils by

2447

2114

41957

53

579

4
27925

60
625265

Classes

Number of pupils
8
79
8
101
16
180

Classes

Number of pupils
1088
24498
64
1023
1152
25521

2
1
3

Schools

Number of pupils
25754
582669
39
941

29093

nationality

Total number of pupils at primary
schools
of which Slovak nationals
of which :
Slovak nationality
Czech, Moravian, Silesian
Ukrainian
Ruthenian
Hungarian
Polish
German
Roma
other
foreigners

650966
650027
589791
1267
613
255
52863
48
99
4654
437
939
56

650966

57

3. GYMNASIA
a) state
Language of instruction

Number of
schools

Number of
classes

Slovak
Hungarian
Slovak-Hungarian
Ukrainian
Total in Slovakia

137
11
8
1
157

Number of
students
2116
153

63325
4046

6
2275

116
67487

b) private
Language of instruction

Number of
schools

Number of
classes

Slovak
Hungarian
other
Total in Slovakia

15
1
1
17

Number of
students
104
7
4
115

2407
170
38
2615

c) church
Language of instruction

Number of
schools

Number of
classes

Slovak
Hungarian
Total in Slovakia
Total number of gymnasia in
Slovakia

Number of
students

34
4
38

333
18
351

10054
459
10513

212

2741

80615

Students of gymnasia by nationality
Total number of students
of which Slovak nationals
of which:
Slovak nationality
Czech, Moravian, Silesian
Ukrainian
Ruthenian
Hungarian
Polish
German
Roma
other

80615
80434
74104
264
91
56
5787
15
36
3
78
58

foreigners

181

59

4. SECONDARY VOCATIONAL SCHOOLS
a) state
Language of instruction

Number of
schools

Number of
classes

Slovak
Hungarian
Slovak-Hungarian
Total

289
6
14
309

Number of
students
2970
129

81268
3285

3099

84553

b) private
Language of instruction

Number of
schools

Number of
classes

Slovak
Hungarian
Slovak-Hungarian
Total

25
1
2
28

Number of
students
140
14

3102
259

154

3361

c) church
Language of instruction

Number of
schools

Number of
classes

Slovak
Total
Total number of secondary
vocational schools in Slovakia

Number of
students

4
4

35
35

862
862

341

3288

88776

Students of secondary vocational schools by
nationality
Total number of students
of which Slovak nationals
of which:
Slovak nationality
Czech, Moravian, Silesian
Ukrainian
Ruthenian
Hungarian
Polish
German
Roma
other

88776
88701
81609
190
618
35
6131
5
13
62
38
60

foreigners

75

61

5. SECONDARY APPRENTICE SCHOOLS AND APPRENTICES
a) state
Language of instruction

Number of
schools

Slovak
Hungarian
Slovak-Hungarian
Total in Slovakia

Number of classes
326
5
22
353

Number of
students

4019
56
306
4381

96093
1151
6391
103635

b) private
Language of instruction

Number of
schools

Slovak
Hungarian
Slovak-Hungarian
Total in Slovakia

Number of classes
5
3
2
10

Number of
students
25
33
13
71

425
683
186
1294

c) church
Language of instruction

Number of
schools

Number of classes

Slovak
Total in Slovakia
Total number of secondary
apprentice schools and
apprentices in Slovakia

Number of
students

5
5

39
110

909
909

368

4562

105838

Students of secondary apprentice schools and
Total number of students
of which Slovak nationals
of which:
Slovak nationality
Czech, Moravian, Silesian
Ukrainian
Ruthenian
Hungarian
Polish
German
Roma
other

apprentices by
105838
105774
96309
220
103
48
8867
6
11
180
30

62

nationality:

foreigners

64

63

6. SPECIAL SCHOOLS
a) state
Language of instruction

Number of
schools

Slovak
Hungarian
Slovak-Hungarian
Total

Number of classes
339
14
17
370

Number of pupils

3192
180

29040
1543

3372

30583

b) private
Language of instruction

Number of
schools

Slovak

Number of classes
2

Number of pupils
4

26

c) church
Language of instruction

Number of
schools

Slovak
Total in Slovakia

Number of classes

Number of pupils

5

36

258

377

3412

30867

Pupils in special schools by nationality
Total number of pupils at special schools
of which Slovak nationals:
of which:
Slovak nationality
Czech, Moravian, Silesian
Hungarian
Ukrainian
Ruthenian
Polish
Roma
other
foreigners

30867
30855
26522
33
2034
9
5
5
2240
7
12

64

Article 9 - Judicial authorities
Paragraphs and Sub-paragraphs chosen
1. The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents
using the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to
the situation of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded
by the present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration
of justice:
a) in criminal proceedings to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or
minority language and to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall
not be considered inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a regional or minority
language;
b) in civil proceedings to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court,
that he or she may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring
additional expense and to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or
minority languages;
c) in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters to allow, whenever a
litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she may use his or her regional
or minority language without thereby incurring additional expense and to allow
documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages, if necessary
by the use of interpreters and translations;
d) to take steps to ensure that the application of sub-paragraphs b and c above and any
necessary use of interpreters and translations do not involve extra expense for the persons
concerned.
3. The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or minority languages the most
important statutory texts and those relating particularly to users of these languages, unless
they are otherwise provided.
Measures taken in order to implement these provisions :
In Article 47 of the Constitution concerning provisions for the use of a regional or minority language
in proceedings before courts, the applicable legal system of the Slovak Republic goes beyond the
framework of this provision of the Charter. This is associated with the Parties’ commitment to allow
users of regional or minority languages to use them in judicial districts located in the territory where
they live. Act No. 184/1999 Coll. specifies the 20 percent threshold for the use of a minority
language in official communication. However, by referring § 5 (1) of this Act, as regards the use of
minority languages in court proceedings, to special legal norms, the validity and subsequent
application of which is related to the whole territory of the Slovak Republic, it can be stated that the
legal system of the Slovak Republic goes beyond this particular requirement of the Charter. The
above means that, based on the application of the law on national minority languages, regional or
minority languages can be used in court proceedings even outside judicial districts complying with the
with the 20 percent threshold of population representing a national minority
a) To ensure the application of this provision, the Code of Criminal Procedure in its Section 2, subsection 14 stipulates the following:
"Every person is entitled to use his/her mother tongue before authorities involved in criminal
proceedings."

65

To ensure the exercise of this right, authorities involved in criminal proceedings are required to
engage an interpreter in line with Section 28 of the Code of Criminal Procedure:
"If there is a need to translate the content of a statement or a written document or if the
accused declares that he does not have a command of the language of the proceedings, an
interpreter shall be engaged; the interpreter may also act as the recorder."
Similarly, the provision of Section 55, paragraph 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is to be taken
into consideration as it provides details concerning the principle laid down in Section 7, paragraph 1
of the Act on the state language:
"Records of oral testimony from a person who does not have command of Slovak shall also be
drawn up in Slovak; if a verbatim record of the testimony is necessary, the recorder or the
interpreter shall also enter the relevant part of the testimony into the records in the language,
in which the testimony was provided."
The above-quoted provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure apply to all parties to proceedings,
which means the accused, the defendant, any party to the case, the injured party, as well as the
witness if such a person declares that he/she does not understand the language of the proceedings.
The application of these provisions in practice is illustrated by extensive case law:
R 34/1967: "If the defendant does not have a command of the language of the proceedings,
the criminal justice authority is obliged to engage an interpreter under Section 28 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure." Failure to engage an interpreter for the proceedings constitutes a
curtailment of the right of defence and grounds for the vacation of the judgment."
R 28/1981: "If a person who does not have a command of Czech or Slovak testifies before
court as a witness, the court must engage an interpreter even if the presiding judge has a
command of the language in which the witness gives testimony."
R 48/1994: "Under Section 28 of the Code of Criminal Procedure as amended by Act No.
558/1992 Coll. an interpreter must be also engaged if the accused claims that he/she does not
have a command of the language of the proceedings. This is a subjective right of the accused
to express himself/herself in his/her mother tongue. The above-specified indicates that the
engagement of an interpreter does not depend on the opinion of the criminal justice
authorities whether and to what extent the accused has a command of the Slovak language."
The provisions of Section 2, paragraphs 14 and 28 of the Code of Criminal Procedure are not only
applied to the initial phase of criminal prosecution, but also to the period prior to the beginning of
criminal prosecution, notably to the lodging of information on crime under Section 59 in connection
with Section 158, paragraph 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure:
Information on the facts indicating the commission of criminal offence shall be filed to
prosecutor, investigator or police body; those are obliged to instruct informer on his/her
responsibility for giving deliberately false entries. Prosecutor may handover the received
information to investigator or police body for further procedures.
Similarly, if any documentary evidence that either supports or refutes the alleged facts related to the
criminal offence or the accused is provided in a regional or minority language, its translation is
provided in accordance with Section 112, paragraph 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
However, it should be noted that the applicable legislation does not provide for the reverse
procedure, i.e. the provision of translations of adopted decisions as it is indicated by the following
adjudication:

66

R 42/1976: "The courts shall deliver written documents issued in Czech or Slovak within the
framework of criminal court proceedings to the parties of the proceedings that do not have
command of these languages without translating them into their mother tongue."
According to Section 151 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the costs of criminal proceedings,
including the costs of sentence enforcement proceedings, shall be borne by the State. This provision
indicates that in addition to costs related to the individual acts, the State also bears costs related to
the engagement of an interpreter.
The above-quoted provisions show that the applicable legal system in the Slovak Republic enshrines
the right to use a regional or minority language in criminal proceedings. As this right is guaranteed to
any person stating that he/she does not have a command of the language of the proceedings, not
limited to the accused, in any phase of criminal proceedings, the Slovak legislation governing this
matter goes beyond the framework laid down by the relevant provision of the Charter. It is evident
that the exercise of this right does not result in any extra costs to be incurred by such persons. The
existing Code of Criminal Procedure thus fully respects the provisions of the Charter, which the
Slovak Republic undertook to implement.
b) In its Section 18, the Code of Civil Judicial Procedure lays down the following:
"The parties shall participate in civil proceedings on an equal footing. They have the right to
use their mother tongue in proceedings before court. The court shall have to provide them
with equal opportunities to exercise their rights."
The above-referred provision reflects and lays down details relating to Article 12 of the Slovak
Constitution, which governs the equality of participants in civil proceedings. This equality is ensured
by means of the right to act before court in one’s mother tongue, which means that participants in
proceedings have the right to make petitions and other written motions as well as to make oral
statements in their mother tongue, and the court is obliged to engage an interpreter to facilitate
communication with the participant in his/her mother tongue. Costs relating to the engagement of an
interpreter are borne by the State as it is stipulated by Section 141, sub-section 2 of the Code of
Civil Judicial Procedure:
"The costs of evidence that are not covered by the advance payment, as well as cash expenses
incurred by the appointed counsel, who is not an attorney-at-law, and costs related to the use
of the party’s mother tongue in the proceedings shall be borne by the State."
Case law shows that this provision is applied in practice:
R 21/1986: "The duty to reimburse the costs of the engagement an interpreter so that a
participant in civil judicial proceedings could act in his/her mother tongue must not be
imposed on the participant. The same applies to an interpreter appointed by court to facilitate
communication with a deaf-mute participant in proceedings."
The above means that the current Slovak legal order allows for the use of a regional or minority
language in civil court proceedings, as well as produce documents and evidence in regional and
minority languages, without incurring additional expenses for the parties to the proceedings. The
relevant provision of the Charter is thereby fully respected.
c) The provisions related to proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters form an
integral part of the Code of Civil Procedure. The special regulations related to this area of law are
dealt with in Section V of the Code of Civil Procedure This means that the general provisions of the
Code, including the right to use one’s mother tongue in court actions, are analogically applicable to

67

proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters. For further details, see Article 9 (1) b)
of the Charter.
d) As the above analysis of the relevant provisions of the Slovak Republic’s legal order shows, the
cost of interpreting or translations, related to the application by a party of the right to use a regional
or minority language in civil court proceedings and proceedings before courts concerning
administrative matters, is borne by the state. For further details, see Article 9 (1) b) and c) of the
Charter.
Ad paragraph 3
As regards the Slovak Republic’s commitment to make available in the regional or minority
languages the most important national statutory texts and those relating particularly to users of these
languages, under point C of Governmental Resolution No. 27/2001 the Deputy Prime Minister for
human and minority rights and regional development was assigned the task of elaborating a
comprehensive report on the legislative, financial and other measures adopted to ensure the fulfilment
of the Slovak Republic’s commitments arising from the adopted provisions of the Charter. This
report should specify the necessary measures related to the implementation of the Charter in
practice, including Article 9 (3) of the Charter, the application of which will undoubtedly require the
allocation of a significant amount of finance from the state budget.

Article 10 - Administrative authorities and public services
1. Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are
users of regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according
to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
a iii) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written
applications and receive a reply in these languages; or
iv) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written
applications in these languages.
2. In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents
who are users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified
below, the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
b) the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written
applications in these languages
c) the publication by regional authorities of their official documents also in the relevant
regional or minority languages
d) the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in the relevant
regional or minority languages
f) the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State
g) the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official language(s),
of traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or minority languages.
3. With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other persons
acting on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which regional or

68

minority languages are used, in accordance with the situation of each language and as far as
this is reasonably possible:
c) to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request in these languages.
4. With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by
them, the Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
a) translation or interpretation as may be required
c) compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a
knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that
language is used.
5. The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or
minority languages, at the request of those concerned.
Measures taken in order to implement these provisions :
The Slovak Republic fulfils the commitments stated under Article 10 of the Charter within the
framework of adopted international documents, as well as in internal legislation concerning this
matter.
As regards international documents, this concerns the following in particular:
- UN Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic
Minorities of 1992, Article 2 (1).
- Final Document of the Copenhagen Conference on the Human Dimension, Article 32 l.
- CE Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities.
Ad paragraph 1:
Under Article 34 (2) b), the Constitution lays down the "right to use one’s mother tongue in
official contact". Under § 2 (1) and § 2 (3), Act No. 184/1999 Coll. on the Use of National
Minority Languages allows Ruthenian-speaking persons to use Ruthenian in official contact and
submit requests and receive replies in this language.
According to the annex to Governmental Ordinance No. 221/1999 Coll., Ruthenian is used in 68
municipalities in the territory of Slovakia. Ukrainian is used in 18 municipalities in the Slovak
Republic. According to law, in these municipalities, persons can submit written or oral requests and
receive replies in these languages. One of the municipalities, where Ruthenian-speaking citizens live,
is the seat of a district office (Medzilaborce).
Ad paragraph 2
As regards the Slovak Republic’s internal legislation, this commitment from the Charter is enacted
above all in the Constitution of the Slovak Republic, under Article 34 (2) b):
… "besides the right to master the state language, citizens belonging to national minorities or
ethnic groups are also guaranteed, under conditions defined by law,
b) the right to use their language in official contact…"
The specific use of National minority languages on the territory of the Slovak Republic is regulated
by Act No. 184/1999 Coll. on the Use of National Minority Languages.
This Act allows persons living in the territory of municipalities listed in the annex to Governmental
Ordinance No. 221/1999 Coll., through which the list of municipalities in which at least 20% of the
population of Slovak citizens belong to a national minority is issued:
69

- to use the language of the national minority in official communication,
- to submit written requests to state administration authorities seated in the municipality or authorities
of the municipality’s self-government in the language of the national minority and, besides replies in
the state language, also receive replies in the language of the national minority, with the exception of
public documents (identification cards, driver’s licences, passports, etc.),
- upon request, to receive decisions issued in administrative proceedings in a minority language,
- upon request, to receive forms issued by territorial self-government authorities in a minority
language,
- with the consent of all participants, to hold sessions of territorial self-government authorities in a
minority language,
- members of municipality councils, to use a minority language at the council’s sessions; interpreting
into the state language is arranged for by the municipality,
- to maintain local chronicles in a minority language,
- to use a minority language to indicate buildings used as the seat of the municipality’s selfgovernment or a state administration authority,
- to use a minority language for street names and other local place-names,
- to use a minority language on signs providing important information (warnings, health protection),
- to request state administration authorities and local self-government for information on generally
binding legal regulations in a minority language,
- employees of self-government and state administration authorities in 23 municipalities where these
institutions are seated, to use a minority language in official communication.
With regard to this Act, the Public Administration Section of the Ministry of the Interior issued within
the Operational Instructions Journal for regional and district offices of state administration:
- Guidelines to general internal administration units, small traders’ licensing units and fire protection
units for the use of minority languages in official communications, Issue No. 12 of 9 September
1999,
- Guidelines for the signing of buildings of state administration bodies in minority languages, Issue
No. 10 of 10 May 2000,
- Guidelines for the signing of buildings of local government bodies, Issue No. 203-2001/05692 of
4 May 2001.
The Act No. 191/1994 Coll. on the names and signs of municipalities in minority languages governs
the use of traditional place names in minority languages:
(1) "Municipalities in which residents belonging to a national minority represent at least 20
per cent of the population are identified in the minority language on separate traffic
signposts specifying the limits of the municipality."
(2) "Road signs under (1) shall be placed under road signs displaying the name of the
municipality in the state language."
(3) "The list of names of municipalities in national minority languages is stated in the annex
to this Act; the names of municipalities have a local character."
Under this Act the relevant bodies of local state administration, particularly traffic authorities, are
obliged to provide for the signing of the municipality in the relevant minority language. This part of the
Act came into effect in November 1994. The local state administration bodies comply with this
statutory requirement. The municipalities in which national minorities represent at least 20 per cent of
the population are identified by means of such signposts.
If necessary and upon request local state administration authorities or social service establishments
are able to arrange for interpreting services.
70

Under § 2 (1) and § 2 (3), Act No. 184/1999 Coll. on the Use of National Minority Languages
allows Ruthenian-speaking persons to use Ruthenian in official contact and submit requests and
receive replies in this language.
Ad paragraphs 3 and 4
Implementation of this commitment of the Charter is ensured in the Act No. 184/1999 Coll. on the
Use of Minority Languages, in particular in Section 2 paragraph 3.
"A citizen of the Slovak Republic, belonging to a national minority shall have the right to
submit written applications to a body of state administration and a body of local selfadministration (hereinafter "body of public administration") in the municipality under
paragraph 1 also in the minority language. The body of public administration in the
municipality under paragraph 1 shall provide a reply in the state language and in the minority
language, with the exception of public documents."

If necessary or if requested by citizens, local state administration authorities or
social service establishments are able to arrange for interpreting services.
Ad paragraph 5
This Slovakia’s undertaking related to the Charter is transposed into Act No. 300/1993 Coll. on first
name and surname and Act No. 154/1994 Coll. on registers. In this context, the following provisions
of the Act on registers are relevant:
Section 13, sub-section 4: "Upon the oral notification of a birth, the informant is obliged to
prove his/her identity. If the informant… makes such notification in a language of which the
registrar does not have a command, the presence of an interpreter is required. Should the
interpreter not be an officially appointed interpreter, the interpreter must make an oath, in
accordance with a special regulation, before the registrar for whom the interpreter will
interpret. The data on interpretation and the interpreter shall be recorded in the Birth
Register."
Section 16: "The female surname of a person other than Slovak nationality shall be recorded
without the grammatical suffix of gender indication according to the Slovak grammatical
rules,
a) if it is requested by the parents of a female child at the registration of her surname in the
Birth Register according to Section 13, sub-section 1, if it is requested by the adoptive parents
at the registration of the surname of their adopted child in case of irrevocable adoption;
b) if it is requested by a woman at the registration of her marriage in the Marriage Register
according to Section 14;
c) if it is requested by a woman in relation to the registration of the decision on a change to
surname in accordance with a special act."
Section 19, sub-section 3: "In the birth certificate of a person other than of Slovak nationality
whom this official document concerns and whose name is recorded in the Register in the
Slovak equivalent, the person’s name shall be recorded in his/her language, if he/she requests
so in writing; and such fact shall be recorded in the Register. All further modifications and
confirmations shall be made using this form of the name."
Section 19, sub-section 5: "In the birth certificate or marriage certificate of a woman whom
this official document concerns, her surname shall be recorded without the Slovak genderidentifying suffix, if she requests so in writing; this fact shall be recorded in the Register. All
further official extracts and confirmations on data recorded in the Register shall be made
71

using this form of the surname. Any request in writing according to the first sentence above
shall be maintained in the Register of documents."
The Act on first name and surname:
Section 2, sub-section 1: "A person born on the territory of the SR may have several names
given, also foreign ones, according to conditions set out in Section 1..."

72

Article 11 - Media
Paragraphs and Sub-paragraphs Chosen:
1. The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the
territories in which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language,
to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or
play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the
media:
a iii) to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer programmes in the regional or
minority languages
b ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis
c ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the regional
or minority languages on a regular basis
d) to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in the regional or minority languages
e i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one newspaper
in the regional or minority languages
f ii) to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions in the
regional or minority languages.
2. The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a
regional or minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure
that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of
information in the written press in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional
or minority language. The exercise of the above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it
duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or
penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests
of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or
crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of
others, for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the
authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
3. The Parties undertake to ensure that the interests of the users of regional or minority
languages are represented or taken into account within such bodies as may be established in
accordance with the law with responsibility for guaranteeing the freedom and pluralism of the
media.

Measures taken in order to implement these provisions
On its 5th circuit Slovak Radio broadcasts programmes for national minorities - "National Minority
and Ethnic Broadcasting". This programme is provided by a specialised editorial office, which was
established through transformation in as early as 1991. The time structure of the broadcasting
respects the results of the population census and follows the number of populations of individual
communities. For this reason, within the national minority and ethnic broadcasting office, there are
separate departments for individual national minorities for broadcasting in Ruthenian, Ukrainian,
73

German, Czech, Polish and Roma. The broadcasts are aired on medium wave at Prešov 1071 kHz
and Stakcín 864 kHz.
Radio broadcasting for the Ukrainian and Ruthenian national minorities is 13.5 hours/weekly and
almost 80% of the broadcasts are in Ruthenian, which is spoken by Ruthenians living in Slovakia.
Some enduring problems are related to this broadcasting, since the representatives of a smaller
section of Ruthenians express the opinion that their language is a dialect of Ukrainian.
Representatives of a larger section of persons who affiliate themselves only with the Ruthenian
nationality are of the opinion that Ruthenian is a separate language of a separate national minority,
which does not form a part of the Ukrainian nation. Unfortunately, these two groups have disputed
over the name of the editorial office, broadcasting time for individual communities and the legitimacy
of their interest associations’ representatives for several years.
Analogically, programmes for individual national minorities are broadcast in Slovak Television as
follows:
for the Ukrainian national minority – the Ukrainian national magazine, 12 shows, 5.5 hours
for the Ruthenian national minority – the Ruthenian national magazine, 7 shows, 3.7 hours
multiethnic magazine – 1 show, 0.4 hours.
The reception of television and radio signal of numerous television and radio stations (both public and
private) from neighbouring countries is also possible in the territory of Slovakia. Besides the
electronic media, a number of periodical and non-periodical press publications are annually published
in Slovakia with financial support from the state. Access to foreign literature is not restricted in any
way.
The Constitution
Article 34 (1) "The comprehensive development of persons belonging to national minorities or
ethnic groups in the Slovak Republic is guaranteed, particularly the right to develop their own
culture, together with other members of the minority or ethnic group, the right to disseminate
and receive information in their mother tongue, the right to associate in national minority
associations, and the right to set up and maintain educational and cultural institutions."
Act No. 308/2000 Coll. on Broadcasting and Retransmission
Section 16: "The broadcaster shall: (...)
g) ensure at broadcasting of programs and other elements of program service the use of the
state language and languages of national minorities in accordance with special regulations".
Act No. 255/1991 Coll. on Slovak Radio
Section 6 "Slovak Radio fulfils the following main tasks:
d) By the means of the radio broadcasting it contributes to the development of the national
culture and culture of nationalities living in the Slovak Republic, as well as to the mediation of
cultural values of other nations."
Act No. 254/1991 Coll. on Slovak Television
Section 3, sub-section 3 "The Slovak Television by the means of the television broadcasting in
their mother tongue also provides for the exercise of the interests of the nationalities and
ethnic groups living in the Slovak Republic."
Section 6 (j) "Slovak Television fulfils the following tasks:

74

... it contributes by the means of the television broadcasting to the development of the
national culture and cultures of nationalities living in the Slovak Republic, as well as to the
mediation of cultural values of other nations."
The above review demonstrates that, based on public television and radio, very good conditions,
comparable with the standards in EU Member States, have been created for the
application/implementation of the European Charter in the field of the media.

Article 12 - Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraphs and Sub-paragraphs Chosen
1. With regard to cultural activities and facilities especially libraries, video libraries, cultural
centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and
film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries,
including inter alia the use of new technologies - the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent,
have power or play a role in this field:
a) to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority languages
and foster the different means of access to works produced in these languages
b) to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in regional or
minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation
and subtitling activities
c) to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages by
aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities
d) to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of
various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of
regional or minority languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for
which they provide backing
e) to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting
cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of the regional or
minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest of the population
f) to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or
minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities
g) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for collecting,
keeping a copy and presenting or publishing works produced in the regional or minority
languages
2. In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are
traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority
language justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and
facilities in accordance with the preceding paragraph.
3. The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy
abroad, for regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.
Measures taken in order to implement these provisions :
Within the framework of its powers and responsibilities, the Ministry of Culture of the Slovak
Republic is engaged in a broad range of efficient co-operation with the organizations representing 12
75

national minorities living in the Slovak Republic. Political, organisational and financial support
provided to their activities and aiming at maintaining and developing the cultures of the national
minorities and ethnic groups ensures free use of their languages and respect for their specifics and
values.
In this respect, the special Ministry of Culture unit – minority culture section – provides systemic and
planned financial support from the state budget to civil associations, i.e. non-governmental
organisations of the Hungarian, Roma, Jewish, German, Croatian, Ruthenian, Ukrainian, Russian,
Polish, Czech, Bulgarian and Moravian nationalities.
In accordance with the Government’s Policy Statement and national minority policy, the Ministry of
Culture has elaborated an effective, objective and transparent scheme for the provision of finance
from the special allocation under the Ministry of Culture budget for individual minority cultures.
The following are the key elements of this system:
1/ The Ministry of Culture Guidelines for the provision and accounting of subsidies provided
from the commitments of the Ministry’s budget to civil associations, foundations and professional
organizations of legal persons to carry out their cultural activities;
2/ The Ministry of Culture Guidelines for the provision and accounting of subsidies provided
from the commitments of the Ministry’s budget to natural persons – entrepreneurs and non-financial
entities – legal persons to support their cultural activities in accordance with Act No. 303/1995 Coll.
on budgetary rules.
3/ Rules of organization and procedure of the Committee for the transfer of purpose-tied
funds intended to support the culture of national minorities. This document sets out rules
specifying the powers and responsibilities, procedures and eligibility requirements for committees
making decision about the provision of purpose-tied funds – grants to projects submitted by the
individual entities representing national minorities.
4/ The Committee for the transfer of purpose-tied funds intended to support the culture of the
national minorities is an important element in this system. It provides for a high degree of the
autonomy of the minorities in the fields of project preparation and application, the specification of
their objectives and priorities concerning their culture, periodicals and non-periodicals. The
Committee consists of 11 representatives of the national minorities. They are appointed by the
Minister of Culture. Only the Secretary of the Committee is an employee of the Ministry. The
Committee is an advisory body to the Minister providing him with its conclusions and
recommendations in this field. This body representing the national minorities assesses the applications
of the individual national minorities for contributions and, based on the principle of majority vote,
adopts recommendations and conclusions as to the amounts of subsidies to be granted.
5/ The above-specified Committee has its sub-committees, which are formed by the individual
national minorities. This means that each national minority has its own sub-committee that makes
decisions as to the allocation of funds approved and committed for it by the Committee. Taking into
consideration its allocation, each national minority sets out its own priorities and approves projects
designed to support cultural activities, periodicals and non-periodicals.
6/ Applications for the funding of projects in the fields of cultural activities, periodicals and
non-periodicals. Each national minority submits structured applications for projects that are valid for
the whole of the calendar year.
By applying the above-referred system that has been reviewed and updated in the recent years, the
national minorities are provided with purpose-tied funds to carry out cultural activities and publish
periodicals and non-periodicals. This system is designed and operated with the intention to fulfil the
mission and objectives of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages as it provides
76

for the development and use of the languages of minorities and ethnic groups as symbols of their
cultural heritage and linguistic identity.
The table below provides a comprehensive review of the financing of national minority culture in
Slovakia in the specified period.
Tab. 3 The provisions of funding for minority cultures in the 1995-2002 period from the special
allocation under the Ministry of Culture budget chapter (in SKK)
Nationality
Hungarian
Roma
Czech
Ruthenian
Ukrainian
Moravian
German
Croatian
Bulgarian
Jewish
Polish
Russian
others
Total

1995
10 952 000
4 956 296
937 802
1 697 585
3 718 793
279 10
2 573 080
1 275 727
282 440
203 500
108 200

1996
7 327 200
4 079 200
1 294 000
2 360 000
4 313 000
503 800
3 784 100
1 200 000
360 300
400 200
778 000

1997
10 390 000
3 542 000
670 000
1 010 000
4 818 000
501 000
5 176 000
2 242 000
411 000
1 820 000
410 000

1998
10 976 000
3 970 000
590 000
1 250 000
3 710 000
670 000
3 495 000
2 190 000
1 380 000
250 000
250 000

28 644 200
55 628 723

21 388 000
47 787 800

13 352 000
44 342 000

6 080 000
34 811 000

1999
23 813 935
7 846 550
2 078 400
2 078 400
2 289 990
972 000
1 990 200
1 153 400
980 175
1 920 200
614 200
582 200
487 200
47 135 450

2000
23 014 000
6 054 980
2 081 700
2 390 000
2 498 000
990 000
2 067 500
1 320 000
900 000
1 780 000
830 000
580 000
1 387 000
45 893 180

2001
23 703 000
4 946 000
2 201 000
2 215 000
2 460 000
400 000
1 830 000
1 700 000
493 000
1 626 000
726 000
520 000
990 000
43 810 000

2002
39 142 300
7 303 900
2 599 200
3 399 000
2 995 000
1 000 000
2 373 000
1 879 000
900 000
2 066 400
1 300 000
520 000
1 993 000
67 470 800

In addition to the aforementioned forms of state support for national minorities culture, there are also
the following institutions falling under the competence of the Ministry of Culture: the ensemble Ifjú
Szívek [Young Hearts], the Museum of Jewish Culture, Museum of the Culture of Hungarians in
Slovakia, Museum of Culture of Carpathian Germans, the Documentation Centre of Croatian
Culture seated in Bratislava , Museum of the Ruthenian-Ukrainian Culture seated in Svidník, the
Documentation Centre of Czech Culture in Slovakia and Documentation Centre of Roma Culture in
Slovakia at the Ethnographic Museum of the Slovak National Museum in Martin.
The following institutions are financed from the budgets of the regional offices of state administration
as they were transferred from the Ministry of Culture to them under Act No. 222/1996 Coll.: the
Jókai Theatre in the town of Komárno, the Thália Theatre in the city of Košice, the Romathan
Theatre in the city of Košice, and the A. Duchnovic Theatre in the town of Prešov, the Museum of
the Hungarian Culture and Danube region in Komárno, the Departments for the Roma minority
culture of the Vihorlat Museum in the town of Humenne and the Gemer-Malohont Museum in the
town of Rimavska Sobota.
Table 4 below provides a clear review of the volume of finance provided to national minorities’
cultural institutions.

77

Tab. 4 Funds provided to the institutions of minority cultures under the competence of the Ministry
of Culture and regional offices of state administration in 1999-2002
Organization
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

Thália Theatre, Košice
Jókai Theatre, Komárno
Romathan Theatre, Košice
A. Duchnovic Theatre, Prešov
Museum of the RuthenianUkrainian Culture, Svidník
Museum of the Hungarian
Culture and Danube Region
Museum of the Culture of
Hungarians in Slovakia,
Bratislava
Museum of the Jewish
Culture, Bratislava
Museum of the Culture of
Carpathian Germans,
Bratislava
Ensemble Ifjú Szívek,
Bratislava
Total

1999
6 405 000
8 679 000
7 048 000
10 875 000

2000
7 550 000
9 995 000
7 078 000
11 513 000

2001
9 803 000
15 723 000
7 595 000
11 869 000

2002
9 755 000
22 094 000
7 544 000
18 078 000

5 849 000

4 895 000

4 998 000

5 776 000

4 412 000

4 116 000

3 969 000

6 983 000
10 000 000

5 460 000

5 290 000

5 430 000

5 650 000

1 950 000

2 000 000

2 000 000

2 050 000

4 429 000

5 386 000

5 997 000

6 137 000

55 107 000

57 823 000

67 384 000

74 267 000

Article 13 - Economic and Social Life
Paragraphs and Sub-paragraphs Chosen
1. With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole
country:
a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without justifiable
reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to economic or
social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical documents such as
instructions for the use of products or installations
b) to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of companies and private documents of any
clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or minority languages, at least between
users of the same language
c) to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority languages in
connection with economic or social activities.
2. With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the public
authorities are competent, within the territory in which the regional or minority languages are
used, and as far as this is reasonably possible:
c) to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and hostels offer
the possibility of receiving and treating in their own language persons using a regional or
minority language who are in need of care on grounds of ill-health, old age or for other
reasons.

78

Measures taken in order to implement these provisions
Ad paragraph 1
No legal regulations or internal guidelines regulating social service facilities contain provisions that
would prohibit the use of regional or minority languages.
No complaints, petitions or applications concerning rules directed to the discouragement from the
use of regional or minority languages have been recorded in the Slovak Republic.
Ad paragraph 2
Social care facilities provide for the reception and treatment of their clients in their language.
Employees of the facilities have good command of the minority language used by the clients of the
facilities. There are meeting rooms for individual minorities, religious services are provided
individually for each minority. Bilingual magazines and other publications are published. Clients are
allowed to watch television programmes in the languages of their choice. The operation is managed in
a way so as to ensure that persons of Slovak nationality are not discriminated even in areas with a
larger number of clients and employees speaking a language other than Slovak. Cultural and social
events in Ruthenian or Ukrainian, as well as in Slovak, are organised for the clients.
Section 8, sub-section 4 of Act No. 270/1995 Coll. on the state language of the Slovak Republic as
amended lays down the following:
”The entire documentation of heath care facilities is maintained in the state language. The
contact between healthcare personnel and the patients is usually conducted in the state
language; if the patient is a citizen or foreigner who does not have command of the state
language, it can be conducted in a language that enables communication with the patient."
According to Act No. 634/1992 Coll. on consumer protection (Section 6, Sections 9 – 20), the
prohibition of consumer discrimination and the principle of obligatory information apply in Slovakia.
Under the above-referred Act, consumer means "a natural person purchasing products and using
services for his/her direct consumption…". In this respect, the law does not differentiate between the
nationalities of consumers, however, at the same time in case of technical documents, such as users’
guides for products or equipment the seller is obliged to inform the consumer on the properties of the
goods sold in a language comprehensible to the consumer.
With regard to health and safety at work, Government Ordinance No. 117/2002 Coll. lays down
that the employer is obliged to provide information in a language that is comprehensible to all
employees concerned.

79

Article 14 - Transfrontier exchanges
Paragraphs and Sub-paragraphs Chosen
The Parties undertake:
a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the States in
which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if necessary to seek to
conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster contacts between the users of the
same language in the States concerned in the fields of culture, education, information,
vocational training and permanent education
only for Ukrainian language
b) for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or promote co-operation
across borders, in particular between regional or local authorities in whose territory the
same language is used in identical or similar form.
Measures taken in order to implement these provisions:
The Slovak Republic has concluded bilateral treaties with its neighbours containing provisions
guaranteeing the protection of national minorities and support for transfrontier co-operation.
1/ Treaty on Good Neighbourliness and Friendly Co-operation between the Slovak Republic and
the Republic of Hungary of 1995 (Council of Europe Recommendation No. 1201 forms a part of the
Treaty)
2/ Treaty between the Czech and Slovak Federative Republic and the Republic of Poland on Good
Neighbourliness, Solidarity and Friendly Co-operation of 1991
3/ Treaty between the Czech and Slovak Federative Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany
on Good Neighbourliness and Friendly Co-operation of 1992
4/ Treaty between the Slovak Republic and the Czech Republic on Good Neighbourliness, Friendly
Relations and Co-operation of 1992
5/ Treaty on Good Neighbourliness, Friendly Relations and Co-operation between the
Slovak Republic and Ukraine of 1993.

Ukrainian
On 5 December 2002, the Agreement between the Government of the Slovak Republic and the
Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine on Cross-border Co-operation was concluded. The Agreement
created favourable conditions for the development of closer co-operation between territorial selfgovernments and local state administrations and provided comprehensive support for contacts
between the users of Slovak, Ruthenian and Ukrainian languages in both states in the fields of culture,
education, information, vocational training and permanent education.
Based on the Agreement, it has been proposed that a working group for cross-border co-operation
be established within the Slovak-Ukrainian Intergovernmental Commission for Scientific and
Technical Development.
Slovak-Ukrainian cross-border co-operation is also developing within the framework of the
Carpathian Euro-region, which covers the territory of several other states.

80

The Slovak Ministry of the Interior organised a Council of Europe International Conference on
Slovak-Ukrainian Cross-border Co-operation held in the towns of Michalovce (Slovakia)
and Uzhhorod (Ukraine) on 30 and 31 May 2002 to promote such co-operation.

81

Language: Hungarian
Article 8 - Education
Paragraphs and Sub-paragraphs Chosen
1. With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such
languages are used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without
prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
f)
g)
h)
i)

to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages
to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority languages
to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority languages
to make available technical and vocational education in the relevant regional or minority
languages
to make available university and other higher education in regional or minority languages
to arrange for the provision of adult and continuing education courses which are taught
mainly or wholly in the regional or minority languages
to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is
reflected by the regional or minority language
to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of
paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party
to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken and
progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority
languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.

Measures taken in order to implement these provisions :
During the discussion and ratification of the Charter important legislation governing education for
national minorities or ethnic groups in accordance Part I of the Charter were adopted. The following
arrangements were introduced:
•

the maintenance of bilingual pedagogical documentation at schools using a national minority
language as the language of instruction and the issuance of bilingual school reports;
• secondary school entry exams for pupils from primary schools using a national minority language
as the language of instruction for studies at schools using Slovak as the language of instruction on
the subject of Slovak and Slovak literature within the scope of the curriculum of the primary
school they have attended and another main subject in the language used by the primary school
they have attended as the language of instruction;
• the introduction of primary school zero classes into the school education system and the
establishment of the pedagogical profession of assistant teacher; the assistants work as
pedagogical staff at nursery schools, primary schools and special primary schools and promote
the success in school of children and pupils from social and educational environments that provide
lack of stimulation;
• the transfer of certain competences in the field of education from state administration authorities
to municipalities and higher territorial units, effective from 1 July 2002.

82

Envisaged changes:
A reform of primary and secondary education will be gradually implemented on the basis of the
National Programme for the Development of Education and Training in the Slovak Republic in the
coming 15 to 20 years, which was approved by the Slovak Government (Government Resolution
No. 1193 of 19 December 2001) and the Parliamentary Committee on education, science, youth
and sport (Resolution No. 368 of 7 May 2002).
In its Policy Statement (November 2002) the Slovak Government expressed its intention to deal with
the several aspects of minority education, notably:
• to approve a new school law governing the field of education and training,
• to establish a university offering studies to citizens of Hungarian nationality in order to overcome
differences in level of education and structure,
• to offer the possibility of choice of teaching in the mother tongue to the Ruthenian and Roma
minorities,
• to address the outstanding aspects of public school financing,
• to provide for an open school system – the equality of establishment and development of
religious and private schools, etc.
• to enhance the university education of the pedagogues belonging to the nationalities in their
mother tongue in terms of certification.
The school network in the Slovak Republic in the school year 2001/2002:
The right of national minorities to education under Article 34 of the Slovak Constitution is facilitated
by the educational process in the following types of schools:
Hungarian
• nursery schools (state and church)
• primary schools (state and church)
• secondary schools: gymnasia (state, private and church)
• secondary vocational schools (state and private)
• secondary apprentice schools (state and private)
• special schools (state schools for physically or mentally impaired pupils: special schools, primary
schools at healthcare establishments, primary schools for the hearing impaired, assistance schools,
apprentice schools)
• universities (state) – Department of Hungarian Studies and the Pedagogic Faculty of the
University of Constantine the Philosopher in Nitra, Department of Hungarian Language and
Literature of the Comenius University in Bratislava.

83

The following is the overview of the schools and school facilities with different languages of
instruction in the school year 2001/2002.
1. NURSERY SCHOOLS
a) state
Language of instruction

Number of
schools

Slovak
of which schools using Ruthenian as
the language of instruction
Hungarian
Slovak-Hungarian
Ukrainian
Slovak-Ukrainian
Slovak-German
Total in Slovakia

Number of
classes

Number of pupils

2804

6862

141729

0

0

8

277
101
22
3
1
3208

557

9479

34

534

1
7454

22
151772

b) other
Founder/Language of instruction

Number of
schools

municipality/Slovak
enterprise/Slovak
private/Slovak
church/Slovak
church/Hungarian
civic association/Slovak
other/Slovak
Total in Slovakia
Nursery schools in Slovakia in
total
Children in nursery schools by
nationality
Total number of children in nursery
schools
of which Slovak nationals
of which:
Slovak nationality
Czech, Moravian, Silesian
Ukrainian
Ruthenian
Hungarian
Polish

Number of
classes

Number of pupils

10
20
10
10
2
1
2
55

25
56
16
19
2
1
3
122

526
1103
336
408
32
10
45
2460

3263

7576

154232

154232
154028
140546
46
120
60
12087
9
84

German
Roma
other
foreigners

2. PRIMARY SCHOOLS
a) state
Language of instruction
Slovak
of which schools with classes using
German as the language of instruction
Hungarian
Slovak-Hungarian
Ukrainian
Slovak-Ukrainian
German
Total in Slovakia
b) private
Language of instruction
Slovak
Bulgarian
Total in Slovakia
c) church
Language of instruction
Slovak
Hungarian
Total in Slovakia

25
1016
119
204

Schools
2053
5

259
29
7
1
1
2350
Schools

Primary school pupils by
Total number of pupils at primary

Pupils
582669
941

2114

41957

53

579

4
27925

60
625265

Classes

Pupils

2
1
3

8
8
16

82
12
94

Classes
1088
64
1152

2447

29093

Schools

Total number of primary schools
in Slovakia

Classes
25754
39

nationality
schools

650966

of which Slovak nationals
of which :
Slovak nationality
Czech, Moravian, Silesian
Ukrainian
Ruthenian
Hungarian
Polish

650027
589791
1267
613
255
52863
48
85

79
101
180
Pupils
24498
1023
25521
650966

German
Roma
other
foreigners

99
4654
437
939

3. GYMNASIA
a) state
Language of instruction
Slovak
Hungarian
Slovak-Hungarian
Ukrainian
Total in Slovakia

Schools
137
11
8
1
157

Classes
2116
153

Students
63325
4046

6
2275

116
67487

b) private
Language of instruction

Schools

Slovak
Hungarian
other
Total in Slovakia

Classes
15
1
1
17

Students
104
7
4
115

2407
170
38
2615

c) church
Language of instruction

Schools

Slovak
Hungarian
Total in Slovakia
Total number of gymnasia in
Slovakia

Classes

Students

34
4
38

333
18
351

10054
459
10513

212

2741

80615

Students of gymnasia by nationality
Total number of students

80615

of which Slovak nationals
of which:
Slovak nationality
Czech, Moravian, Silesian
Ukrainian
Ruthenian
Hungarian
Polish
German
Roma

80434
74104
264
91
56
5787
15
36
3
86

other
foreigners

78
181

4. SECONDARY VOCATIONAL SCHOOLS
a) state
Language of instruction
Slovak
Hungarian
Slovak-Hungarian
Total

Schools
289
6
14
309

Classes
2970
129

Students
81268
3285

3099

84553

b) private
Language of instruction
Slovak
Hungarian
Slovak-Hungarian
Total

Schools

Classes
25
1
2
28

Students
140
14

3102
259

154

3361

c) church
Language of instruction

Schools

Slovak
Total
Total number of secondary
vocational schools in Slovakia

Classes

Students

4
4

35
35

862
862

341

3288

88776

Students of secondary vocational schools by
nationality
Total number of students
of which Slovak nationals
of which:
Slovak nationality
Czech, Moravian, Silesian
Ukrainian
Ruthenian
Hungarian
Polish
German
Roma
other
foreigners

88776
88701
81609
190
618
35
6131
5
13
62
38
75

87

5. SECONDARY APPRENTICE SCHOOLS AND APPRENTICES
a) state
Language of instruction
Slovak
Hungarian
Slovak-Hungarian
Total in Slovakia

Schools
326
5
22
353

Classes
4019
56
306
4381

Students
96093
1151
6391
103635

Classes

Students

b) private
Language of instruction
Slovak
Hungarian
Slovak-Hungarian
Total in Slovakia

Schools
5
3
2
10

25
33
13
71

425
683
186
1294

c) church
Language of instruction
Slovak
Total in Slovakia

Schools

Total number of secondary
apprentice schools and
apprentices in Slovakia

Classes

Students

5
5

39
110

909
909

368

4562

105838

Students of secondary apprentice schools and
apprentices by nationality:
Total number of students
of which Slovak nationals
of which:
Slovak nationality
Czech, Moravian, Silesian
Ukrainian
Ruthenian
Hungarian
Polish
German
Roma
other
foreigners

105838
105774
96309
220
103
48
8867
6
11
180
30
64

88

6. SPECIAL SCHOOLS
a) state
Language of instruction
Slovak
Hungarian
Slovak-Hungarian
Total

Schools
339
14
17
370

Classes
Number of pupils
3192
29040
180
1543
3372

30583

b) private
Language of instruction
Slovak

Schools

Classes

Number of pupils
4
26

Classes

Number of pupils
36
258

2

c) church
Language of instruction
Slovak

Schools
5

Total in Slovakia

377

3412

Pupils in special schools by nationality
Total number of pupils at special schools

30867

of which Slovak nationals:
of which:
Slovak nationality
Czech, Moravian, Silesian

30855
26522
33

Hungarian
Ukrainian
Ruthenian
Polish
Roma
other
foreigners

2034
9
5
5
2240
7
12

89

30867

Article 9 - Judicial authorities
Paragraphs and Sub-paragraphs Chosen
1. The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents
using the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to
the situation of each of these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded
by the present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration
of justice:
a) in criminal proceedings, to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or
minority language and provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall
not be considered inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a regional or minority
language
b) in civil proceedings, to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court,
that he or she may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring
additional expense and allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or
minority languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations
c) in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters, to allow, whenever a
litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she may use his or her regional
or minority language without thereby incurring additional expense and allow documents
and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages, if necessary by the use
of interpreters and translation
d) to take steps to ensure that the application of sub-paragraphs b and c above and any
necessary use of interpreters and translations do not involve extra expense for the persons
concerned.
2. a) The Parties undertake not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the
State solely because they are drafted in a regional or minority language.
3. The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or minority languages the most
important national statutory texts and those relating particularly to users of these
languages, unless they are otherwise provided.
Measures taken in order to implement these provisions :
Ad paragraph 1.
In Article 47 of the Constitution concerning provisions for the use of a regional or minority language
in proceedings before courts, the applicable legal system of the Slovak Republic goes beyond the
framework of this provision of the Charter. This is associated with the Parties’ commitment to allow
users of regional or minority languages to use them in judicial districts located in the territory where
they live. Act No. 184/1999 Coll. specifies the 20 percent threshold for the use of a minority
language in official communication. However, by referring § 5 (1) of this Act, as regards the use of
minority languages in court proceedings, to special legal norms, the validity and subsequent
application of which is related to the whole territory of the Slovak Republic, it can be stated that the
legal system of the Slovak Republic goes beyond this particular requirement of the Charter. The
above means that, based on the application of the law on national minority languages, regional or
minority languages can be used in court proceedings even outside judicial districts complying with the
with the 20 percent threshold of population representing a national minority
a) To ensure the application of this provision, the Code of Criminal Procedure in its Section 2,
sub-section 14 stipulates the following:
90

"Every person is entitled to use his/her mother tongue before authorities involved in criminal
proceedings."
To implement this right, authorities involved in criminal proceedings are required to engage an
interpreter in line with Section 28 of the Code of Criminal Procedure:
"If there is a need to translate the content of a statement or a written document or if the
accused declares that he does not have a command of the language of the proceedings, an
interpreter shall be engaged; the interpreter may also act as the recorder."
Similarly, the provisions of Section 55, paragraph (3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure is to be
taken into consideration as it provides details concerning the principle laid down in Section 7,
paragraph 1 of the Act on the state language:
"Records of oral testimony from a person who does not have command of Slovak shall also be
drawn up in Slovak; if a verbatim record of the testimony is necessary, the recorder or the
interpreter shall also enter the relevant part of the testimony into the records in the language,
in which the testimony was provided."
The above-quoted provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure apply to all parties to proceedings,
which means the accused, the defendant, any party to the case, the injured party, as well as the
witness if such a person declares that he/she does not understand the language of the proceedings.
The application of these provisions in practice is illustrated by extensive case law:
R 34/1967: "If the defendant does not have a command of the language of the proceedings,
the criminal justice authority is obliged to engage an interpreter under Section 28 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure. Failure to engage an interpreter for the proceedings constitutes a
curtailment of the right of defence and grounds for the vacation of the judgment."
R 28/1981: "If a person who does not have a command of Czech or Slovak testifies before
court as a witness, the court must engage an interpreter even if the presiding judge has a
command of the language in which the witness gives testimony."
R 48/1994: "Under Section 28 of the Code of Criminal Procedure as amended by Act No.
558/1992 Coll. an interpreter must be also engaged if the accused claims that he/she does not
have a command of the language of the proceedings. This is a subjective right of the accused
to express himself/herself in his/her mother tongue. The above-specified indicates that the
engagement of an interpreter does not depend on the opinion of the criminal justice
authorities whether and to what extent the accused has a command of the Slovak language."
The provisions of Section 2, paragraphs 14 and 28 of the Code of Criminal Procedure are not only
applied to the initial phase of criminal prosecution, but also to the period prior to the beginning of
criminal prosecution, notably to the lodging of information on crime under Section 59 in connection
with Section 158, paragraph 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure:
Information on the facts indicating the commission of criminal offence shall be filed to
prosecutor, investigator or police body; those are obliged to instruct informer on his/her
responsibility for giving deliberately false entries. Prosecutor may handover the received
information to investigator or police body for further procedures.
Equally, if any documentary evidence that either supports or refutes the alleged facts related to the
criminal offence or the accused is provided in a regional or minority language, its translation is
provided in accordance with Section 112, paragraph 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
However, it should be noted that the applicable legislation does not provide for the reverse
91

procedure, i.e. the provision of translations of adopted decisions as it is indicated by the following
adjudication:
R 42/1976: "Written documents relating to the proceedings before court and issued in the
Czech or Slovak languages in the course of criminal proceedings shall be delivered by courts
to the parties to proceedings that do not command these languages, without translation into
their mother tongue."
According to Section 151 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the costs of criminal proceedings,
including the costs of sentence enforcement proceedings, shall be borne by the State. This provision
indicates that in addition to costs related to the individual acts, the State also bears costs related to
the engagement of an interpreter.
The above-quoted provisions show that the applicable legal system in the Slovak Republic enshrines
the right to use a regional or minority language in criminal proceedings. As this right is guaranteed to
any person stating that he/she does not have a command of the language of the proceedings, not
limited to the accused, in any phase of criminal proceedings, the Slovak legislation governing this
matter goes beyond the framework laid down by the relevant provision of the Charter. It is evident
that the exercise of this right does not result in any extra costs to be incurred by such persons. The
existing Code of Criminal Procedure thus fully respects the provisions of the Charter, which the
Slovak Republic undertook to implement.
b) In its Section 18, the Code of Civil Judicial Procedure lays down the following:
"The parties shall participate in civil proceedings on an equal footing. They have the right to
use their mother tongue in proceedings before court. The court shall have to provide them
with equal opportunities to exercise their rights."
The above-referred provision reflects and lays down details relating to Article 12 of the Slovak
Constitution, which governs the equality of participants in civil proceedings. This equality is ensured
by means of the right to act before court in one’s mother tongue, which means that participants in
proceedings have the right to make petitions and other written motions as well as to make oral
statements in their mother tongue, and the court is obliged to engage an interpreter to facilitate
communication with the participant in his/her mother tongue. Costs relating to the engagement of an
interpreter are borne by the State as it is stipulated by Section 141, sub-section 2 of the Code of
Civil Judicial Procedure:
"The costs of evidence that are not covered by the advance payment, as well as cash
expenses incurred by the appointed counsel, who is not an attorney-at-law, and costs related
to the use of the party’s mother tongue in the proceedings shall be borne by the State."
The fact that this provision is applied in practise is well documented by case law:
R 21/1986: "The duty to reimburse the costs of the engagement an interpreter so that a
participant in civil judicial proceedings could act in his/her mother tongue must not be
imposed on the participant. The same applies to an interpreter appointed by court to facilitate
communication with a deaf-mute participant in proceedings."
The above means that the existing legal system and legislation in the Slovak Republic allow for the
use of a regional or minority language in civil proceedings before courts, to provide evidence and
documents in regional and minority languages without any additional costs to be borne by those
parties and thus this provision of the Charter is fully respected.
c) The provisions related to proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters form an
integral part of the Code of Civil Procedure. The special regulations related to this area of law are
92

dealt with in Section V of the Code of Civil Procedure. This means that the general provisions of the
Code of Civil Procedure, including the right to use one’s mother tongue in court actions, are
analogically applicable to proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters. For further
details, see Article 9 (1) b) of the Charter.
d) As the above analysis of the relevant provisions of the Slovak Republic’s legal order shows, the
cost of interpreting or translations, related to the application by a party of the right to use a regional
or minority language in civil court proceedings and proceedings before courts concerning
administrative matters, is borne by the state. For further details, see Article 9 (1) b) and c) of the
Charter.
Ad paragraph 2.
As regards the Slovak Republic’s commitment not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up
within the State solely because they are drafted in a regional or minority language, it must be
underlined that this may only concern documents drafted by natural or legal persons in the form of
requests, submissions, proposals, etc. This arises particularly from Article 6 of the Constitution, as
well as Section 7 of the law on the state language, because state authorities of the Slovak Republic
issue decisions in the state language and therefore a legal document drawn up by a state authority
cannot be in a language other than Slovak, with the exception of public administration decisions
under the law on national minority languages. Based on the act, state administration and territorial
self-government authorities can, upon request, issue a decision in a national minority language, along
with the Slovak version. Yet, this only applies to municipalities where the population of members of
the national minority is at least 20%. But it should be emphasised, that unless it is requested that they
also be issued in a national minority language, these decisions are only issued in Slovak. This means
that the parties cannot use state authorities’ decisions only in a national minority language in a court
proceeding.
With this regard if these legal documents (e.g. requests, testaments, proposals, letters of attorney,
etc.) are submitted by natural or legal persons in a regional or minority language in court proceedings,
the validity of these documents is not denied a priori. Following legal assessment of the importance
or relevance of the submitted legal documents, justified by the submitting party of the proceedings,
the court shall request translation of such a document with the aim of getting acquainted with the facts
stated in it, assessing it and subsequently deciding.
Ad paragraph 3.
As regards the Slovak Republic’s commitment to make available in the regional or minority
languages the most important national statutory texts and those relating particularly to users of these
languages, under point C of Governmental Resolution No. 27/2001 the Deputy Prime Minister for
human and minority rights and regional development was assigned the task of elaborating a
comprehensive report on the legislative, financial and other measures adopted to ensure the fulfilment
of the Slovak Republic’s commitments arising from the adopted provisions of the Charter. This
report should specify the necessary measures related to the implementation of the Charter in
practice, including Article 9 (3) of the Charter, the application of which will undoubtedly require the
allocation of a significant amount of finance from the state budget.

93

Article 10 - Administrative authorities and public services
Paragraphs and Sub-paragraphs Chosen
1. Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are
users of regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according
to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
a) ii – to ensure that such of their officers as are in contact with the public use the regional or
minority languages in their relations with persons applying to them in these languages; or
2. In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents
who are users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified
below, the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
a) the use of regional or minority languages within the framework of the regional or local
authority
b) the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written
applications in these languages
c) the publication by regional authorities of their official documents also in the relevant
regional or minority languages
d) the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in the relevant regional
or minority languages
f) the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State
g) the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official language(s),
of traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or minority languages.
3. With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other persons
acting on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which regional or
minority languages are used, in accordance with the situation of each language and as far as
this is reasonably possible:
b) to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request and receive a reply in
these languages; or
a) translation or interpretation as may be required
c) compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a
knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that
language is used.
5. The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or
minority languages, at the request of those concerned.
Measures taken in order to implement these provisions :
The commitment of the Slovak Republic stipulated in Article 10 of the Charter is respected by the
country according to the adopted international documents as well as according to internal legislation
regulating this issue.
The international documents covering this issue are mainly:
- UN Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic
Minorities of 1992 Article 2 paragraph 1.
- Document of the Copenhagen Meeting of the Conference on the Human Dimension, Article 32 l.
94

- The Council of Europe Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities.
- Treaty on Good Neighbourly Relations and Friendly Cooperation between the Slovak Republic
and the Hungarian Republic, Article 15 paragraph 2 subparagraph g).
Ad paragraph 1.
In 501 municipalities, where the Hungarian language is used, the staff of municipal authorities has a
knowledge of the Hungarian language and use it in contacts with persons addressing them in
Hungarian language. In 23 municipalities, which are the seats of district authorities and their detached
units (according to information of respective regional offices) the heads of the regional offices and the
mayors of the municipalities particularly since 1998 arranged the operation of the offices so as in
each department at least one officer has command of Hungarian.
In some districts (e.g. Komárno, Levice, Nové Zámky, Šala etc.) there are 20-50 % of population
speaking Hungarian. Social services facilities have competence over the whole state territory and are
used by clients speaking Slovak and Hungarian. In retirement homes, social care facilities,
orphanages, care facilities for pensioners the staff also communicate in Hungarian. The clients have
the possibility to attend religious services, cultural activities, social events, watch TV programmes,
read books and daily press in Slovak and in Hungarian.
Ad paragraph 2.
As regards the Slovak Republic’s internal legislation, this commitment from the Charter is enacted
above all in the Constitution of the Slovak Republic, under Article 34 (2) b):
… "besides the right to master the state language, citizens belonging to national minorities or
ethnic groups are also guaranteed, under conditions defined by law,
b) the right to use their language in official contact…"
The specific use of national minority languages on the territory of the Slovak Republic is regulated by
Act No. 184/1999 Coll. on the Use of National Minority Languages.
Persons living in municipalities listed in the Annex to Government regulation No. 221/1999 Coll..,
issuing a list of municipalities, where Slovak citizens belonging to a national minority constitute at least
20 % of the population, are entitled by the law to:
-

-

use the national minority language in official communications,
submit written applications to a state authority, located in the municipality and a selfadministration body of the municipality also in the national minority language and receive a reply
in the state language and the national minority language, with the exception of public documents
(identity card, driving licence, passport etc.),
receive, upon request, a decision issued in administrative proceedings also in the minority
language,
receive, upon request, forms, issued under the competence of the self-administration body also in
the minority language,
conduct a session of a local self-government also in the minority language with the consent of all
present,
use a minority language by the members of municipality councils at the council’s sessions;
interpreting into the state language is arranged for by the municipality,
maintain local chronicles in a minority language,
use a minority language to indicate buildings used as the seat of the municipality’s self-government
or a state administration authority,
use a minority language for street names and other local place-names,
95

-

use a minority language on signs providing important information (warnings, health protection),
request state administration authorities and local self-government for information on generally
binding legal regulations in a minority language,
use a minority language in official communication by employees of self-government and state
administration authorities in 23 municipalities where these institutions are seated.

With regard to this Act, the Public Administration Section of the Ministry of the Interior issued and
published within the Operational Instructions Journal for regional and district offices of state
administration:
- Guidelines to general internal administration units, small traders’ licensing units and fire protection
units for the use of minority languages in official communications, Issue No. 12 of 9 September
1999.
- Guidelines for signing of buildings of state administration bodies in minority languages, Issue No.
10 of 10 May 2000
- Guidelines for the signing of buildings of local government bodies, Issue No. 203-2001/05692 of
4 May 2001.
The Act No. 191/1994 Coll. on the names and signs of municipalities in minority languages governs
the use of traditional place names in minority languages:
Section 1of the Act:
(1) Municipalities in which residents belonging to a national minority represent at least 20 per
cent of the population are identified in the minority language on separate traffic signposts
specifying the limits of the municipality."
(2) Road signs under (1) shall be placed under road signs displaying the name of the
municipality in the state language."
(3) The list of names of municipalities in national minority languages is stated in the annex to
this Act; the names of municipalities have a local character.
Under this Act the relevant bodies of local state administration, particularly traffic authorities, are
obliged to provide for the signing of the municipality in the relevant minority language. This part of the
Act came into effect in November 1994. The local state administration bodies comply with this
statutory requirement. The municipalities in which national minorities represent at least 20 per cent of
the population are identified by means of such signposts.
In some districts there are areas, with approximately 50% of Slovak speaking and 50 % of
Hungarian speaking citizens. In oral communication the minority language is used routinely and also in
written communication, when necessary. The users of a regional or minority language may submit
oral or written requests in the regional languages. A request in the minority language is replied to in
the minority language. Requests in minority languages appear only sporadically.
The necessary documents, announcements, methodological guidelines on generally binding legal
regulations and minutes from meetings with the persons living in social service facilities are submitted
in the state language and also in the regional or minority language.
The social service facilities in ethnically mixed areas provide their clients – applicants for social aid
with forms (applications), explanations, recommendations and suggestions in bilingual version or in
the minority language.
In official meetings the state language is used, but regional or minority language is not excluded. In
case of need translation or interpretation are provided. The regional and local press publishes
articles, interviews on social aid also in minority languages.

96

Ad paragraph 3.
Implementation of this commitment of the Charter is ensured in the Act No. 184/1999 Coll. on the
Use of Minority Languages, in particular in Section 2 paragraph 3:
"A citizen of the Slovak Republic, belonging to a national minority shall have the right to
submit written applications to a body of state administration and a body of local selfadministration (hereinafter "body of public administration") in the municipality under
paragraph 1 also in the minority language. The body of public administration in the
municipality under paragraph 1 shall provide a reply in the state language and in the minority
language, with the exception of public documents."
The use of a regional or a minority language is possible in all areas of activity, social services
facilities, with at least 20 % of inhabitants of Hungarian nationality.
Clients of the social service facilities may submit their requests in the minority language, replies to
such requests are provided by the employees of these facilities also in that language. As yet no
complaints relating to the use of minority languages were registered.
Ad paragraph 4.
Translation and interpretation in those facilities are provided by the staff speaking the minority
language, enabling the clients to use this language. Social service facilities hire staff according to the
qualification criteria and skills - in regions with Hungarian speaking population some 20% of the staff
speak the regional minority language.
Ad paragraph 5.
This Slovakia’s undertaking related to the Charter is transposed into Act No. 300/1993 Coll. on first
name and surname and Act No. 154/1994 Coll. on registers. In this context, the following provisions
of the Act on registers are relevant:
Section 13, sub-section 4: "Upon the oral notification of a birth, the informant is obliged to
prove his/her identity. If the informant… makes such notification in a language of which the
registrar does not have a command, the presence of an interpreter is required. Should the
interpreter not be an officially appointed interpreter, the interpreter must make an oath, in
accordance with a special regulation, before the registrar for whom the interpreter will
interpret. The data on interpretation and the interpreter shall be recorded in the Birth
Register."
Section 16: "The female surname of a person other than Slovak nationality shall be recorded
without the grammatical suffix of gender indication according to the Slovak grammatical
rules,
a) if it is requested by the parents of a female child at the registration of her surname in the
Birth Register according to Section 13, sub-section 1, if it is requested by the adoptive parents
at the registration of the surname of their adopted child in case of irrevocable adoption;
b) if it is requested by a woman at the registration of her marriage in the Marriage Register
according to Section 14;
c) if it is requested by a woman in relation to the registration of the decision on a change to
surname in accordance with a special act."
Section 19, sub-section 3: "In the birth certificate of a person other than of Slovak nationality
whom this official document concerns and whose name is recorded in the Register in the
Slovak equivalent, the person’s name shall be recorded in his/her language, if he/she requests
97

so in writing; and such fact shall be recorded in the Register. All further modifications and
confirmations shall be made using this form of the name. "
Section 19, sub-section 5: "In the birth certificate or marriage certificate of a woman whom
this official document concerns, her surname shall be recorded without the Slovak genderidentifying suffix, if she requests so in writing; this fact shall be recorded in the Register. All
further official extracts and confirmations on data recorded in the Register shall be made
using this form of the surname. Any request in writing according to the first sentence above
shall be maintained in the Register of documents."
The Act on first name and surname:
- Section 2, sub-section 5: "A person born on the territory of the SR may have several names
given, also foreign ones, according to conditions set out in Section 1..."
The users of regional or minority language may submit oral or written requests in their language. Most
of registrars in linguistically mixed areas speak not only the state but also the Hungarian language.
Some registrars (approximately 10 %) in this area are of Hungarian nationality. Civilian marriage
ceremonies in linguistically mixed areas are carried out by the Register Offices in both languages.

Article 11 - Media
Paragraph and Sub-paragraph chosen
1. The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the
territories in which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language,
to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or
play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the
media:
a iii) to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer programmes in the regional or
minority languages;
b ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the regional or
minority languages on a regular basis;
c ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in the regional
or minority languages on a regular basis;
d) to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in the regional or minority languages;
e i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one newspaper
in the regional or minority languages;
f i) to cover the additional costs of those media which use regional or minority languages,
wherever the law provides for financial assistance in general for the media.
2. The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a
regional or minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure
that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of
information in the written press in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional
or minority language. The exercise of the above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it
duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or
98

penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interest of
national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime,
for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others,
for preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the
authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
3. The Parties undertake to ensure that the interests of the users of regional or minority
languages are represented or taken into account within such bodies as may be established in
accordance with the law with responsibility for guaranteeing the freedom and pluralism of the
media.
Measures taken in order to implement these provisions:
Slovak Radio provides a separate broadcast for Hungarian national minority. It broadcasts by the
Main editor’s office of the Hungarian Broadcasting. This unit consists from 44 staff members out of
who 34 are editors, preparing 56 hours and 10 minutes of broadcasts per week. In 2002 it came to
2.480 hours, in the first six months of 2003 it made 1660 hours. There are all kinds of broadcast,
news, documentary, music and drama programmes. Dominant position is held by the journalist
programme Pulz. Broadcasts such as Denná kronika (Daily Chronicle), Ozveny (Echoes), Z týždna
na týžden (From one week to another), Turmix, Literárna mozaika (Literary mosaic), U nás doma
(At our home) are also widely followed.
In the Slovak Television the programs are broadcasted for the Hungarian national minority by the
editor’s office of the Hungarian Broadcasting in Bratislava as follows:
News
211 x 5 minutes = 1055 minutes = 17,58 hours yearly
Magazines
113 x 26 minutes = 2678 minutes = 44,63 hours yearly
Total
62,21 hours yearly.
It is also possible to receive in the SR the TV and radio signal of numerous TV and radio networks
(public and private) from neighbouring countries. Apart from the electronic media, numerous titles of
periodic and non-periodic press are published each year in the SR, with the financial support of the
state. There are no barriers to access to foreign literature.
Constitution of the SR
Article 34 paragraph 1: "The comprehensive development of persons belonging to national
minorities or ethnic groups in the Slovak Republic is guaranteed, particularly the right to
develop their own culture, together with other members of the minority or ethnic group, the
right to disseminate and receive information in their mother tongue, the right to associate in
national minority associations, and the right to set up and maintain educational and cultural
institutions."
Act No. 308/2000 Coll. on Broadcasting and Retransmission
Section 16: "The broadcaster shall: (...)
g) ensure at broadcasting of programs and other elements of program service the use of the
state language and languages of national minorities in accordance with special regulations".
Act No. 255/1991 Coll. on Slovak Radio:
Section 6 "Slovak Radio fulfils the following main tasks:
d) By the means of the radio broadcasting it contributes to the development of the national
culture and culture of nationalities living in the Slovak Republic, as well as to the mediation of
cultural values of other nations."
99

Act No. 254/1991 Coll. on Slovak Television:
Section 3, sub-section 3 "The Slovak Television by the means of the television broadcasting in
their mother tongue also provides for the exercise of the interests of the nationalities and
ethnic groups living in the Slovak Republic."
Section 6 indent j "Slovak Television fulfils the following tasks:
... it contributes by the means of the television broadcasting to the development of the
national culture and cultures of nationalities living in the Slovak Republic, as well as to the
mediation of cultural values of other nations."
The above review demonstrates that, based on public television and radio, very good conditions,
comparable with the standards in EU Member States, have been created for the
application/implementation of the European Charter in the field of the media.

Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities

Paragraphs and Sub-paragraphs Chosen:
1. With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries, cultural
centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and
film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries,
including inter alia the use of new technologies - the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities are competent,
have power or play a role in this field:
a) to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority languages
and foster the different means of access to works produced in these languages;
b) to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in regional
or minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronization
and subtitling activities;
c) to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages
by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronization and subtitling
activities;
d) to ensure that the bodies responsible for organizing or supporting cultural activities of
various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of
regional or minority languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for
which they provide backing;
e) to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organizing or supporting
cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of the regional or
minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest of the population;
f) to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or
minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;
g) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for collecting,
keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the regional or minority
languages;
100

2. In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are
traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority
language justifies so, to allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and
facilities in accordance with the preceding paragraph.
3. The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy
abroad, for regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.
Measures taken in order to implement these provisions :
Within the framework of its powers and responsibilities, the Ministry of Culture of the Slovak
Republic is engaged in a broad range of efficient co-operation with the organizations representing 12
national minorities living in the Slovak Republic. Political, organisational and financial support
provided to their activities and aiming at maintaining and developing the cultures of the national
minorities and ethnic groups ensures free use of their languages and respect for their specifics and
values.
In this respect, the special unit of the Ministry of Culture – minority culture section– provides
systemic and planned financial support from state budget to civil associations, i.e. non-governmental
organisations of the Hungarian, Roma, Jewish, German, Croatian, Ruthenian, Ukrainian, Russian,
Polish, Czech, Bulgarian and Moravian nationalities.
In accordance with the Government’s Policy Statement and national minority policy, the Ministry of
Culture has elaborated an effective, objective and transparent scheme for the provision of finance
from the special allocation under the Ministry of Culture budget for individual minority cultures.
The following are the key elements of this system:
1/ The Ministry of Culture Guidelines for the provision and accounting of subsidies provided
from the commitments of the Ministry’s budget to civil associations, foundations and professional
organizations of legal persons to carry out their cultural activities;
2/ The Ministry of Culture Guidelines for the provision and accounting of subsidies provided
from the commitments of the Ministry’s budget to natural persons – entrepreneurs and non-financial
entities – legal persons to support their cultural activities in accordance with Act No. 303/1995 Coll.
on budgetary rules.
3/ Rules of organization and procedure of the Committee for the transfer of purpose-tied
funds intended to support the culture of national minorities. This document sets out rules
specifying the powers and responsibilities, procedures and eligibility requirements for committees
making decision about the provision of purpose-tied funds – grants to projects submitted by the
individual entities representing national minorities.
4/ The Committee for the transfer of purpose-tied funds intended to support the culture of the
national minorities is an important element in this system. It provides for a high degree of the
autonomy of the minorities in the fields of project preparation and application, the specification of
their objectives and priorities concerning their culture, periodicals and non-periodicals. The
Committee consists of 11 representatives of the national minorities. They are appointed by the
Minister of Culture. Only the Secretary of the Committee is an employee of the Ministry. The
Committee is an advisory body to the Minister providing him with its conclusions and
recommendations in this field. This body representing the national minorities assesses the applications
of the individual national minorities for contributions and, based on the principle of majority vote,
adopts recommendations and conclusions as to the amounts of subsidies to be granted.
5/ The above-specified Committee has its sub-committees, which are formed by the individual
national minorities. This means that each national minority has its own sub-committee that makes
101

decisions as to the allocation of funds approved and committed for it by the Committee. Taking into
consideration its allocation, each national minority sets out its own priorities and approves projects
designed to support cultural activities, periodicals and non-periodicals.
6/ Applications for the funding of projects in the fields of cultural activities, periodicals and
non-periodicals. Each national minority submits structured applications for projects that are valid for
the whole of the calendar year.
By applying the above-referred system that has been reviewed and updated in the recent years, the
national minorities are provided with purpose-tied funds to carry out cultural activities and publish
periodicals and non-periodicals. This system is designed and operated with the intention to fulfil the
mission and objectives of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages as it provides
for the development and use of the languages of minorities and ethnic groups as symbols of their
cultural heritage and linguistic identity.
The table below provides a comprehensive review of the financing of national minority culture in
Slovakia in the specified period.
Table 5: The provisions of funding for minority cultures in the 1995-2002 period from the
special allocation under the Ministry of Culture budget chapter (in SKK)
Nationality
Hungarian
Roma
Czech
Ruthenian
Ukrainian
Moravian
German
Croatian
Bulgarian
Jewish
Polish
Russian
others
Total

1995
10 952 000
4 956 296
937 802
1 697 585
3 718 793
279 10
2 573 080
1 275 727
282 440
203 500
108 200

1996
7 327 200
4 079 200
1 294 000
2 360 000
4 313 000
503 800
3 784 100
1 200 000
360 300
400 200
778 000

1997
10 390 000
3 542 000
670 000
1 010 000
4 818 000
501 000
5 176 000
2 242 000
411 000
1 820 000
410 000

1998
10 976 000
3 970 000
590 000
1 250 000
3 710 000
670 000
3 495 000
2 190 000
1 380 000
250 000
250 000

28 644 200
55 628 723

21 388 000
47 787 800

13 352 000
44 342 000

6 080 000
34 811 000

1999
23 813 935
7 846 550
2 078 400
2 078 400
2 289 990
972 000
1 990 200
1 153 400
980 175
1 920 200
614 200
582 200
487 200
47 135 450

2000
23 014 000
6 054 980
2 081 700
2 390 000
2 498 000
990 000
2 067 500
1 320 000
900 000
1 780 000
830 000
580 000
1 387 000
45 893 180

2001
23 703 000
4 946 000
2 201 000
2 215 000
2 460 000
400 000
1 830 000
1 700 000
493 000
1 626 000
726 000
520 000
990 000
43 810 000

2002
39 142 300
7 303 900
2 599 200
3 399 000
2 995 000
1 000 000
2 373 000
1 879 000
900 000
2 066 400
1 300 000
520 000
1 993 000
67 470 800

In addition to the aforementioned forms of state support for national minorities culture, there are also
the following institutions falling under the competence of the Ministry of Culture: the ensemble Ifjú
Szívek [Young Hearts], the Museum of Jewish Culture, Museum of the Culture of Hungarians in
Slovakia, Museum of Culture of Carpathian Germans, the Documentation Centre of Croatian
Culture seated in Bratislava , Museum of the Ruthenian-Ukrainian Culture seated in Svidník, the
Documentation Centre of Czech Culture in Slovakia and Documentation Centre of Roma Culture in
Slovakia at the Ethnographic Museum of the Slovak National Museum in Martin.
The following institutions are financed from the budgets of the regional offices of state administration
as they were transferred from the Ministry of Culture to them under Act No. 222/1996 Coll.: the
Jókai Theatre in the town of Komárno, the Thália Theatre in the city of Košice, the Romathan
Theatre in the city of Košice, and the A. Duchnovic Theatre in the town of Prešov, the Museum of
the Hungarian Culture and Danube region in Komárno, the Departments for the Roma minority
culture of the Vihorlat Museum in the town of Humenne and the Gemer-Malohont Museum in the
town of Rimavska Sobota.
The following table shows the levels of funds provided to minority cultural institutions:

102

Table 6: Funds provided to the institutions of minority cultures under the competence of the
Ministry of Culture and regional offices of state administration in 1999-2002
Organization
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

Thália Theatre, Košice
Jókai Theatre, Komárno
Romathan Theatre, Košice
A. Duchnovic Theatre, Prešov
Museum of the RuthenianUkrainian Culture, Svidník
Museum of the Hungarian
Culture and Danube Region
Museum of the Culture of
Hungarians in Slovakia,
Bratislava
Museum of Jewish Culture,
Bratislava
Museum of the Culture of
Carpathian Germans,
Bratislava
Ensemble Ifjú Szívek,
Bratislava
Total

1999
6 405 000
8 679 000
7 048 000
10 875 000

2000
7 550 000
9 995 000
7 078 000
11 513 000

2001
9 803 000
15 723 000
7 595 000
11 869 000

2002
9 755 000
22 094 000
7 544 000
18 078 000

5 849 000

4 895 000

4 998 000

5 776 000

4 412 000

4 116 000

3 969 000

6 983 000
10 000 000

5 460 000

5 290 000

5 430 000

5 650 000

1 950 000

2 000 000

2 000 000

2 050 000

4 429 000

5 386 000

5 997 000

6 137 000

55 107 000

57 823 000

67 384 000

74 267 000

Article 13 – Economic and Social Life
Paragraphs and Sub-paragraphs Chosen
1. With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole
country:
a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without justifiable
reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to economic or social
life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical documents such as instructions for
the use of products or installations;
b) to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of companies and private documents of any
clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or minority languages, at least between
users of the same language;
c) to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority languages in
connection with economic or social activities;
2. With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the public
authorities are competent, within the territory in which the regional or minority languages are
used, and as far as this is reasonably possible:
c) to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and hostels offer the
possibility of receiving and treating in their own language persons using a regional or
minority language who are in need of care on grounds of ill-health, old age or for other
reasons;

103

Measures taken in order to implement these provisions:
Ad paragraph 1
No legal regulation or internal guidelines regulating social service facilities contain provisions that
would prohibit the use of regional or minority languages.
No complaints, suggestions or petitions for proceedings were lodged in the Slovak Republic that
would aim at discouraging the use of regional or minority language or at preventing the use of
Hungarian language or rejecting an application in this language.
Ad paragraph 2
Social care facilities provide for the reception and treatment of their clients in their language.
Employees of the facilities have good command of the minority language used by the clients of the
facilities. There are meeting rooms for individual minorities, religious services are provided
individually for each minority. Bilingual magazines and other publications are published. Clients are
allowed to watch television programmes in the languages of their choice. The operation is managed in
a way so as to ensure that persons of Slovak nationality are not discriminated even in areas with a
larger number of Hungarian speaking clients and employees. Cultural and social events in Hungarian,
as well as in Slovak, are organised for the clients.
According to Act No. 270/1995 Coll. On the state language of the Slovak Republic as amended:
”The entire documentation of heath care facilities is maintained in the state language. The
contact between healthcare personnel and the patients is usually conducted in the state
language; if the patient is a citizen or foreigner who does not have command of the state
language, it can be conducted in a language that enables communication with the patient."
According to Act No. 634/1992 Coll. On Consumer Protection (Section 6, Sections 9-20) the
prohibition of consumer discrimination and the principle of obligatory information apply in Slovakia.
Consumer is a "natural person purchasing products and using services for his/her direct
consumption...". In this respect the law does not differentiate between the nationalities of consumers,
however at the same time, in case of technical documents, such as users’ guides for products or
equipment the seller is obliged to inform the consumer on the characteristics of the goods sold in
a language comprehensible to the consumer.
As regards the protection of life and health of employees under Government regulation No.
117/2002 Coll. the employer is obliged to provide information in a language that is comprehensible
to all employees concerned.

Article 14- Transfrontier exchanges
Paragraphs and Sub-paragraphs Chosen
1. With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole
country:
a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the States in
which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if necessary to seek to
conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster contacts between the users of the
same language in the States concerned in the fields of culture, education, information,
vocational training and permanent education;
104

b) for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or promote cooperation across borders, in particular between regional or local authorities in whose
territory the same language is used in identical or similar form.
Measures taken in order to implement these provisions
This issue is covered by the Treaty on Good Neighbourly Relations and Friendly Cooperation
between the Slovak Republic and the Hungarian Republic that entered into force on 15 May 1996
(No. 115/1997 Coll..), Article 7.
"The Contracting Parties shall create conditions to develop various forms of economic
cooperation in the border areas at regional and local level, including cooperation between
natural persons and legal entities."
"The Contracting Parties attach importance to the cooperation between second-level selfadministration entities, cities and municipalities according to their competencies while
applying the subsidiarity principle."
According to the stipulations of Article: 15 paragraph 6 of the Treaty on Good Neighbourly
Relations and Friendly Cooperation between the Slovak Republic and the Republic of Hungary of
1995 (hereinafter the Basic Treaty) and on the basis of the Protocol between the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of the Slovak Republic and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Hungary of 24
November 1998 on the creation of a mechanism helping the implementation of the Basic Treaty,
eleven Joint Slovak-Hungarian Commissions were established.
• Joint Slovak-Hungarian Commission for Military and Other Security Policy Issues
• Joint Slovak-Hungarian Commission for Economic Cooperation
• Joint Slovak-Hungarian Commission for the Protection of Nature and Environment
• Joint Slovak-Hungarian Commission for Transport, Communications and Their Infrastructure
• Joint Slovak-Hungarian Commission for Agriculture, Veterinary and Phytosanitary Care
• Joint Slovak-Hungarian Commission for Culture and Press
• Joint Slovak-Hungarian Commission for Education, Science, Sport and Youth
Joint Slovak-Hungarian Commission for Health Care, Health Insurance and Social Care
• Joint Slovak-Hungarian Commission for Cooperation in Areas in the Competence of the Ministry
of Interior
• Joint Slovak-Hungarian Commission for Minorities
• Joint Slovak-Hungarian Commission for European and Euro-Atlantic Integration or Other
Foreign Policy Issues
On 23 April 2001 the Prime Ministers signed the Agreement between the Government of the Slovak
Republic and the Government of the Republic of Hungary on Cross-border Cooperation between
Territorial Units or Administrative Bodies. Upon signing the agreement conditions were created for
the development of cooperation between neighbouring border areas, cities, municipalities and their
associations and contacts between speakers of the Slovak and the Hungarian languages were
encouraged in both countries in the area of culture, education, information, vocational training and
lifelong learning.
According to Article 8 of the Agreement an Intergovernmental Joint Slovak-Hungarian Commission
for Cross-Border Cooperation was established.
An international conference of the Council of Europe on Slovak-Hungarian cooperation was
organised by the Slovak Ministry of Interior in Lucenec (Slovakia) and Salgótarján (Hungary) in
September 1999 to support such cooperation.
105

The Slovak – Hungarian cross-border cooperation develops well, as it is demonstrated by the fact
that many international associations - "Euroregions" were established recently on either side of the
border (some of them involving several countries): Euroregion Karpaty, Euroregion Slaná – Rimava,
Euroregion Neogradiensis, Ipel Euroregion, Euroregion Váh – Danube – Ipel, Euroregion of the
Danubian Tripartite; also so-called micro-regions are established, comprising several neighbouring
border villages of either country.

106

ANNEX NO. 1

Overview of funding provided for the culture of national minorities in 1999 - 2002
Funding provided for cultural activities, periodicals and non-periodicals from the transfer Minority
Culture in 1999
Nationality
Bulgarian
Czech
Croatian
Hungarian
Moravian
German
Polish
Roma
Ruthenian
Russian
Ukrainian
Jewish
others
Total

Cultural
activities
488 175
661 000
1 153 400
7 848 135
762 000
978 200
350 175
2 787 750
625 000
204 200
1 119 990
910 000
487 200
18 384 225

%

Periodicals

2,7
432 000
3,6
970 000
6,3
0
42,6 9 770 000
4,2
210 000
5,4
883 000
1,9
264 025
15,2 4 908 800
3,4 1 775 000
1,1
385 000
6,1 1 136 000
5,0
0
2,7
0
100 20 733 825

%
2,1
4,7
0
47,1
1,0
4,3
1,3
23,6
8,6
1,9
5,5
0
0
100

Nonperiodicals
60 000
447 400
0
6 195 800
0
120 00
0
150 000
0
0
34 000
1 010 200
0
8 017 400

%

Total

0,8
980 175
5,6 2 078 400
0 1 153 400
77,2 23 813 935
0
972 000
1,5 1 990 200
0
614 200
1,9 7 846 550
0
2 40 000
0
589 200
0,4 2 289 990
12,6 1 920 200
0
487 200
100 47 135 450

%
2,1
4,4
2,4
50,5
2,1
4,2
1,3
16,6
5,1
1,3
4,9
4,1
1,0
100

Funding provided for cultural activities, periodicals and non-periodicals from the transfer Minority
Culture in 2000
Nationality
Bulgarian
Czech
Croatian
Hungarian
Moravian
German
Polish
Roma
Ruthenian
Russian
Ukrainian
Jewish
others
Total

Cultural
activities
500 000
981 700
965 000
9 631 000
590 000
1 267 500
610 000
2 728 980
647 000
180 000
715 000
210 000
978 350
20 004 530

%

Periodicals

2,5
400 000
4,9 1 100 000
4,8
0
48,1 6 543 000
2,9
400 000
6,3
800 000
3,0
220 000
13,6 2 843 000
3,2 1 573 000
0,9
400 000
3,6 1 540 000
1,0
70 000
4,9
408 650
100 16 297 650

%
2,5
6,7
0
40,1
2,5
4,9
1,3
17,4
9,7
2,5
9,4
0,4
2,5
100

107

Nonperiodicals
0
0
355 000
6 840 000
0
0
0
483 000
170 000
0
243 000
1 500 000
0
9 591 000

%

Total

0
900 000
0 2 081 700
3,7 1 320 000
71,4 23 014 000
0
990 000
0 2 067 500
0
830 000
5,0 6 054 980
1,8 2 390 000
0
580 000
2,5 2 498 000
15,6 1 780 000
0 1 387 000
100 45 893 180

%
2,0
4,5
2,9
50,0
2,2
4,5
1,8
13,2
5,2
1,3
5,4
3,9
3,0
100

Funding provided for cultural activities, periodicals and non-periodicals from the transfer Minority
Culture in 2001
Nationality
Bulgarian
Czech
Croatian
Hungarian
Moravian
German
Polish
Roma
Ruthenian
Russian
Ukrainian
Jewish
others
Total

Cultural
Non% Periodicals %
%
Total
%
activities
periodicals
493 000 2,48
0
0
0
0
493 000 1,12
1 095 000 5,52 1 106 000 6,95
0
0 2 201 000 5 02
1 346 000 6,79
0
0
354 000 4,38 1 700 000 3,88
10 540 000 53,18 7 504 000 47,15 5 695 000 70,52 23 703 000 54,1
0
0
400 000 2,51
0
0
400 000 0,91
1 130 000
5,7
700 000
4,4
0
0 1 830 000 4,17
445 000 2,24
281 000 1,76
0
0
726 000 1,65
2 408 000 12,15 2 150 000 13,51
388 000
4,8 4 946 000 11,29
580 000 2,93 1 500 000 9,42
135 000 1,67 2 215 000 5,05
105 000 0,53
415 000
2,6
0
0
520 000 1,19
787 000 3,97 1 460 000 9,17
213 000 2,64 2 460 000 5,61
379 000 1,91
50 000 0,31 1 197 000 14,82 1 626 000 3,71
512 000 2,58
348 000 2,19
130 000 1,61
990 000 2,25
19 820 000 100 15 914 000 100 8 076 000 100 43 810 000
100

Funding provided for cultural activities, periodicals and non-periodicals from the transfer Minority
Culture in 2002
Nationality
Bulgarian
Czech
Croatian
Hungarian
Moravian
German
Polish
Roma
Ruthenian
Russian
Ukrainian
Jewish
others
Total

Cultural
% Periodicals
activities
660 000 2,13
240 000
1 304 800 4,22 1 294 000
1 629 000 5,27
0
14 743 300 47,74 11 650 000
325 000 1,05
400 000
1 553 000
5,0
820 000
900 000 2,91
400 000
5 313 900 17,2 1 750 000
1 386 000 4,48 1 723 000
114 000 0,37
406 000
940 000 3,04 1 445 000
264 000 0,85
100 000
1 725 000 5,58
198 000
30 883 500 100 20 426 400

%
1,17
6,33
0
57,0
1,95
4,0
1,95
8,57
8,4
1,99
7,07
0,49
0,97
100

108

Non%
Total
%
periodicals
0
0
990 000 1,47
0
0 2 599 200 3,85
250 000 1,55 1 879 000 2,78
12 749 000 78,9 39 142 300
58
275 000
1,7 1 000 000 1,48
0
0 2 373 000 3,51
0
0 1 300 000 1,93
240 000 1,48 7 303 900 10,83
290 000 1,79 3 399 000 5,03
0
0
520 000 0,77
205 000 1,27 2 590 000 3,84
1 701 900 10,53 2 066 400 3,06
70 000 0,43 1 993 000 2,95
16 160 900 100 67 470 800
100

ANNEX NO. 2
NATIONAL COUNCIL OF THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC ACT
of 10 July 1999
on National Minority Languages Use
The National Council of the Slovak Republic,
pursuant to the Constitution of the Slovak Republic and international instruments
binding on the Slovak Republic,
respecting the protection and development of the fundamental rights and
freedoms of the citizens of the Slovak Republic who are persons belonging to national
minority,
taking into account the existing legal acts in force which govern the use of
national Minority Languages,
recognising and appreciating the importance of mother tongues of the citizens of
the Slovak Republic who are persons belonging to national minority as an expression of
the cultural wealth of the State,
having in mind establishing of a democratic, tolerant and prosperous society in
the context of an integrating European Community,
realising that the Slovak language is the State Language in the Slovak Republic,
and that it is desirable to regulate the use of the languages of the citizens of the Slovak
Republic who are persons belonging to national minority,
hereby passes the following Act:
Section 1
A citizen of the Slovak Republic who is a person belonging to a national minority
has the right to use, apart from the State Language, his or her national Minority
Language (hereinafter referred to as "Minority Language"). The purpose of this Act is to
lay down, in conjunction with specific legal acts, the rules governing the use of Minority
Languages also in official communication.
Section 2
(1) If the citizens of the Slovak Republic who are persons belonging to a national
minority constitute according to the last census at least 20 % of the inhabitants of a
municipality, they may use a Minority Language in official communication within that
municipality.
(2) The list of the municipalities referred to in paragraph 1 shall be determined
by a regulation of the Government of the Slovak Republic.
(3) A citizen of the Slovak Republic who is a person belonging to a national
minority shall have, in the municipality referred to in paragraph 1, the right to address
written filings to the Governmental Agencies and self-government bodies (hereinafter
109

referred to as "the Body of Public Administration") also in a Minority Language. The
Body of Public Administration in the municipality referred to in paragraph 1 shall reply,
apart from in the State Language, also in the Minority Language, with exception of public
documents.
(4) The decision made in an administrative proceeding 1 by the Body of Public
Administration in the municipality referred to in paragraph 1 shall be issued, except in
the State Language also in a Minority Language in the form of a counterpart. In the event
of any doubts, the text of the decision in the State Language shall apply.
(5) The name of a Body of Public Administration displayed on buildings in a
municipality referred to in paragraph 1 shall be given also in a Minority Language.
(6) The body of local self-government in a municipality referred to in paragraph 1
shall provide the citizens with official forms issued within its competence in the State
Language and, upon request, also in a Minority Language.
Section 3
(1) A session of the local self-government body in the municipality referred to in
Section 2 paragraph 1 may be held also in a Minority Language, subject to the consent
of all present persons.
(2) A member of the municipal council in the municipality referred to in Section 2
paragraph 1 shall have the right to use at the meetings of that body a Minority Language.
Interpretation shall be secured by the municipality.
(1) A session of the local self-government body in the municipality referred to in
Section 2 paragraph 1 may be held also in a Minority Language, subject to the consent
of all present persons.
Section 4
(1) A session of the local self-government body in the municipality referred to in
Section 2 paragraph 1 may be held also in a Minority Language, subject to the consent
of all present persons.
(2) In the municipality referred to in Section 2 paragraph 1, important information,
in particular warnings, cautions and health information shall be displayed in publicly
accessible places apart from the State Language also in a Minority Language.
(3) The Body of Public Administration in the municipality referred to in Section 2
paragraph 1 shall, within the scope of its competence, provide information on the
generally binding legal provisions upon request apart from the State Language also in a
Minority Language.
Section 5
(1) The right to use a Minority Language in a proceeding before court and in
other spheres is regulated by specific legal acts.2/

1

Act No. 71/1967 Coll. on Administrative Proceedings (Administrative Procedure Code) as amended.

110

(2) The provisions of Section 2 paragraph 1 shall not apply to the pre-school
education, system of primary and secondary schools or culture. The use of national
Minority Languages in these areas is regulated by specific legal acts.2
Section 6
In application of this Act, the use of the Czech language in official communication
shall be deemed to fulfil the requirement of basic understanding with the State
Language unless an international instrument binding on the Slovak Republic provides
otherwise.
Section 7
(1) A Body of Public Administration and its employees are obliged to use the
State Language in official communication1/ and, under conditions provided for under this
Act and specific legal acts, they may use also a Minority Language. The Body of Public
Administration and its employees shall not be required to have a command of a Minority
Language.
(1) A Body of Public Administration and its employees are obliged to use the
State Language in official communication1/ and, under conditions provided for under
this Act and specific legal acts, they may use also a Minority Language.
Section 8
Section 10 of the Act of the National Council of the Slovak Republic No.
270/1995 Coll. on the State Language of the Slovak Republic is hereby cancelled.
Section 9
This Act shall enter into effect on 1 September 1999.

President of the Slovak Republic
Chairman of the National Council of the Slovak Republic
Prime Minister of the Slovak Republic

2

E.g., Section 3 paragraph 1 and Section 3a of Act No. 29/1984 Coll. on the System of Primary and Secondary
Schools (School Act) as amended, Act of the National Council of the Slovak Republic No. 279/1993 Coll. on
Educational Establishments as amended by Act of the National Council of the Slovak Republic No. 222/1996
Coll.

111

ANNEX NO. 3
List
of municipalities, where citizens of the Slovak Republic belonging to the Hungarian national
minority constitute at least 20 % of the population according to the results of the census of
26 May 2001
Region
Bratislava

Trnava

District
Senec 20,4

Municipality
1.Senec
2. Boldog
3.Hamuliakovo 55,6
4. Hrubá Borša
5. Hrubý Štúr
6. Kalinkovo
7. Kostolná pri Dun.
8. Malinovo
9. Nová Dedinka
10.Reca
11.Tomášov
12.Turen
13.Velký Biel
14.Vlky
1. Dunajská Streda
2. Bác
3. Baka
4. Balon
5. Bellova Ves 45,1
6. Blahová
7.Blatná na Ostrove
8. Bodíky
9. Bohelov
10.Cakany
11.Cenkovce
12.Ciližská Radvan
13.Dobrohošt
14.Dolný Bar
15.Dolný Štál
16.Dunajský Klatov
17.Gabcíkovo
18.Holice
19.Horná Potôn
20.Horné Mýto
21.Horný Bar
22.Hubice
23.Hviezdoslavov
24.Jahodná
25.Janíky
26.Jurová
27.Klúcovec

Dunajská Streda
83,3

112

22,1
70,3
31,7
74,3
37,1
68,8
50,6
28,7
44,1
55,4
77,0
41,4
77,4
79,7
67,2
92,5
94,0
52,1
87,9
96,5
97,8
86,3
90,9
95,4
91,4
82,6
94,2
93,9
90,4
96,0
93,9
97,2
89,2
77,2
45,1
94,0
90,3
94,1
98,1

Galanta

38,6

113

28.Kostolné Kracany 92,8
29.Kralovicove Krac. 90,2
30.Kútniky
87,4
31.Kvetoslavov
46,0
32.Kyselica
78,9
33.Lehnice
68,9
34.Lúc na Ostrove
95,7
35.Macov
56,8
36.Mad
95,7
37.Malé Dvorníky
92,5
38.Medvedov
87,3
39.Mierovo
82,3
40.Michal na Ostrove 89,0
41.Nový Život
85,3
42.Narad
95,1
43.Ohrady
95,3
44.Okoc
92,5
45.Oldza
93,8
46.Orechová Potôn 93,5
47.Padán
94,4
48.Pataš
89,7
49.Povoda
78,6
50.Rohovce
87,7
51.Sap
96,3
52.Šamorín
66,6
53.Štvrtok na Ostrove 82,8
54.Topolníky
93,0
55.Trhová Hradská 94,6
56. Trnávka
81,3
57. Trstená na Ostrove 93,2
58.Velká Paka
55,6
59. Velké Blahovo
86,0
60. Velké Dvorníky 95,8
61. Velký Meder
84,5
62. Vieska
89,9
63.Vojka nad Dunajom 87,7
64. Vrakún
92,7
65. Vydrany
85,4
66. Zlaté Klasy
67,7
1.Galanta
36,8
2.Cierna Voda
92,4
3.Cierny Brod
90,2
4. Dolné Saliby
78,0
5. Dolný Chotár
93,3
6.Horné Saliby 67,0
7. Jánovce
33,0
8. Jelka
68,4
9. Kajal
70,9

Nitra

Komárno

69,1

114

10.Košúty
11.Králov Brod
12. Matúškovo
13. Mostová
14. Sládkovicovo
15. Tomášikovo
16. Topolnica
17. Trstice
18. Váhovce
19. Velká Maca
20. Velké Ulany
21. Vozokany

60,7
83,5
64,1
88,1
38,5
88,0
53,3
93,7
77,1
84,8
71,1
83,0

1. Komárno
2. Bajc
3. Bátorové Kosihy
4. Bodza
5. Bodzianske Lúky
6. Brestovec
7. Búc
8. Calovec
9. Cicov
10.Dedina mládeže
11.Holiare
12.Hurbanovo
13.Chotin
14.Imel
15.Iža
16.Kamenicná
17.Kližská Nemá
18.Kolárovo
19.Kravany nad
Dunajom
20.Marcelová
21.Martovce
22.Moca
23.Modrany
24.Nesvady
25.Okolicná na
Ostrove
26. Patince
27. Pribeta
28. Radvan nad
Dunajom
29. Sokolce
30. Svätý Peter
31. Tôn
32. Trávnik

60,1
56,8
83,4
92,9
95,1
96,3
93,6
73,0
91,5
66,6
92,9
50,2
87,1
46,5
72,8
78,6
92,2
80,8
81,0
88,5
90,6
92,0
85,3
59,0
88,6
91,4
76,6
91,5
91,4
73,6
88,0
91,3

33. Velké Kosihy
34. Virt
35. Vrbové /Váhom
36. Zemiamska Olca
37. Zlatná na Ostrove
Levice 27,9

85,6
67,5
89,2
89,8
90,5

1. Bajka
26,7
2. Beša
40,2
3. Bielovce
91,6
4. Bory
45,6
5. Cata
68,6
6. Demnadice
32,3
7. Dolné Semerovce 59,3
8. Farná
76,8
9. Hokovce
46,6
10.Hontianska Vrbica 36,9
11.Horná Sec
23,1
12.Horné Semerovce 54,3
13.Horné Turovce
68,0
14.Horný Pial
52,2
15.Hrkovce
57,8
16.Hronovce
48,0
17.Ipelský Sokolec 86,3
18.Ipelské Ulany
89,2
19.Jur nad Hronom 41,8
20..Ket
93,2
21.Hrubánovo
78,2
22.Kukucinov
32,6
23.Lontov
70,9
24.Málaš
51,4
25.Malé Ludince
82,8
26.Mýtne Ludany
45,7
27.Nýrovce
72,9
28.Ondrejovce 35,7
29.Pastovce
73,6
30.Plaštovce
69,2
31.Pohronský Ruskov 61,6
32.Sazdice
61,5
33.Sikenica
40,4
34.Slatina
56,0
35.Šahy
62,2
36.Šalov
72,6
37.Šarovce
46,0
38.Tehla
21,3
39.Tekovské Lužany 35,4
40.Tekovský Hrádok 56,4
41.Tupá
34,4
42.Turá
60,6

Levice mesto 12,2

115

Nitra 6,7

Nové Zámky 38,3

116

43.Velké Ludince
44.Velké Turovce
45.Výškovce nad
Iplom
46.Vyšné nad
Hronom
47.Zalaba
48.Zbrojníky
49.Želiezovce
50.Žemliare
1.Bobindol
2.Branc
3.Cechynce
4.Cifáre
5.Dolné Obdokovce
6.Hostová
7.Jelenec
8.Klasov
9.Kolínany
10.Nitrianske
Hrnciarovce
11.Pohranice
12.Velké Chyndice
13.Velký Cetín
14.Žirany
1.Nové Zámky 27,5
2.Andovce
3.Bajtava
4.Bardonovo
5.Belá
6.Bešenov
7.Bina
8.Bruty
90,7
9.Dubník
10.Dvory nad
Žitavou
11.Gbelce
12.Chlaba
13.Kamenica nad
Hronom
14.Kamenín
15.Kamenný most
16.Komoca
17.Lela
18.Lubá
19.Malá nad Hronom
20.Malé Kosihy
21.Mužla

82,6
60,7
79,4
62,1
85,9
32,1
51,2
71,8
30,4
30,7
53,7
43,0
69,5
82,5
36,6
43,1
59,5
32,7
59,3
24,9
79,7
62,2
66,8
91,3
38,6
76,5
80,1
89,6
64,4
71,4
74,3
86,8
78,2
89,9
90,0
84,4
86,6
86,9
93,8
97,1
84,7

Šala 35,7

Banská Bystrica

Zlaté Moravce
Lucenec 27,6
Lucenec mesto 13,1

117

22.Nána
23.Nová Vieska
24.Obid
25.Pavlová
26.Pozba
27.Rúban
28.Salka
29.Sikenicka
30.Strekov
31.Svodin
32.Šarkan
33.Štúrovo
34.Tvrdošovce 71,3
35.Velký Kýr
36.Zemné
1.Diakovce
2.Dlhá nad Váhom
3.Králová nad
Váhom
4.Neded
5.Selice
6.Tešedíkovo
7.Trnovec nad
Váhom
8.Vlcany
9.Žihárec

75,0
88,0
88,1
94,8
77,0
85,3
93,1
92,0
88,8
77,0
85,7
68,7

1.Ladice
1.Belina
2.Biskupice
3.Bolkovce
4.Bulhary
5.Cakanovce
6.Camovce
7.Filakkovo
8.Filakovské Kováce
9.Holiša
10.Jelšovec
11.Kalonda
12.Mikušovce
13.Mucín
14.Nitra nad Iplom
15.Panické Dravce
16.Pleš
17.Prša
18.Radzovce
19.Rapovce
20.Šávol

43,7
90,4
77,6
25,3
84,3
71,9
78,1
64,4
55,0
55,7
34,2
63,6
26,7
29,4
38,5
46,1
51,3
90,8
72,1
44,4
84,1

64,3
74,7
71,5
71,5
83,1
62,4
59,4
82,8
23,9
72,4
75,4

21.Šíd
22.Šurice
23.Trebelovce
24.Trenc
25.Velká nad Iplom
26.Velké Dravce
Poltár
Revúca 22

Rimavská Sobota

41,3

118

72,0
89,8
25,3
30,1
51,0
73,3

1.Nové Hony
21,5
2.Pinciná
48,3
1.Držkovce
68,8
2.Gemer
83,1
3.Gemerská Ves
67,5
4.Gemerský Sad
53,8
5.Hucin
26,5
6.Chvalová
39,0
7.Leváre
84,6
8.Levkuška
79,8
9.Licince
57,9
10.Otrocok
72,4
11.Polina
71,7
12.Rašice
94,3
13.Skerešovo
46,4
14.Tornala
62,1
15.Višnové
52,7
16.Žiar
74,1
1.Rimavská Sobota 35,3
2.Abovce
66,3
3.Barca
85,5
4.Bátka
72,3
5.Belín
32,6
6.Blhovce
76,9
7.Cakov
84,4
8.Cíž
71,4
9.Dolné Zahorany
93,7
10.Dražice
65,0
11.Drna
79,4
12.Dubno
97,1
13.Dubovec
82,9
14.Dulovo
29,9
15.Figa
43,7
16.Gemercek
83,8
17.Gemerské Dechtáre 96,8
18.Gemerské
78,4
Michalovce
19.Gemerský Jablonec 89,7
20.Gortva
55,4
21.Hajnácka
86,3
22.Hodejov
64,2

23.Hodejovec
24.Hostice
25.Hubovo
26.Husiná
27.Chanava
28.Chrámec
29.Ivanice
30.Janice
31.Jesenské
32.Jestice
33.Kaloša
34.Kesovce
35.Konrádovce
36.Král
37.Lenartovce
38.Lenka
39.Martinová
40.Neporadza
41.Nová Bašta 90,3
42.Oždany
43.Paradovce
44.Pavlovce
45.Petrovce
46.Radnovce
47.Rakytník
48.Riecka
49.Rimavská Sec
50.Rimavské Janovce
51.Rumince
53.Stará Bašta
54.Stránske
55.Studená
56.Sútor
57.Šimonovce
58.Širkovce
59.Štrkovec
60.Tachy
61.Tomášovce
62.Uzovská Panica
63.Valice
64.Vcelince
65.Vecelkov
66.Velký Blh
67.Vieska nad
Blhom
68.Vlkyna
69.Vyšné Valice
70.Zádor
119

55,0
87,0
88,3
77,6
88,2
66,2
95,1
96,2
56,8
91,6
77,5
67,8
77,6
69,6
78,0
63,9
67,8
52,6
26,1
52,2
54,3
96,3
84,9
87,8
84,1
88,5
41,3
66,4
94,2
45,2
84,0
56,8
92,1
86,0
84,6
96,1
74,2
63,6
60,9
66,4
95,6
69,0
96,0
96,2
87,6
83,2

Velký Krtíš 27,4

Košice

Košice-okolie 13,2

120

71.Žip
85,3
1.Balog nad Iplom
87,9
2.Bátorová
29,1
3.Bušince
40,2
4.Cebovce
72,0
5.Celáre
35,5
6.Dolinka
96,7
7.Durkovce
63,5
8.Glabušovce
52,3
9.Chrastince
21,3
10.Ipelské Predmostie 76,8
11.Kamenné Kosihy 70,2
12.Kiarov
73,8
13.Klenany
92,3
14.Koláre
80,8
15.Kosihovce
34,7
16.Kosihy
85,3
nad Iplom
17.Kovácovce
66,1
18.Lesenica
41,2
19.Mula
29,7
20.Nenince
77,8
21.Olováry
74,6
22.Opatovská Nová 70,1
Ves
23.Secianky
87,6
24.Selany
54,1
25.Širákov
76,1
26.Trebušovce 80,8
27.Velká Calomija 66,0
28.Velká Ves nad
80,9
Iplom
29.Velké Zlievce
24,1
30.Vinica
87,9
31.Vrbovka
83,4
32.Želovce
22,0
1.Buzica
63,5
2.Cestice
47,2
3.Cecejovce
35,7
4.Debrat
69,1
5.Drienovec
33,5
6.Dvorníky-Vceláre 68,1
7.Háj
85,0
8.Hostovce
90,1
9.Chorváty
76,3
10.Janík
63,8
11.Komárovce 84,3
12.Milhost
41,9

13.Mokrance
35,4
14.Moldava nad
43,7
Bodvou
15.Nižný Lánec
51,4
16.Peder
81,2
17.Perin-Chym
34,1
18.Rešica
90,5
19.Turna nad
43,6
Bodvou
20.Turnianska Nová 90,9
Ves
21.Zádiel
86,6
22.Žarnov
74,9
1.Beša
92,6
2.Budince
68,2
3.Cicarovce
93,6
4.Drahnov
58,3
5.Ižkovce
92,5
6.Kapušianske
73,6
Klacany
7.Krišovská
78,6
Liesková
8.Malé Raškovce
50,8
9.Matovské Vojkovce 85,7
10.Oborin
69,3
11.Ptrukša
95,2
12.Ruská
93,7
13.Velké Kapušany 57,0
14.Velké Raškovce 83,6
15.Velké Slemence 97,0
16.Vojany
70,3
17.Zemplínske 36,2
Kopcany
1.Rožnava
26,8
2.Ardovo
69,5
3.Bohúnovo
87,2
4.Bôrka
53,8
5.Bretka
81,9
6.Brztotín
40,0
7.Coltovo
70,5
8.Cucma
48,8
9.Dlhá Ves
86,7
10.Drnava
71,3
11.Gemerská Hôrka 63,1
12.Gemerská Panica 46,8
13.Hrhov
90,1
14.Hrušov
88,6
15.Jablonov nad
86,7

Michalovce 11,7

Rožnava 30,6

121

Turnou
16.Jovice
77,3
17.Kecovo
91,9
18.Kovácová
89,5
19.Krásnohorská
87,7
Dlhá Lúka
20.Krásnohorské
47,2
Podhradie
21.Kružná
81,1
22.Kunova Teplica 41,2
23.Lipovník
85,6
24.Lúcka
87,7
25.Meliata
74,4
26.Pašková
75,5
27.Plešivec
49,2
28.Rudná
41,8
29.Silica
89,0
30.Silická Brezová
73,4
31.Silická Jablonica 97,2
32.Slavec
62,7
1.Backa
96,3
2.Bara
69,9
3.Biel
75,5
4.Bol
86,2
5.Borša
50,3
6.Botany
71,9
7.Brehov
43,5
8.Cernochov
77,2
9.Cierna
89,6
10.Cierna nad Tisou 60,1
11.Dobrá
85,2
12.Klin nad Bodrogom 60,0
13.Královský Chlmec 76,9
14.Ladmovce
86,8
15.Leles
75,5
16.Malé Trakany
87,9
17.Malý Horeš 95,6
18.Malý Kamenec
94,0
19.Polany
83,0
21.Pribeník
78,9
22.Rad
75,9
23.Sirnik
24,1
24.Solnicka
87,6
25.Somotor
69,2
26.Strážne
92,1
27.Streda nad
60,0
Bodrogom
28.Svätá Mária
87,5

Trebišov 29,3

122

29.Svätuša
30.Svinice
31.Velké Trakany
32.Velký Horeš
33.Velký Kamenec
34.Vinicky
35.Vojka
36.Zatin
37.Zemplín

123

95,4
89,0
83,0
84,1
88,7
62,6
86,9
84,1
64,2

ANNEX No. 4
List
of municipalities, where citizens of the Slovak Republic belonging to the Roma national
minority constitute at least 20 % of the population according to the results of the census of
26 May 2001
Nitra region
District Levice:
1.Dolné Semerovce.20.0%
Banská Bystrica region
District Brezno
1.Valkovna 34.1 %
District Revúca
1.Držkovce 22.2 %
2.Hucín 50.1%
3.Rybník 31.5 %
District Rimavská Sobota
1.Dulovo 65.2%
2.Neporadza 24.6%
3.Pavlovce 25.9%
District Velký Krtíš
1. Celovce 24.7%
Prešov region
District Bardejov
1. Nižný Tvarožec 25.3%
District Kežmarok
1.Jurské 84.0%
2. Malý Slavkov 21.7%
3.Podhorany 54.5%
4.Rakúsy 27.6%
5.Stráne pod Tatrami 20.3%
6.Toporec 30.5%
7.Velká Lomnica 22.1%
District Prešov
1.Cervenica 31.2%
2.Hermanovce 21.3%
3.Mirkovce 61.2%
4.Svinia 27.1%
District Sabinov
1.Olejníkov 37.8%
2.Ostrovany 43.9%
District Stropkov
1. Miková 27.7%
124

District Svidník
1.Kružlová 21.0%
District Vranov nad Toplou
1.Banské 23.1%
2.Caklov 31.3%
3. Cicava 48.8 %
4. Hlinné 21.5 %
5 .Prosacov 41.5%
6.Sol 22.7%
Košice region
District Gelnica
1.Nálepkovo 27.6%
2.Richnava 26.3%
3.Závadka 22.3%
Košice II
1.Luník IX 44.0%
Košice surroundings
1.Hacava 28.2%
2.Kecerovce 61.8%
3.Nižný Lanec 24.9%
4.Velká Ida 31.6%
5.Vtáckovce 50.8%
District Michalovce
1.Budince 23.4%
2.Inacovce 31.8%
3.Laškovce 42.1%
4.Pavlovce nad Uhom 23.5%
District Rožnava
1.Bôrka 32.3%
2.Henckovce 20.4%
3.Krásnohorské
Podhradie 28.1%
District Spišská Nová Ves
1.Arnutovce 29.1%
2.Letanovce 20.5%
3.Porác 23.8%
4.Žehra 26.3%
District Trebišov
1.Egreš 24.3%
2.Lastovce 37.7%
3.Zbehnov 26.7%

125

Annex No. 5
Croatian national minority
according to the results of the census of 26 May 2001
– main areas of residence Croatian national minority according to the census of the
inhabitants of houses and flats of 26 May 2001

and

Persons with
permanent
Residence - total
1

Slovak Republic

5,379,455

890

0.02

Bratislava - Devínska Nová Ves
Bratislava - Karlova Ves

15,502
32,843

46
27

0.3
0.1

Bratislava - Cunovo
Bratislava - Jarovce

911
1,199

148
244

16.2
20.4

District, municipality

126

Croatian

%

11

ANNEX No. 6

German national minority
according to the results of census of 26 May 2002
– main areas of residence

District, municipality
Slovak Republic

Persons with
permanent
residence
German
total
%
5,379,455 5405
0.1

Bratislava - Staré Mesto
Bratislava - Ružinov
Bratislava - Nové Mesto
Bratislava - Dúbravka
Bratislava - Karlova Ves
Bratislava - Petržalka

44,798
70,004
37,418
35,199
32,843
117,227

245
237
110
74
84
219

0.5
0.5
0.3
0.2
0.3
0.2

18,018
1,094
867
3,134
53,097
1,214

86
61
79
94
153
65

0.5
5.6
9.1
3
0.3
5.4

District Turcianske Teplice
Brieštie
Horná Štubna
Sklené
Turcek
Turcianske Teplice

170
1,606
816
716
7,031

25
82
27
93
26

14.7
5.1
3.3
13
0.4

District Žiar nad Hronom
Janova Lehota
Kopernica
Krahule
Kremnica
Kremnické Bane
Kunešov

850
429
144
5,822
250
244

20
22
35
69
26
45

2.4
5.1
24.3
1.2
10.4
18.4

District Kežmarok
Kežmarok

17,383

74

0.4

District Poprad
Poprad

56,157

119

0.2

District Prievidza
Handlová
Klacno
Malinová
Nitrianske Pravno
Prievidza
Tužina

127

District Stará Lubovna
Chmelnica

914

107

11.7

District Košice I
Košice - Sever
Košice - Staré mesto

20,309
22,171

76
72

0.4
0.3

District Košice II
Košice - Západ

40,870

93

0.2

3,667

497

13.6

District Košice - okolie
Medzev

128

ANNEX No. 7
List
of municipalities, where citizens of the Slovak Republic belonging to the Ruthenian national
minority constitute at least 20 % of the population according to the results of the census of
26 May 2001

District, municipality
a

Persons with
permanent
residence
total
1

Ruthenian nationality
number
7

in
%
22

District Bardejov
Becherov
Chmelová
Jedlinka
Mikulášová
Ondavka
Regetovka
Šarišské Cierne
Vyšná Polianka
Vyšný Tvarožec

274
405
86
153
37
14
345
124
136

133
166
29
50
18
8
73
45
61

48.5
41.0
33.7
32.7
48.6
57.1
21.2
36.3
44.9

District Humenné
Nechválova Polianka
Nižná Jablonka
Pritulany
Ruská Kajna
Ruská Poruba
Vyšná Jablonka
Závada

135
180
67
150
285
84
84

36
37
55
34
178
32
60

26.7
20.6
82.1
22.7
62.5
38.1
71.4

68
349
430
421
497
312
405
6,741
431

49
150
195
273
308
126
234
2 303
356

72.1
43.0
45.3
64.8
62.0
40.4
57.8
34.2
82.6

District Medzilaborce
Brestov nad Laborcom
Cabalovce
Cabiny
Certižné
Habura
Kalinov
Krásny Brod
Medzilaborce
Nagov

129

Olka
Olšinkov
Palota
Radvan nad Laborcom
Repejov
Rokytovce
Roškovce
Sukov
Svetlice
Valentovce
Volica
Výrava
Zbojné
Zbudská Belá

351
41
183
602
173
191
237
153
175
42
347
144
214
161

202
16
64
139
87
119
48
54
46
24
98
72
59
99

57.5
39.0
35.0
23.1
50.3
62.3
20.3
35.3
26.3
57.1
28.2
50.0
27.6
61.5

District Snina
Cukalovce
Hostovice
Kalná Roztoka
Klenová
Osadné
Parihuzovce
Pcoliné
Runina
Ruská Volová
Topola
Ubla
Ulic

143
378
630
535
233
28
621
91
139
226
881
1,078

82
85
172
176
58
11
167
62
66
94
176
227

57.3
22.5
27.3
32.9
24.9
39.3
26.9
68.1
47.5
41.6
20.0
21.1

District Stará Lubovna
Circ
Ruská Vola nad Popradom
Stránany
Údol

1,118
115
207
431

373
32
51
121

33.4
27.8
24.6
28.1

351
38
406
58
67
121
173
75
281
75
116

112
18
144
14
20
57
66
19
59
40
32

31.9
47.4
35.5
24.1
29.9
47.1
38.2
25.3
21.0
53.3
27.6

District Stropkov
Brusnica
Bystrá
Havaj
Jakušovce
Kožuchovce
Malá Polana
Miková
Potôcky
Staškovce
Vladica
Vojtovce

130

District Svidník
Belejovce
Cigla
Dobroslava
Dubová
Havranec
Jurkova Vola
Keckovce
Korejovce
Krajná Bystrá
Krajná Porúbka
Krajné Cierno
Medvedie
Mirola
Nižná Jedlová
Nižná Pisaná
Nižný Mirošov
Nižný Orlík
Nová Polianka
Pstriná
Roztoky
Šarbov
Vagrinec
Vápeník
Vyšná Jedlová
Vyšná Pisaná
Vyšný Mirošov

18
88
41
243
10
84
230
70
335
58
84
62
85
80
98
249
260
62
70
294
9
134
52
173
80
604

131

11
19
14
69
4
34
56
19
72
40
34
21
17
32
23
66
71
17
29
69
4
30
24
87
41
185

61.1
21.6
34.1
28.4
40.0
40.5
24.3
27.1
21.5
69.0
40.5
33.9
20.0
40.0
23.5
26.5
27.3
27.4
41.4
23.5
44.4
22.4
46.2
50.3
51.3
30.6

ANNEX No. 8
List
of municipalities, where citizens of the Slovak Republic belonging to the Ukrainian national
minority constitute at least 20 % of the population according to the results of the census of
26 May 2001

District, municipality
a
District Bardejov
Ondavka
Šarišské Cierne

persons with
permanent
residence
total
1

Ukrainian
nationality
8

%
23

37
345

9 24.3
93 27.0

41

16 39.0

District Snina
Runina
Ruský Potok

91
161

23 25.3
39 24.2

District Stará Lubovna
Jarabina

834

243 29.1

District Medzilaborce
Olšinkov

132

