Strasbourg, 16 April 2014

ECRML (2014) 5

EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES

APPLICATION OF THE CHARTER IN SLOVENIA

4th monitoring cycle

A.

Report of the Committee of Experts on the Charter

B.
Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers of the
Council of Europe on the application of the Charter by
Slovenia

The European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages provides for a control
mechanism to evaluate how the Charter is applied in a State Party with a view to,
where necessary, making recommendations for improving its legislation, policy
and practices. The central element of this procedure is the Committee of Experts,
set up under Article 17 of the Charter. Its principal purpose is to report to the
Committee of Ministers on its evaluation of compliance by a Party with its
undertakings, to examine the real situation of regional or minority languages in the
State and, where appropriate, to encourage the Party to gradually reach a higher
level of commitment.
To facilitate this task, the Committee of Ministers adopted, in accordance with
Article 15, paragraph 1, an outline for periodical reports that a Party is required to
submit to the Secretary General. The report should be made public by the State.
This outline requires the State to give an account of the concrete application of
the Charter, the general policy for the languages protected under Part II and, in
more precise terms, all measures that have been taken in application of the
provisions chosen for each language protected under Part III of the Charter. The
Committee of Experts’ first task is therefore to examine the information contained
in the periodical report for all the relevant regional or minority languages on the
territory of the State concerned.
The Committee of Experts’ role is to evaluate the existing legal acts, regulations
and real practice applied in each State for its regional or minority languages. It
has established its working methods accordingly. The Committee of Experts
gathers information from the respective authorities and from independent sources
within the State, so as to attempt to obtain a fair and just overview of the real
language situation. After a preliminary examination of an initial periodical report,
the Committee of Experts submits, if necessary, a number of questions to each
Party to obtain supplementary information from the authorities on matters it
considers insufficiently developed in the report itself. This written procedure is
usually followed up by an on-the-spot visit by a delegation of the Committee of
Experts to the State in question. During this visit the delegation meets bodies and
associations whose work is closely related to the use of the relevant languages,
and consults the authorities on matters that have been brought to its attention.
This information-gathering process is designed to enable the Committee of
Experts to evaluate more effectively the application of the Charter in the State
concerned.
Having concluded this process of collecting information, the Committee of
Experts adopts its own report. This report is submitted to the Committee of
Ministers, together with suggestions for recommendations that the latter may
decide to address to the State Party.

2

CONTENTS
A.

Report of the Committee of Experts on the application of the Charter in
Slovenia .............................................................................................................. 4
Chapter 1 Background information .................................................................................... 4
1.1.

The Charter’s ratification by Slovenia ........................................................................4

1.2.

The work of the Committee of Experts ......................................................................4

1.3.

Particular issues arising in the evaluation of the application of the Charter in
Slovenia .....................................................................................................................5
1.3.1. Territorial scope of application of the Charter with regard to German and
Croatian and application of the Charter to German, Croatian and Serbian ....5
1.3.2. Traditional presence of Bosnian ......................................................................6

1.4.

New legislative measures ..........................................................................................6

Chapter 2 Conclusions of the Committee of Experts on how the Slovenian
authorities reacted to the recommendations of the Committee of
Ministers RecChL (2010)5 .................................................................................. 7
Chapter 3 The Committee of Experts' evaluation in respect of Part II and Part III of
the Charter .......................................................................................................... 9
3.1

Evaluation in respect of Part II of the Charter............................................................9

3.2.

Evaluation in respect of Part III of the Charter.........................................................21
3.2.1. The Hungarian language ...............................................................................21
3.2.2. The Italian language ......................................................................................29

Chapter 4 Findings of the Committee of Experts in the fourth monitoring round ........ 39
Appendix I: Instrument of Ratification ................................................................................41
Appendix II: Comments from the Slovenian authorities .....................................................43

B.

Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
on the application of the Charter by Slovenia ................................................ 45

3

A.
Report of the Committee of Experts on the application of the Charter in
Slovenia
adopted by the Committee of Experts on 15 November 2013
and presented to the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
in accordance with Article 16 of the Charter

Chapter 1
1.1.

Background information

The Charter’s ratification by Slovenia

1.
Slovenia ratified the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages (hereafter referred to
as the Charter) on 4 October 2000. The Charter entered into force in Slovenia on 1 January 2001.
2.
The instrument of ratification of Slovenia is set out in Appendix I of this report. On 26 April 2007,
the National Assembly adopted the Act Amending the Act Ratifying the European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages, which was published in Uradni list Republike Slovenije – MP No. 7/2007 (Ur. l. RS
No. 44/2007). This led to a new declaration attached to the instrument of ratification.
3.
Article 15, paragraph 1 of the Charter requires States Parties to submit three-yearly reports in a
form prescribed by the Committee of Ministers. The fourth periodical report by Slovenia, which was due in
June 2012, was submitted to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe on 16 September 2013.

1.2.

The work of the Committee of Experts

4.
This evaluation report is based on the information obtained by the Committee of Experts from the
fourth periodical report of Slovenia and through interviews held with representatives of regional or minority
language speakers in Slovenia and the Slovenian authorities during the on-the-spot visit, which took place
on 4-6 November 2013. The Committee of Experts received a number of statements from bodies and
associations legally established in Slovenia, submitted pursuant to Article 16, paragraph 2 of the Charter.
5.
In the present fourth evaluation report, the Committee of Experts will focus on the provisions and
issues which were singled out in the third evaluation report as raising particular problems. It will evaluate
in particular how the Slovenian authorities have reacted to the recommendations of the Committee of
Experts and the Committee of Ministers. The Committee of Experts will also look at the new issues
detected during the fourth monitoring cycle.
6.
The report contains detailed recommendations that the Slovenian authorities are urged to take into
account in order to develop their policy on regional or minority languages. The Committee of Experts has,
on the basis of its detailed recommendations, also established a list of proposals for general
recommendations to be addressed to Slovenia by the Committee of Ministers, as provided in Article 16.4
of the Charter.
7.
The Committee of Experts regrets that the fourth periodical report was submitted by Slovenia with
a delay of 15 months. Such delays severely hamper the monitoring process and the functioning of the
Charter mechanism. The Committee of Experts therefore calls upon the Slovenian authorities to comply
with their reporting obligation at three-year intervals, as provided by Article 15.1 of the Charter.
8.
In May 2011 a Charter Implementation Roundtable was organised in Ljubljana by the Council of
Europe and the Slovenian authorities. The roundtable was attended by representatives of the Committee
of Experts, of the Advisory Committee on the Framework Convention for the Protection of National

4

Minorities and of the national authorities. A meeting with the representatives of the regional or minority
language speakers was organised a day before, since, regrettably, the Slovenian authorities did not find
any possibility for a joint meeting to take place.
9.
The present evaluation report is based on the political and legal situation prevailing at the time of
the Committee of Experts' on-the-spot visit to Slovenia (November 2013).
10.

1.3.

The present report was adopted by the Committee of Experts on 15 November 2013.

Particular issues arising in the evaluation of the application of the Charter in Slovenia

11.
Slovenia has a very high legal standard of protection for the Hungarian and Italian languages in
the “ethnically-mixed areas”, as was noted by the Committee of Experts in its previous evaluation reports.
While gaps in the implementation of this legal framework persist in certain areas, Slovenia shows a
continued commitment to the protection and the promotion of the Hungarian and Italian languages.
1.3.1.

Territorial scope of application of the Charter with regard to German and Croatian and
application of the Charter to German, Croatian and Serbian

12.
In the third monitoring cycle, the Committee of Ministers recommended Slovenia to “define the
areas where German and Croatian have been traditionally spoken in Slovenia and apply the
provisions of Part II to German, Croatian […], in co-operation with the speakers”. Furthermore, the
Committee of Experts urged the Slovenian authorities to define, in co-operation with the speakers, the
areas where German and Croatian have been traditionally spoken in Slovenia and apply the provisions of
Part II to German and Croatian.
13.
According to the fourth periodical report, the study entitled “National/ethnic vitality of members of
the Serbian, Croatian and German national communities in the area of their historical settlement”,
commissioned by the Slovenian authorities in 2008 to the Institute for Ethnic Studies has not yet been
finalised.
14.
The Committee of Experts notes that this study, which started five years ago, has so far not led to
any concrete results with respect to the application of the Charter to German and Croatian. It reiterates
that measures to define the areas where German and Croatian have been traditionally spoken in Slovenia
should be taken in close co-operation and on the basis of transparent consultations with the speakers.
Furthermore, the Committee of Experts reiterates that, according to information received from the German
speakers in the previous monitoring cycle, the areas where German is traditionally spoken in Slovenia are
the municipalities of Apače, Celje, Muta, Limbuš, Radlje, Maribor, Ruše, Ptuj, Šentilj, Lenart and Svečina
as well as the villages of Kočevske Poljane, Občice, Stare žage, Mali Rigelj, Hrib (Dolenjske Toplice
1
municipality), Črmošnjice and Srednja vas (Semič municipality) . On the basis of the information received
from the Croatian speakers in the previous monitoring cycle, the Croatian language has a traditional
presence in Bela Krajina and Žumberak (Dolenjska region) and Croatian speakers are concentrated in
2
and around the municipality of Metlika, notably in Radovica and Bojanja Vas . In the opinion of the
Committee of Experts, this already gives the Slovenian authorities at least a basis to start a dialogue with
the speakers on the application of Part II of the Charter to German and Croatian.
15.
The Committee of Experts further points out that defining the areas where German and Croatian
have been traditionally spoken and applying Part II of the Charter to these languages have been recurrent
3
recommendations of the Committee of Ministers since the first and second monitoring cycles . It is

1

Paragraph 14, Third report of the Committee of Experts on Slovenia, ECRML (2010)5
Paragraph 15, Third report of the Committee of Experts on Slovenia, ECRML (2010)5
3
See Recommendations RecChL(2004)3 and RecChL (2007)5 of the Committee of Ministers on the application of the European
Charter for Regional or Minority Languages in Slovenia
2

5

therefore of the view that the Slovenian authorities should, as a matter of urgency, take resolute steps and
implement these recommendations.
The Committee of Experts strongly urges the Slovenian authorities to define, in co-operation with
the speakers, the areas where German and Croatian have been traditionally spoken in Slovenia
and apply the provisions of Part II to German and Croatian.
16.
In the third monitoring cycle, the Committee of Ministers also recommended Slovenia to “[…]
apply the provisions of Part II to […] Serbian, in co-operation with the speakers”. Furthermore, the
Committee of Experts “encourage[d] the Slovenian authorities to co-operate with the Serbian speakers in
the implementation of the provisions of Part II of the Charter to the Serbian language”.
17.
The fourth periodical report contains very limited information with regard to Serbian and there are
no indications of a structured application of Part II of the Charter to this language, in the area where this is
traditionally used. The Committee of Experts reiterates that Part II of the Charter applies to the Serbian
4
language in Bojanci, Marindol, Miliči and Paunoviči .
The Committee of Experts urges the Slovenian authorities to apply the provisions of Part II of the
Charter to the Serbian language, in cooperation with the speakers.

1.3.2.

Traditional presence of Bosnian

18.
In the third monitoring cycle, the Committee of Ministers recommended Slovenia to “clarify, in cooperation with the speakers, the issue of the traditional presence of the Bosnian language in
Slovenia”. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts addressed the same recommendation to the Slovenian
authorities.
19.
According to the fourth periodical report, the presence of the Bosnian language in Slovenia is a
result of recent migration.
20.
During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed by representatives of the
Bosnian speakers that people of Bosnian origin arrived in the current territory of Slovenia at the end of the
th
19 century. After Bosnia and Herzegovina became part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire in 1878 a higher
number of Bosniaks arrived in present-day Slovenia during the First World War, as soldiers. However, this
did not develop into a community. A continuous Bosnian presence in Slovenia dates back to the 1950s.
21.
Based on the information received, the Committee of Experts considers that the Bosnian language
is not “traditionally used” in Slovenia in conformity with the definition of a “regional or minority language”
contained in Article 1 of the Charter.

1.4.

New legislative measures

22.
In the fourth monitoring cycle, the Slovenian authorities informed the Committee of Experts that
new legislation relevant to the protection and promotion of regional or minority languages, in particular
Hungarian and Italian in the “ethnically-mixed areas”, has been adopted. Such acts are, for example, the
Decree on Publishing in the Official Journal of Slovenia (Ur.l. RS No. 20/2010), the Recognition of
Professional Qualifications for Physicians, Specialist Doctors, Doctors of Dental Medicine and Dental
Medicine Specialists Act (Ur.l. RS No. 107/2010) the Identity Card Act (Ur.l. RS No. 35/2011), the State
Prosecutor Act (Ur.l. RS No. 58/2011), the Police Organisation and Work Act, the Tasks and Powers of
the Police Act (Ur.l. RS No. 15/2013). The Committee of Experts observes that several of these new acts
are reactions to concerns it raised in previous rounds.
4

Paragraph 19, Third report of the Committee of Experts on Slovenia, ECRML (2010)5

6

Chapter 2
Conclusions of the Committee of Experts on how the Slovenian
authorities reacted to the recommendations of the Committee of Ministers
RecChL (2010)5
Recommendation No. 1:
“define the areas where German and Croatian have been traditionally spoken in Slovenia and apply the
provisions of Part II to German, Croatian and Serbian, in co-operation with the speakers”
23.
The Slovenian authorities have not yet defined the areas where Croatian, German and Serbian
have been traditionally spoken in Slovenia. The study on this issue was commissioned in 2008 and has
not yet been finalised.
24.
There are no indications of a structured application of Part II of the Charter to Croatian, German
and Serbian, which remain largely absent from public life in Slovenia. No educational models for Croatian,
German and Serbian as regional or minority languages have been developed. Also, Croatian, German
and Serbian are not present in the broadcasting media and receive limited financial support from the
Slovenian authorities.
Recommendation No. 2:
“clarify, in co-operation with the speakers, the issue of the traditional presence of the Bosnian language in
Slovenia”
25.
The Slovenian authorities have informed the Committee of Experts that there is no traditional
presence of the Bosnian language in Slovenia.
Recommendation No. 3:
“develop the teaching of the Romani language and Roma culture at all appropriate stages”
26.
Romani is taught in the framework of the optional subject “Roma culture”, offered in the 7th-9th
grades of primary education. There are no qualified Romani-speaking teachers, but teaching is carried out
by Roma assistants. The 2004 “Strategy for Education of Roma in the Republic of Slovenia” was
amended in 2011 and activities at pre-school level have been developed. Under various projects, training
of Roma assistants and the development of teaching materials have continued.
Recommendation No. 4:
“take proactive measures to reduce the gap between the legislative framework and practical
implementation regarding the use of Hungarian and Italian in the provision of public services, in economic
and social activities, as well as in relations with local branches of State administration”
27.
The Slovenian authorities continue to focus on developing the legal framework relevant for
Hungarian and Italian. However, a wide gap remains between the legislative framework and the actual
use of Hungarian and Italian in the provision of public services, in economic and social activities, as well
as in relations with local branches of State administration. There is still a clear need for a more pro-active
and practice-oriented approach by the Slovenian authorities, in order to ensure a more systematic
enforcement of the applicable legislation.
Recommendation No. 5:
“intensify measures to raise public awareness of the regional or minority languages in mainstream
education and in the mass media”
28.
The curricula for teaching Hungarian and Italian contain some information with respect to the
presence of these languages in Slovenia. This does not seem to be the case for Croatian, German or
Serbian. As far as media is concerned, the public broadcaster has the legal obligation to support the
dissemination of information about the cultures present in Slovenia. However, information about regional

7

or minority languages is largely absent from the media or contributes to the promotion of a negative
image. There is still little knowledge about the regional or minority languages and cultures and their
traditional presence in Slovenia. Prejudice and stereotypes continue to influence the perception of certain
minorities.

8

Chapter 3
The Committee of Experts' evaluation in respect of Part II and
Part III of the Charter
3.1

Evaluation in respect of Part II of the Charter

29.
The Committee of Experts will not comment on provisions in relation to which no major issues
were raised in its third evaluation report and for which it did not receive any new elements requiring a
revised assessment. Under Part II, this concerns Article 7 paragraph 1.g and paragraph 2.
30.
Part II of the Charter applies to the Croatian, German, Hungarian, Italian, Romani and Serbian
languages. Hungarian and Italian are also covered by Part III.

Article 7
Paragraph 1
In respect of regional or minority languages, within the territories in which such languages are used and according to the
situation of each language, the Parties shall base their policies, legislation and practice on the following objectives and
principles:
a

the recognition of the regional or minority languages as an expression of cultural wealth;

Croatian
31.
In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts encouraged the Slovenian authorities to
recognise, in their domestic legal order, the Croatian language as an expression of cultural wealth.
32.
According to the fourth periodical report and the information received during the on-the-spot visit,
the situation has not changed. Croatian is still considered by the Slovenian authorities only as a language
of the citizens of the former Yugoslav republics or an “immigrant language”, and not a regional or minority
language of Slovenia and an expression of cultural wealth.
German
33.
In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts encouraged the Slovenian authorities to
recognise, in their domestic legal order, the German language as an expression of cultural wealth.
34.
The situation has not changed during the fourth monitoring cycle. Slovenian domestic legislation
still makes no provision to recognise German as a regional or minority language and as an expression of
cultural wealth. Moreover, the information in the fourth periodical report and that received during the onthe-spot visit clearly indicate that German is generally regarded in Slovenia as a foreign language. The
only legal text which makes reference to the German language remains the 2001 Agreement between
Austria and Slovenia on Co-operation in the Fields of Culture, Education and Science.
Serbian
35.
The fourth periodical report contains no specific information concerning the recognition of Serbian
as a regional or minority language and an expression of cultural wealth. In light of the information received
during the on-the-spot visit, Serbian is considered a language of the citizens of the former Yugoslav
Republics or an “immigrant language”, and not a regional or minority language of Slovenia and an
expression of cultural wealth.
36.
The Committee of Experts again reiterates that the present provision puts an obligation on the
Slovenian authorities to recognise Croatian, German and Serbian as regional or minority languages and
as an expression of cultural wealth, which in the Slovenian case means recognition in their domestic legal
order. This lack of recognition hampers the implementation of other Part II provisions to all these
languages, and the level of protection and promotion of these languages is generally below the
requirements of the Charter. While focusing only on the languages and not on the minorities, the

9

Committee of Experts considers that, in the Slovenian legal and political context, the recognition of the
languages is interlinked with the recognition of the Croatian, German and Serbian minorities under
Article 64 of the Constitution, which deals with traditional national minorities. The information in the fourth
periodical report indicates a different approach to the Hungarian and Italian “national communities”, the
Roma “ethnic community” and “the other nations and ethnic communities”, which is reflected in the
protection and promotion of their respective languages.
The Committee of Experts urges the Slovenian authorities to recognise, in their domestic legal
order, the German, Croatian and Serbian languages as an expression of cultural wealth.

b

the respect of the geographical area of each regional or minority language in order to ensure that
existing or new administrative divisions do not constitute an obstacle to the promotion of the regional or
minority language in question;

Italian
37.
In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts encouraged the Slovenian authorities to
adopt a more flexible approach regarding the implementation of the undertakings entered into by Slovenia
under the Charter on the entire territory of Koper/Capodistria, Piran/Pirano and Izola/Isola. It also urged
the authorities to start a dialogue with the Italian speakers and the local authorities on the issue of a
progressive extension of the scope of the protection currently afforded to the Italian language in the
“ethnically-mixed area” to other areas of the three municipalities concerned where there was a stable
presence of Italian speakers. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts urged the authorities to take full
account of the views and concerns of the Italian speakers and refrain from taking measures relating to
administrative divisions which would constitute an obstacle to the promotion of the Italian language.
38.
The fourth periodical report contains no relevant information in this respect. According to
information received from the Italian speakers, the Ministry of the Interior has notified them that persons
belonging to the Italian minority living on the territory of Koper/Capodistria, Piran/Pirano and Izola/Isola,
but outside the “ethnically-mixed area”, may use their mother tongue in relations with the local authorities
and the local branches of state authorities in the three municipalities. However, the other rights of the
Italian speakers in the “ethnically-mixed area” of the three municipalities do not apply to those living
outside this area. The Committee of Experts reiterates that, for the purposes of the Charter, a sufficient
number of Italian speakers are present in the three municipalities outside the “ethnically-mixed area”. It
reiterates that the Slovenian authorities should adopt a more flexible approach and implement the
undertaking entered into by Slovenia under the Charter on the entire territory of Koper/Capodistria,
Piran/Pirano and Izola/Isola.
39.
As far as new administrative divisions are concerned, the Italian speakers have informed the
Committee of Experts of the decision of the Constitutional Court of Slovenia that a new municipality of
Ankaran/Ancarano, currently part of the municipality of Koper/Capodistria, has to be established, following
a local referendum in 2009. The National Assembly has until now rejected the creation of the new
municipality and the decision of the Constitutional Court has not yet been implemented. However,
according to the Italian speakers, the new municipality will most likely be established in 2014.
40.
The Committee of Experts strongly urges the Slovenian authorities to start a dialogue with the
Italian speakers and the local authorities on the issue of the progressive extension of the scope of the
protection currently afforded to the Italian language in the “ethnically-mixed area” to other areas of the
three municipalities concerned where there is a stable presence of Italian speakers.
The Committee of Experts strongly urges the Slovenian authorities to take full account of the
views and concerns of the Italian speakers and to ensure that measures relating to new
administrative divisions do not constitute an obstacle to the promotion of the Italian language.

10

c

the need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in order to safeguard them;

41.
The Committee of Experts reiterates that resolute action to promote regional or minority languages
in order to safeguard them covers several aspects. These include the creation of a legal framework for the
promotion of regional or minority languages, the establishment of bodies which are responsible for the
promotion of these languages, and the provision of adequate financial resources.
Croatian
42.
In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts urged the Slovenian authorities to take
resolute action to promote the Croatian language, in co-operation with the speakers.
43.
According to the fourth periodical report, the Slovenian authorities granted € 19 800 in 2010,
€ 15 900 in 2011 and € 13 250 in 2012, to co-finance projects of Croatian associations in Slovenia
(publications, festival, exhibitions). However, out of these, only a very limited amount has been dedicated
to activities in the area where the language has been traditionally spoken. The authorities further state that
the National Programme for Language Policy 2014-2018, which is under preparation, will reflect the entire
socio-linguistic picture of Slovenia and include general measures targeting minorities; individual measures
for each language will also be foreseen in a sub-programme dedicated to language learning, which will be
prepared as of 2015. The Committee of Experts looks forward to receiving more information in this
respect, which could be relevant for the future monitoring cycles.
44.
The Committee of Experts acknowledges that the Croatian speakers who live in urban centres
need support for the protection and promotion of Croatian where they live. However, it should be pointed
out that there is also a need for support to protect and promote Croatian in the area where it is in
traditional use.
German
45.
In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts urged the Slovenian authorities to take
resolute action to promote the German language, in co-operation with the speakers.
46.
According to the fourth periodical report, the Slovenian authorities granted € 13 000 in 2010,
€ 23 250 in 2011 and € 23 449 in 2012, to co-finance projects in relation to German (publications,
language courses, children’s workshops, theatre exhibitions). The authorities further refer to the National
Programme for Language Policy 2014-2018, under preparation by the Ministry of Culture (see also
paragraph 43 above). During the on-the-spot visit, however, the Committee of Experts has received
evidence that more than half of the projects financed by the authorities have no link to the German
minority and the protection and promotion of German as a regional or minority language. The
representatives of the German speakers further emphasised that the funding system, based on the cofinancing of projects, remains problematic, as it does not offer any stability, or sufficient resources.
Moreover, all non-governmental associations, including those not representing the minority, may receive
funding. Earmarked permanent funding in order to ensure the running of the institutions of the minority in
the long run is necessary.
47.
The Committee of Experts notes that the promotion of German by the Slovenian authorities
remains in essence confined to the terms of the bilateral agreement with Austria. The Committee of
Experts maintains its view that the support of the Slovenian authorities to German is limited and
insufficient to safeguard and to promote this language.
The Committee of Experts strongly urges the Slovenian authorities to take resolute action to
promote the Croatian and German languages, in co-operation with the speakers.

11

Serbian
48.
According to the fourth periodical report, the Slovenian authorities granted € 90 800 in 2010,
€ 85 100 in 2011 and € 73 200 in 2012, to co-finance projects of Serbian associations in Slovenia.
However, none has targeted the area where Serbian is traditionally spoken.
49.
The Committee of Experts considers that there is a need for decided measures to safeguard and
to promote the Serbian language in particular in the traditional settlement area. The Committee of Experts
encourages the Slovenian authorities to take resolute action to promote the Serbian language in the area
where it has been traditionally spoken, in co-operation with the speakers.
d

the facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of regional or minority languages, in speech and
writing, in public and private life;

Croatian
50.
In the third monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts urged the Slovenian authorities “to take
measures to facilitate and/or encourage the use of Croatian in public life, in particular in the broadcasting
media”.
51.
According to the fourth periodical report, in line with the Media Act, the authorities fund media
projects promoting the public interest. Programmes about and in minority languages may be funded in this
framework. In the call for tenders, producing a programme in a minority language is a criterion for
assessing projects in the categories of local, regional, student radio or television broadcaster, as well as
non-profit radio or television broadcaster. The report also indicates that the Slovenian News Agency Act
(Ur.l. 50/2011) foresees that the Slovenian Press Agency as a public service must provide content for the
“Italian and Hungarian national communities, the Roma ethnic community, other nations and ethnic
communities in the Republic of Slovenia”. However, during the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts
has been informed by the representatives of the speakers that, in practice, Croatian as a minority
language is not present in the broadcasting media.
52.
The authorities also stated that in a campaign preventing domestic violence leaflets have been
published inter alia in Croatian.
53.
The Committee of Experts notes that Croatian as a regional or minority language continues to
remain largely absent from public life in Slovenia, and the facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of
Croatian by the Slovenian authorities is limited to cultural activities mainly in areas other than those where
the Croatian language has traditionally been present.
German
54.
In the third monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts urged the Slovenian authorities to take
measures to facilitate and/or encourage the use of German in public life, in particular in the broadcasting
media.
55.
The fourth periodical report states that in a campaign preventing domestic violence leaflets have
been published inter alia in German. According to information received during the on-the-spot visit,
German is not present in the broadcasting media, although the legal framework with respect to media
referred to above (paragraph 51) applies also to German. The German speakers are interested in a
certain presence of German on local radio and television, which would help raise awareness of the
traditional presence of the German language in Slovenia.
56.
Moreover, during the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts has been informed that a
German minority association established in 2011 in Celje could not use a bilingual Slovenian and German
name for registering, since a 2006 law prohibits the use of foreign languages for names of entities
registered in Slovenia.

12

57.
The Committee of Experts notes that German as a regional or minority language still remains
largely absent from public life in Slovenia, and the facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of German
by the Slovenian authorities is limited to the cultural sphere.
Serbian
58.
The Committee of Experts received no information regarding the facilitation and/or encouragement
of the use of Serbian in public life, other than in the cultural sphere and outside the area where the
language has been traditionally spoken. There are no indications that Serbian is present in the
broadcasting media.
The Committee of Experts strongly urges the Slovenian authorities to take measures to facilitate
and/or encourage the use of Croatian, German and Serbian in public life, in particular in the
broadcasting media.

e

the maintenance and development of links, in the fields covered by this Charter, between groups using a
regional or minority language and other groups in the State employing a language used in identical or
similar form, as well as the establishment of cultural relations with other groups in the State using
different languages;

59.
In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts urged the Slovenian authorities to maintain
and develop links, in the fields covered by this Charter, within all the linguistic groups concerned, as well
as to establish cultural relations between them.
60.
According to the fourth periodical report, cooperation among minorities is a criterion when
assessing cultural projects in the call for tenders. However, it remains unclear whether such projects have
been financed or whether other relations between the linguistic groups in Slovenia have been established.
During the on-the-spot visit, the representatives of the German-speakers informed the Committee of
Experts about a cultural evening of all “non-recognised” minorities in Maribor.
61.
The Committee of Experts strongly urges the Slovenian authorities to maintain and develop links,
in the fields covered by this Charter, within all the linguistic groups concerned, as well as to establish
cultural relations between them.
f

the provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of regional or minority
languages at all appropriate stages;

62.
In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts noted that the Elementary School Act
(Article 8) provided for the possibility to teach the mother tongue and related culture to all Slovenian
citizens whose mother tongue is not Slovenian. However, it seemed that there was no teaching of German
and Croatian as regional or minority languages. Therefore, the Committee of Experts asked for more
information in this respect in the next periodical report.
63.
According to the fourth periodical report, German as a mother tongue and related culture, as well
as Croatian as a mother tongue and related culture are offered to “immigrant children”. Such teaching is
mainly financed by the kin-state. In 2012/2013, 60 pupils attended this model of German teaching. In
2011/2012, 62 pupils attended this model of Croatian teaching, organised in Lendava/Lendva, Maribor
and Šalek with the exclusive support of the Croatian authorities. However, this model is not relevant for
the teaching of minority languages under the Charter. Croatian and German are only taught as foreign
languages.
64.
The authorities also refer to the National Programme for Language Policy 2014-2018, under
preparation, and which will include a sub-programme dedicated to language learning (see also paragraph
43 above).

13

5

65.
The Committee of Experts reiterates that the present provision requires the authorities to provide
appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of regional or minority languages at all
appropriate stages. This implies inter alia the development of an educational model that takes the traditional
character of the given language into account, for example by covering the local culture which is reflected by
the language. Furthermore, such a model needs to be provided pro-actively by the authorities who should
inform parents and/or pupils about its availability and encourage them to apply for it.
German
66.
In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts urged the Slovenian authorities to take
concrete measures, in co-operation with the speakers, for providing appropriate forms of teaching German
as a minority language”.
67.
According to the fourth periodical report, there is still no model to teach German as a regional or
minority language in the Slovenian education system. German continues to be taught in Slovenia as a
foreign language. German is not used at pre-school level. During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of
Experts was informed by the German speakers that the German associations organise language courses
in an effort to cover the levels of education where German is not offered. They have reiterated the need
for bilingual pre-school education and primary education in German, in the areas where the language has
been traditionally spoken.
68.
The Committee of Experts reiterates that the implementation of this provision requires more
decided measures from the Slovenian authorities. There is a need to develop the teaching in and of
German as a regional or minority language, in particular in Lower Styria (municipalities of Maribor, Apače,
Celje), as well as in the municipalities of Dolenjske Toplice and Semič, as part of the school framework,
including provision for pre-school education in German.
Croatian
69.
In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts urged the Slovenian authorities to take
concrete measures, in co-operation with the speakers, for providing appropriate forms of teaching
Croatian as a minority language.
70.
According to the fourth periodical report, Croatian continues to be taught as a second foreign
th th
language (optional subject) in the 7 -9 years of primary school. In 2012/2013, 110 pupils studied
Croatian. However, in the area where the language is traditionally spoken, Croatian as an optional subject
was only taught at one school in Novo Mesto, to eight pupils. Croatian is not used at pre-school level.
During the on-the-spot visit, the representatives of the Croatian speakers pointed out that more
awareness-raising and promotion of the possibilities to study Croatian are necessary. The Committee of
Experts reiterates that the current teaching of Croatian is too limited to ensure the transmission of
Croatian as a living language. In addition, the teaching of Croatian is made available too late (as of the
th
7 year), which excludes pre-school and most parts of primary education.
6

71.
The Committee of Experts reiterates that more pro-active measures are needed to provide for the
teaching in or of Croatian as a regional or minority language at all levels, including at pre-school level, in
the areas where it has been traditionally spoken.
Serbian
72.
According to the fourth periodical report, Serbian may be taught as a foreign language (optional
subject) at the third level of primary education. In 2010/2011, 27 pupils studied Serbian in two primary
schools, in Velenje and Koper/Capodistria. In addition, in 2012/2013, a class of Serbian language and
culture was offered to 35 “Serbian-speaking immigrant children”, at a school in Ljubljana. However, it
appears from the information above that the teaching of Serbian takes place only outside the areas where
the language has been traditionally spoken, and not as a regional or minority language. During the on-the-

5
6

Paragraph 55, Third report of the Committee of Experts on Slovenia, ECRML (2010)5
Paragraph 62, Third report of the Committee of Experts on Slovenia, ECRML (2010)5

14

spot visit, the representatives of the Serbian speakers informed the Committee of Experts that teaching of
Serbian is mainly organised by the associations.
73.
The Committee of Experts considers that the implementation of this provision requires decided
measures from the Slovenian authorities. There is a need to develop the teaching in and of Serbian as a
regional or minority language, in the area where it has been traditionally spoken, as part of the school
framework, including provision for pre-school education in Serbian.
The Committee of Experts strongly urges the Slovenian authorities to take concrete measures, in
co-operation with the speakers, for providing appropriate forms of teaching Croatian, German and
Serbian as minority languages.

h

the promotion of study and research on regional or minority languages at universities or equivalent
institutions;

74.
In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts encouraged the Slovenian authorities to
promote research on Croatian and German at universities or equivalent institutions.
75.
The fourth periodical report refers only to the possibility to study Croatian and German at
university level. No information is provided on research carried out on Croatian or German (including its
Gottschee variety).
76.
The Committee of Experts asks the Slovenian authorities to provide information about research on
Croatian and German at universities or equivalent institutions.
Serbian
77.
The fourth periodical report contains no information on the promotion of study and research on
Serbian at universities or equivalent institutions. The Committee of Experts asks the Slovenian authorities
to provide relevant information in this respect in the next periodical report.
i

the promotion of appropriate types of transnational exchanges, in the fields covered by this Charter, for
regional or minority languages used in identical or similar form in two or more States.

78.
In the third evaluation report, in the absence of concrete examples of practical implementation, the
Committee of Experts urged the Slovenian authorities to promote appropriate types of transnational
exchanges in the fields covered by the Charter, for the Croatian and German languages.
79.
The fourth periodical report refers to a cross-border cooperation project (BeRi, 2010-2012), cofinanced through the Slovenia-Croatia Operational Programme 2007-2013. The project included
Slovenian/Croatian language courses in the border area, tolerance and awareness raising activities
among children, cultural events, as well as steps to promote cross-border inter-library loans. The Miran
Jarc Library in Novo Mesto was a partner in the project. It remains unclear whether transnational
exchanges in other fields covered by the Charter (e.g. education, media) have been promoted.
80.
As for German, the fourth periodical report refers to the agreement on co-operation on culture,
education and science for 2008-2012 between Slovenia and Austria. No concrete examples have been
provided of how this agreement promotes transnational exchanges in the fields covered by the Charter
(e.g. education, media, culture), for the German language.
Serbian
81.
The fourth periodical report refers only to co-ordination between the Slovenian and Serbian
authorities, in the field of teacher training and for the preparation of a textbook. No information is provided
on the concrete results of this co-ordination or on the way the authorities promote appropriate types of
transnational exchanges in the fields covered by the Charter, for the Serbian language.

15

82.
The Committee of Experts encourages the Slovenian authorities to promote appropriate types of
transnational exchanges in the fields covered by the Charter, for the Croatian, German and Serbian
languages.

Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to promote, by appropriate measures, mutual understanding between all the linguistic groups of the
country and in particular the inclusion of respect, understanding and tolerance in relation to regional or minority languages
among the objectives of education and training provided within their countries and encouragement of the mass media to
pursue the same objective.
7

83.
The Committee of Experts reiterates that the extent to which a regional or minority language is
protected or promoted is, in many respects, a reflection of the majority language speakers’ approach and
perception, and that awareness-raising within the majority is therefore of the utmost importance. As this
provision indicates, education and the media are especially relevant in this respect. The Committee of
Experts also underlines that the purpose of the present obligation is not just knowledge of the existence of
regional or minority languages in one’s country but also understanding and tolerance in relation to these
languages and their speakers. During the on-the-spot visit, representatives of all regional or minority
language speakers reiterated that this remains a problem, although there have been certain
improvements in societal attitudes towards minorities, their languages and cultures.
Specific issues concerning Italian
84.
In the third periodical report, the Committee of Experts encouraged the Slovenian authorities to
make every effort to solve the problem of negative attitudes towards the Italian speakers.
85.
According to the fourth periodical report, in February 2012 the Commission for National
Communities of the National Assembly condemned the online hate speech against the Hungarian and
Italian minorities. All forms of hate and intolerance against the Hungarian, Italian and Roma minorities
were also publicly condemned in March 2012 by the Government Office for National Minorities. The
authorities further refer to the provisions of the Criminal Code sanctioning the breach of the right to
equality and the public incitement to hatred, violence or intolerance.
86.
The representatives of the Italian speakers informed the Committee of Experts that they remain
subject to prejudice and stereotyping linked to the period of fascism.
87.
The Committee of Experts urges the Slovenian authorities to take measures to combat negative
attitudes towards the Italian speakers.
Specific issues concerning German
88.
In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts encouraged the Slovenian authorities to
take an active stand against expressions of intolerance towards the German speakers.
89.
The fourth periodical report refers only to the above-mentioned provisions of the Criminal Code.
During the on-the-spot visit, the representatives of the German speakers informed the Committee of
Experts that they still face prejudice and stigmatisation. There is a negative perception of the Germans,
linked to historical events, in particular in the public and political discourse. The Committee of Experts
refers to the European Commission against Racism and Intolerance, which also found that German
speakers are facing prejudice and negative attitudes, notably linked to the Second World War, and some
8
manifestations of intolerance .
90.
The Committee of Experts urges the Slovenian authorities to take an active stand against
expressions of intolerance towards the German speakers.

7
8

Paragraph 70, Third report of the Committee of Experts on Slovenia, ECRML (2010)5
Third report on Slovenia, p. 23

16

All regional or minority languages
91.
In the third monitoring cycle, the Committee of Ministers recommended Slovenia to “intensify
measures to raise public awareness of the regional or minority languages in mainstream
education and in the mass media”. Furthermore, the Committee of Experts urged the Slovenian
authorities to raise the awareness of the general public in mainstream education, notably in curricula,
teaching materials and teacher training, as well as in the mass media regarding the traditional presence of
the Croatian, German, Hungarian, Italian and Romani languages.
92.
According to the fourth periodical report, awareness-raising about the presence of Hungarian is
included in the curricula for Slovenian as a mother tongue (for primary, secondary and technical
education), Slovenian as a second language (for bilingual primary education in the “ethnically-mixed area”
th th
of the Prekmurje region) and for Hungarian as an optional subject (in the 7 -9 years of primary
education, outside the “ethnically-mixed area” of the Prekmurje region). The Regional Unit in Murska
Sobota of the National Education Institute contributes to the promotion of intercultural dialogue, by
providing inter alia advice to teaching staff, parents and other interested persons. It also cooperates with
other institutions in Slovenia and Hungary for activities raising awareness about the Hungarian language
and culture.
93.
Awareness-raising about the presence of Italian is included in the curricula for Slovenian language
as first and as second language (for primary, secondary and technical education), Italian as first language
(for primary, secondary and technical education in the “ethnically-mixed area” of the Slovenian part of
Istria), Italian as a second language (primary, secondary and technical education in the “ethnically-mixed
area” of the Slovenian part of Istria, as well as outside the “ethnically-mixed area”). The Regional Unit in
Koper/Capodistria of National Education Institute has contributed to the introduction of intercultural
content in the new textbooks for Italian language. It has also prepared publications for teachers aimed at
developing and assessing intercultural ability in projects implemented by the Institute. It further provides
assistance to teachers in raising awareness of pupils about the presence and co-existence of languages,
supports teachers and headmasters in developing intercultural communication and exchanges,
cooperates with institutions in Slovenia and Italy in activities raising awareness about the presence of the
minority languages and cultures.
94.

No relevant information about Croatian, German or Serbian is provided in the periodical report.

95.
With respect to media, the authorities report that according to the Radio and Television
Corporation of Slovenia Act, the public broadcaster has an obligation to support the dissemination of
information about the cultures present in Slovenia. Regional media in Koper/Capodistria and
Lendava/Lendva regularly inform about the activities of the schools, as well as about the cultural events in
the respective regions.
96.
During the on-the-spot visit, however, the Committee of Experts was informed by representatives
of all regional or minority language speakers that public awareness and perception of minorities remains
problematic. Textbooks used in mainstream Slovenian education contain only very limited information
about the Hungarian and Italian minorities. A survey conducted by the Italian speakers among students
and teachers has illustrated that these are not aware of the traditional presence of Italian in Slovenia,
which they link only to the period of fascism.
97.
The situation appears to be even more problematic in the media. The representatives of the
German speakers pointed out that they remain largely absent from the media coverage at local and
national level. The Croatian speakers informed the Committee of Experts of the negative reaction of the
media to the request to be recognised as a national minority. The Serbian speakers also reported
expressions of prejudice and intolerance to them. According to the Italian speakers, media does not
promote awareness and tolerance, and information about the traditional presence of Italian in Slovenia is
absent from the media, as well as from the vast majority of publications in Slovenia. In their view there is
need for a dedicated information campaign about the traditional presence of Italian in Slovenia. The
Hungarian speakers also referred to the negative perception of the Slovenian society and to the prejudice
promoted by some media. In particular, they are concerned about internet hate speech. Moreover, the

17

Hungarian speakers have pointed out that in the context of the economic crisis, the negative discourse
about minorities has worsened. The Hungarian association has even received defamatory letters.
98.
The Committee of Experts notes as well that the fourth periodical report refers to the Italian culture
as a foreign culture and to German being defined in the educational system as the language of the
neighbours and a foreign language.
99.
The Committee of Experts considers that more resolute steps are needed to promote awareness
9
and tolerance about the regional and minority languages in Slovenia. It reiterates that the media should
be encouraged, without prejudice to their independence, to pay more attention to these languages and
cultures as integral parts of Slovenia’s history and culture. In addition, awareness of regional or minority
languages should be raised as a component and as an expected result of mainstream journalist training, as
well as of teacher training.
100. The Committee of Experts strongly urges the Slovenian authorities to raise the awareness of the
general public in mainstream education, notably in curricula, teaching materials and teacher training, as
well as in the mass media regarding the traditional presence of the Croatian, German, Hungarian, Italian,
Romani and Serbian languages.

Paragraph 4
In determining their policy with regard to regional or minority languages, the Parties shall take into consideration the needs
and wishes expressed by the groups which use such languages. They are encouraged to establish bodies, if necessary, for
the purpose of advising the authorities on all matters pertaining to regional or minority languages.

101. In the third periodical report, the Committee of Experts urged the Slovenian authorities to set up
mechanisms with a view to consulting the relevant organisations representing the Croatian and German
languages when establishing a structured policy for the maintenance and promotion of these languages.
102. The Committee of Experts notes that no mechanisms for the consultation of the speakers of
German and Croatian have been set up.
103. Moreover, the representatives of the Italian speakers informed the Committee of Experts that they
were not consulted during the drafting of the periodical report.
104. The Committee of Experts strongly urges the Slovenian authorities to set up mechanisms with a
view to consulting the relevant organisations representing the Croatian, German and Serbian languages
when establishing a structured policy for the maintenance and promotion of these languages and in other
matters of relevance to them.

Paragraph 5
The Parties undertake to apply, mutatis mutandis, the principles listed in paragraphs 1 to 4 above to non-territorial
languages. However, as far as these languages are concerned, the nature and scope of the measures to be taken to give
effect to this Charter shall be determined in a flexible manner, bearing in mind the needs and wishes, and respecting the
traditions and characteristics, of the groups which use the languages concerned.

Romani
105.
In the third monitoring cycle, the Committee of Ministers recommended Slovenia to “develop the
teaching of the Romani language and Roma culture at all appropriate stages”. Furthermore, the
Committee of Experts urged the Slovenian authorities: to ensure the full implementation of the “Strategy
for Education of Roma in the Republic of Slovenia” of 2004; to promote awareness and acceptance of the
9

Paragraph 76, Third report of the Committee of Experts on Slovenia, ECRML (2010)5

18

Romani language and culture as an integral part of Slovenia’s cultural wealth, to include this promotion
among the objectives of national education, and to encourage the mass media to pursue the same
objective”.
Implementation of the “Strategy for Education of Roma in the Republic of Slovenia” of 2004
106. In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts encouraged the Slovenian authorities to
pursue their efforts to make the teaching of Romani more generally available and to develop a scheme for
the training of teachers who would be able to teach Romani.
107. According to the fourth periodical report, the 2004 “Strategy for Education of Roma” in the
Republic of Slovenia was amended in 2011, aiming at a more successful participation of Roma children
and youth in the educational system at all levels. Pre-school activities have been established. So called
Roma education incubators have been set up, including various forms of work with Roma children and
parents, in their community. Projects co-financed under the European Social Fund have continued and
contributed to developing teaching materials, to the training of Roma assistants and to implementing
different forms of educational activities involving the Roma community. Twelve bilingual picture books
(Slovenian, Prekmurje dialect of Romani and Dolenjska dialect of Romani), accompanied by handbooks
were developed. Thirty schools and pre-schools participate in the above-mentioned projects. In
2012/2013, 2109 Roma children were enrolled in primary education.
108. Romani continues to be taught in the framework of “Roma culture”, an optional subject in the
th th
7 -9 years of primary education, as well as through extracurricular activities, workshops and seminars.
Teaching is carried out by Roma assistants.
109. During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed by representatives of the
Roma community that the “Strategy for Education of Roma in the Republic of Slovenia” had an overall
positive impact. However, its implementation and results greatly differ among regions. While in the
Prekmurje region all Roma children attend primary education, and some continue to secondary and higher
education, in Dolenjska region the school attendance rate, as well as the success rate are lower. The
situation is even more difficult in Maribor and Ljubljana, where Roma arriving more recently in Slovenia
and speaking different Romani varieties live. Concerns have also been expressed by Romani speakers
about the availability of some teaching materials in a sufficient number to be used in schools.
110. The Committee of Experts commends the Slovenian authorities for their considerable efforts in the
field of education for Roma. However, it urges the Slovenian authorities to further pursue their efforts to
make the teaching of Romani more generally available and to develop a scheme for the training of
teachers able to teach Romani.
Codification of Romani
111. In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts urged the Slovenian authorities to further
pursue the codification of the varieties of Romani present in Slovenia. According to the fourth periodical
report and the information received during the on-the-spot visit, the codification of Romani is being
pursued. Romani grammar books and dictionaries have been published. The Committee of Experts
encourages the Slovenian authorities to further pursue the codification of the varieties of Romani present
in Slovenia.
Presence of Romani in the media
112. According to the fourth periodical report and the information received during the on-the-spot visit,
programmes in Romani continue to be broadcast by the national public radio and TV broadcaster. In
addition, Radio Marš in Maribor, Radio Študent in Ljubljana and Radio ROMIC of the Roma Information
Centre broadcast programmes in Romani.

19

Awareness-raising in education and the mass media
113. In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts reiterated the urgent need for resolute
action to promote awareness and acceptance of the Roma language and culture as an integral part of
Slovenia’s cultural wealth, including through measures to promote a more positive image of the Roma in
the media and in the national curriculum.
114. According to the fourth periodical report, the authorities have supported the activities of the Roma
associations, including in the media, aimed inter alia, at raising awareness and combating intolerance and
discrimination. Activities have also continued in the context of the Council of Europe’s “Dosta” campaign.
One of the objectives of the National Programme of Measures for Roma for 2010-2015 is to raise public
awareness about the existence, culture, customs and traditions of the Roma community. The project
Social Integration of the Roma, co-financed by the EEA and Norway and finalised in January 2012, also
aimed inter alia at promoting tolerance and intercultural dialogue.
115. As far as education is concerned, during the on-the-spot visit the Committee of Experts was
informed that the optional subject “Roma culture” is not systematically offered in Slovenian schools,
despite efforts of Roma associations to introduce the teaching of this subject to Slovenian pupils.
Therefore, the information offered about Roma and Romani in education depends to a great extent on the
school and on the teachers.
116. The Committee of Experts nevertheless notes that Roma continue to suffer from severe prejudices
10
and stigmatisation. It reiterates the need for resolute action to promote awareness and acceptance of
the Roma language and culture as an integral part of Slovenia’s cultural wealth. This should include
measures to promote a more positive image of the Roma in the media and in the national curriculum at all
levels.
Harmonisation of the level of provision for Romani for all speakers of this language
117. In the third monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts received no information on the
harmonisation of the level of protection of all Romani speakers.
118. According to the fourth periodical report, all measures protecting and promoting Romani, as well
as Roma culture and identity apply equally to all Romani speakers and no distinctions are made among
them. However, during the on-the-spot visit, representatives of the Romani speakers indicated that a
distinction is still being made between Roma traditionally living in Slovenia and Roma having arrived there
more recently.
The Committee of Experts strongly urges the Slovenian authorities to pursue their efforts:
- to ensure the full implementation of the “Strategy for Education of Roma in the Republic of
Slovenia”;
- to promote awareness and acceptance of the Romani language and culture as an integral part of
Slovenia’s cultural wealth, to include this promotion among the objectives of national education,
and to encourage the mass media to pursue the same objective.

10

Paragraph 89, Third report of the Committee of Experts on Slovenia, ECRML (2010)5

20

3.2.

Evaluation in respect of Part III of the Charter

119. Slovenia applies the provisions it has chosen under Part III of the Charter (quoted in bold italics) to
Hungarian and Italian.
120. The Committee of Experts will not comment on provisions in relation to which no major issues
were raised in the previous evaluation reports and for which it did not receive any new elements requiring
a revised assessment or a different presentation of their implementation. These provisions are listed
below:
In the case of Hungarian:
- Article 8, paragraph 1.a ii; b ii; c ii; d ii; e iii; f iii; g; paragraph 2;
- Article 9, paragraph 2.a;
- Article 10, paragraph 1.c; 2.c; e; g; paragraph 5;
- Article 11, paragraph 1.e.i; paragraph 2;
- Article 12, paragraph 1.a; d; e; f; paragraph 2; paragraph 3;
- Article 13, paragraph 1.a;
- Article 14 a; b.
In the case of Italian:
- Article 8, paragraph 1.a i; b i; c i; f iii; g; paragraph 2;
- Article 9, paragraph 2.a;
- Article 10, paragraph 2.a; b; c; d; e; paragraph 5;
- Article 11, paragraph 1.e.i; paragraph 2;
- Article 12, paragraph 1.a; d; e; f; paragraph 3;
- Article 13, paragraph 1.a;
- Article 14 a; b.
121. For these provisions, the Committee of Experts refers to the conclusions reached in the previous
reports but reserves the right to evaluate the situation again at a later stage.

3.2.1.

The Hungarian language

Article 8 – Education
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used, according to the
situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
h

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of paragraphs a to
g accepted by the Party;

122. In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking fulfilled.
Nevertheless, it urged the Slovenian authorities to make efforts to find a solution to the problem of a
possible temporary shortage of Hungarian teachers due to a significant number of retirements.
123. According to the fourth periodical report, the Act on the Exercise of the Special Rights of Members
of the Italian and Hungarian Ethnic Communities in the Field of Education envisages the possibility of
employing foreign teachers in the case of staff shortage. If no candidate fulfilling the required conditions
applies for a vacancy, the pre-school or school may employ a visiting foreign teacher for a maximum of
two years. During the on-the-spot visit, the representatives of the Hungarian speakers stated that at
present the generation shift does not raise problems.
124. However, the Hungarian speakers expressed concerns about the level of knowledge of Hungarian
of the teachers and their capacity to teach subjects bilingually. Teacher training takes place only in

21

Slovenian and there is a possibility to study Hungarian language as a subject; however, this proves to be
insufficient in practice. This has consequences on the provision and quality of bilingual education, since
some teachers are not able to teach adequately certain subjects in Hungarian. The Slovenian authorities
stated that they are aware of these problems and informed the Committee of Experts that further training
is organised to deal with these issues. A new project on training teachers for bilingual teaching in
Hungarian and Italian will be launched in December 2013.
125. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking is fulfilled. It
encourages the Slovenian authorities to provide adequate basic and further training for teachers working
in bilingual schools.
i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken and progress
achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority languages and for drawing
up periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.

126. In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking fulfilled. It
however requested the Slovenian authorities to report, in the next periodical report, on the progress in
monitoring bilingual education.
127. According to the fourth periodical report, the National Education Institution has launched a twoyear test project entitled “Teaching literacy in the Slovenian and Hungarian languages in bilingual primary
schools”, for the period from 1 September 2012 to 3 October 2014. This project aims to assess the
acquisition of bilingual literacy. At present, no report on the progress of this project is available.
128. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled. It however asks the Slovenian
authorities to report, in the next periodical report, on the progress in monitoring bilingual education.

Article 9 – Judicial authorities
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents using the regional or minority
languages justifies the measures specified below, according to the situation of each of these languages and on condition
that the use of the facilities afforded by the present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper
administration of justice:
a

in criminal proceedings:
i
to provide that the courts, at the request of one of the parties, shall conduct the proceedings in the
regional or minority languages;
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations involving no extra expense for the persons
concerned;

b

in civil proceedings:
i
to provide that the courts, at the request of one of the parties, shall conduct the proceedings in the
regional or minority languages; and/or
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

c

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
i

d

129.

to provide that the courts, at the request of one of the parties, shall conduct the proceedings in the
regional or minority languages; and/or
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;
to take steps to ensure that the application of sub-paragraphs i and iii of paragraphs b and c above and
any necessary use of interpreters and translations does not involve extra expense for the persons
concerned.

In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered these undertakings fulfilled.

22

130. According to the fourth periodical report, on 12 July 2011 the State Prosecutor Act was passed,
providing that in the “ethnically-mixed area”, state prosecutor’s offices shall also conduct their affairs in
Hungarian. The costs shall be covered by funds earmarked for state prosecutor’s offices. Moreover, a
state prosecutor and his personnel should have advanced knowledge of Hungarian.
131. During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed by the Hungarian speakers
that, in practice, proceedings rarely take place in Hungarian, since not all judges speak the language and
the use of interpretation increases the duration of the proceedings. The Slovenian authorities confirmed
that one judge and one clerk have knowledge of Hungarian at the Lendava/Lendva Court.
132. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that these undertakings are fulfilled.
Nevertheless, it encourages the Slovenian authorities to take practical measures facilitating the use of
Hungarian before courts.
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
133. In the third monitoring cycle, the Committee of Ministers recommended to Slovenia to “take
proactive measures to reduce the gap between the legislative framework and practical
implementation regarding the use of Hungarian […] in the provision of public services, […] as well
as in relations with local branches of State administration”.
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of regional or minority
languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake,
as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

i

to ensure that the administrative authorities use the regional or minority languages;

134. In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking formally
fulfilled. It requested the Slovenian authorities to provide concrete information on the practical use of
Hungarian in local branches of state administration in the next periodical report.
135. According to the fourth periodical report, the police are bound to use Hungarian in the “ethnicallymixed area”. All forms are issued also in Hungarian and communication with members of the minority
takes place in Hungarian. Employees of the Surveying and Mapping Authority of the Republic of Slovenia,
working in the area, communicate in Hungarian daily. According to the periodical report, the right to use
Hungarian is consistently implemented in practice and daily work in the Administrative Units with
“ethnically-mixed” settlements, although the Slovenian authorities admit that only one local office in the
Murska Sobota Administrative Unit has a bilingual sign (Prosenjakovci/Pártosfalva) and that not all forms
are available in Hungarian in the Lendava/Lendva Administrative Unit. Hungarian-speaking civil servants
as well as translators are employed. Civil servants may take Hungarian language courses and the
financial bonus system for the certified ability of civil servants to use Hungarian continues to be in place.
136. During the on-the-spot visit, however, the Hungarian speakers informed the Committee of Experts,
that, in practice, Hungarian is rarely used by the local branches of state authorities. Only a few employees
are able to speak Hungarian. Therefore, Slovenian is used as a working language in the Administrative
Units. The Hungarian speakers also emphasised that it is not clear in practice how the knowledge of
Hungarian is assessed, as formal qualifications often differed significantly from the actual ability to use the
language. Some civil servants only attended a 40-hour language course, which is not sufficient for a
command of Hungarian allowing its use in daily work.
137. In light of this information, the Committee of Experts considers the undertaking partly fulfilled. It
encourages the Slovenian authorities to take measures encouraging the practical use of Hungarian in
local branches of state administration.

23

b

138.

to make available widely used administrative texts and forms for the population in the regional or
minority languages or in bilingual versions;

This undertaking was considered fulfilled in the previous monitoring cycles.

139. In the fourth periodical report, the Slovenian authorities inform the Committee of Experts that
forms are issued also in Hungarian and a special portal for Hungarian was established as part of the Egovernment State Portal. According to the information received from the Hungarian speakers during the
on-the-spot visit, a great number of forms are available in Hungarian, but not all. Moreover, forms in
Hungarian are not directly available in public institutions, where the applicants have to request them.
140. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking is fulfilled.
However, it encourages the Slovenian authorities to take measures strengthening the implementation of
this undertaking in practice.
Paragraph 2
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who are users of regional or
minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below, the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
a
b
d

the use of regional or minority languages within the framework of the regional or local authority;
the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written applications in these
languages;
the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in the relevant regional or minority
languages;

141. In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered these undertakings still fulfilled.
Nevertheless, it requested further information from the Slovenian authorities regarding their practical
implementation.
142.
In the fourth periodical report, the Slovenian authorities state that the right to use Hungarian the
local and regional authorities is consistently implemented in practice and daily work. During the on-thespot visit, the Hungarian speakers confirmed that Hungarian is used more consistently by the local
authorities. Most employees of local authorities speak Hungarian and the majority of forms are available in
Hungarian. Documents are also published in Slovenian and Hungarian. The Hungarian speakers,
however, emphasised the importance of bilingual signage in local institutions, which does not always exist
in practice.
143. The Committee of Experts considers the undertakings fulfilled. However, it encourages the
Slovenian authorities to look into the issue of bilingual signage in local institutions.
f

the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their assemblies, without
excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

144. In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking fulfilled.
Nevertheless, it requested further information from the Slovenian authorities regarding its practical
implementation.
145. During the on-the-spot visit, the representatives of the Hungarian speakers informed the
Committee of Experts that Hungarian is no longer used in local assemblies, as the councillors who did not
speak or understand Hungarian complained about the long duration of debates because of interpretation.
146. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It encourages the
Slovenian authorities to take practical measures encouraging the use by local authorities of Hungarian in
debates in their assemblies.

24

Paragraph 3
With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting on their behalf, the Parties
undertake, within the territory in which regional or minority languages are used, in accordance with the situation of each
language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in the provision of the service;

147. In the third monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking formally
fulfilled. It requested the Slovenian authorities to submit information, in the fourth periodical report, on
measures taken to ensure that Hungarian was used in the provision of public services.
148. According to the fourth periodical report, “Eko-park d.o.o. Lendava - Öko-park Kft. Lendva”, a
public company providing services of drinking water supply and waste transport, conducts business in
both Slovenian and Hungarian. The company communicates with the clients in Hungarian if the clients so
request. All notices and publications of the company are bilingual, as well as meter readings entry form.
However, the website, the forms for project conditions and approvals, the invoices and money order forms
are available in Slovenian only.
149. During the on-the-spot visit, the representatives of the Hungarian-speakers informed the
Committee of Experts that companies providing public services operate mainly in Slovenian. Only those
entities based in Lendava/Lendva operate bilingually to certain extent, while those having the
headquarters outside the “ethnically-mixed area”, for example in Maribor, use only Slovenian.
150. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It encourages the Slovenian
authorities to ensure the use of Hungarian in the provision of public services.
Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the Parties undertake to take
one or more of the following measures:
a
b
c

translation or interpretation as may be required;
recruitment and, where necessary, training of the officials and other public service employees required;
compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a knowledge of a
regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that language is used.

151. In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered these undertakings fulfilled for
local and state administration. As regards public services, the undertakings remained not fulfilled. The
Committee of Experts requested the Slovenian authorities to submit more information in the next
periodical report as regards public services.
152. The Committee of Experts received no specific information on this issue during the fourth
monitoring cycle.
153. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled for local and state administration. As
regards public services, the Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that this undertaking
is not fulfilled. The Committee of Experts asks the Slovenian authorities to submit more information in the
next periodical report as regards public services.

25

Article 11 – Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in which those languages
are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are
competent, have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the
media:
a

to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:
i

to ensure the creation of at least one radio station and one television channel in the regional or
minority languages;

154. In the third monitoring cycle, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking partly fulfilled.
It urged the Slovenian authorities to gradually increase the provision for Hungarian in public television
broadcasting.
155. According to the information in the fourth periodical report, there has been no increase in the
extent of television broadcasting. The TV programmes in Hungarian are broadcast several times a week,
however their extent cannot be considered equivalent to a Hungarian-speaking television channel, which
is the requirement of the present undertaking. The Committee of Experts has not been made aware of any
measures taken to increase the provision of Hungarian in public television broadcasting.
156. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that this undertaking is partly fulfilled.
It again urges the Slovenian authorities to increase the provision for Hungarian in public television
broadcasting.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to ensure that the interests of the users of regional or minority languages are represented or taken
into account within such bodies as may be established in accordance with the law with responsibility for guaranteeing the
freedom and pluralism of the media.

157. In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking fulfilled.
Nevertheless, it requested the Slovenian authorities to provide information, in the next periodical report,
on how the interests of the Hungarian speakers were taken into account.
158. In the fourth periodical report the Slovenian authorities state that the interests of Hungarian
speakers are represented and taken into account, as they are present within the Programme Committee
and the Programme Council.
159.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled.

Article 13 – Economic and social life
160. In the third monitoring cycle, the Committee of Ministers recommended to Slovenia to “take
proactive measures to reduce the gap between the legislative framework and practical
implementation regarding the use of Hungarian […] in economic and social activities”.
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole country:
b

to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of companies and private documents of any clauses
excluding or restricting the use of regional or minority languages, at least between users of the same
language;

26

161.

In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking not fulfilled.

162. According to the fourth periodical report, the Companies Act provides that in areas inhabited by
the Hungarian minority communications with employees may also be conducted in Hungarian. Although
the acts of the company must be written in Slovenian, in areas inhabited by the Hungarian minority,
Hungarian may also be used. The Committee of Experts points out that this provision concerns the whole
country and not only in the territory where Hungarian is used.
163. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It asks the Slovenian
authorities to inform, in the next periodical report, whether the legislation prohibits, within the whole
country, the insertion in internal regulations of companies and private documents of any clauses excluding
or restricting the use of Hungarian, at least between users of this language.
c
d

to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority languages in connection with
economic or social activities;
to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by means other than those
specified in the above sub-paragraphs.

164. In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered these undertakings fulfilled.
Nevertheless, it requested the Slovenian authorities to report on the implementation of the Consumer
Protection Act in the next periodical report.
165. The fourth periodical report does not contain any relevant information on the practical
implementation of the Consumer Protection Act. During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts
was informed that information relating to the characteristics, intended use of the product, composition and
the use of products or services are only provided in Slovenian on products of Slovenian origin, although in
line with the existing legislation Hungarian should also be used in the “ethnically-mixed area”.
166. The Committee of Experts underlines that these undertakings apply within the whole territory of
the country. It asks the Slovenian authorities to provide information about the implementation of these
undertakings also outside the “ethnically-mixed area”.

Paragraph 2
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the public authorities are competent,
within the territory in which the regional or minority languages are used, and as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

to include in their financial and banking regulations provisions which allow, by means of procedures
compatible with commercial practice, the use of regional or minority languages in drawing up payment
orders (cheques, drafts, etc.) or other financial documents, or, where appropriate, to ensure the
implementation of such provisions;

167. In the third evaluation report, in the absence of relevant information, the Committee of Experts
considered this undertaking not fulfilled. It encouraged the Slovenian authorities to include in their financial
and banking regulations provisions which allow the use of Hungarian in drawing up payment orders
(cheques, drafts, etc.) or other financial documents.
168. According to the fourth periodical report, the legislation does not regulate this issue. During the onthe-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed by the Hungarian speakers that the payment orders
and other financial documents are drawn up in Slovenian.
169. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It encourages the Slovenian
authorities to include in their financial and banking regulations provisions which allow the use of
Hungarian in drawing up payment orders (cheques, drafts, etc.) or other financial documents.

27

b

in the economic and social sectors directly under their control (public sector), to organise activities to
promote the use of regional or minority languages;

170. In the third evaluation report, in the absence of relevant information, the Committee of Experts
considered this undertaking not fulfilled. It requested the Slovenian authorities to provide information
concerning the organisation of relevant activities to promote the use of Hungarian in the public sector.
171. In the fourth periodical report the Slovenian authorities refer to the National Programme for
Language Policy 2014-2018, which aims at providing conditions for the equal public use and development
of Hungarian or Italian in “ethnically-mixed areas”.
172. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled at present. It asks the Slovenian
authorities provide further information on the National Programme for Language Policy 2014-2018 and
concerning the organisation of relevant activities to promote the use of Hungarian in the public sector in
the next periodical report.
c

173.

to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and hostels offer the possibility
of receiving and treating in their own language persons using a regional or minority language who are in
need of care on grounds of ill-health, old age or for other reasons;

In the previous monitoring cycles, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking fulfilled.

174. During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed that Hungarian can be used
in social care facilities in Lendava/Lendva. However, the hospital in Murska Sobota, which comprises
eight “ethnically-mixed” settlements, does not have Hungarian-speaking staff and is not able to receive
and treat persons in Hungarian.
175. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It encourages the authorities
to ensure that social care facilities responsible for the “ethnically mixed areas” offer the possibility of
receiving and treating persons in Hungarian.
d

to ensure by appropriate means that safety instructions are also drawn up in regional or minority
languages;

176. In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking partly fulfilled.
It requested the Slovenian authorities to provide specific information concerning the implementation of this
undertaking in the next periodical report.
177.

The fourth periodical report does not contain specific information about this issue.

178. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that this undertaking is partly fulfilled.
It requests the Slovenian authorities to provide specific information concerning the implementation of this
undertaking in the next periodical report.
e

to arrange for information provided by the competent public authorities concerning the rights of
consumers to be made available in regional or minority languages.

179. In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking formally
fulfilled. It requested the Slovenian authorities to provide information on its practical implementation in the
next periodical report.
180.

The fourth periodical report does not contain the requested specific information.

181. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that this undertaking formally fulfilled.
It requests the Slovenian authorities to provide information on its practical implementation in the next
periodical report

28

3.2.2.

The Italian language

Article 8 – Education
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used, according to the
situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
d

182.

i

to make available technical and vocational education in the relevant regional or minority languages

In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking fulfilled.

183. During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed by the Italian speakers about
delays in translating the new textbooks into Italian, which affect technical and vocational education in
particular.
184. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking is fulfilled.
Nevertheless, it encourages the Slovenian authorities to ensure that adequate textbooks are available for
all levels of education.
e

i
ii
iii

to make available university and other higher education in regional or minority languages; or
to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher education subjects; or
if, by reason of the role of the State in relation to higher education institutions, sub-paragraphs i and
ii cannot be applied, to encourage and/or allow the provision of university or other forms of higher
education in regional or minority languages or of facilities for the study of these languages as
university or higher education subjects;

185. In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking fulfilled.
Nevertheless, it requested the Slovenian authorities to comment on the problems regarding the
recognition of degrees in some subjects, such as pharmacy.
186. According to the fourth periodical report, Slovenia succeeded to the bilateral agreement between
the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Republic of Italy on Mutual Recognition of
Certificates and Degrees, signed in 1983. In 1995, Slovenia and Italy additionally signed the
Memorandum of Understanding on Mutual Recognition of Slovenian and Italian Degrees and Professional
Titles. Professional titles in pharmacy are recognised by a competent university in a speedy procedure.
187. However, the Committee of Experts was informed by the representatives of the Italian speakers
that problems still persist in the recognition and equivalence of diplomas obtained abroad.
188. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled. Nevertheless, it asks the Slovenian
authorities to clarify the problems regarding the recognition and equivalence of diplomas.
h

189.

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of paragraphs a to
g accepted by the Party;

In the previous monitoring cycles, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking fulfilled.

190. During the on-the-spot visit, the representatives of the Italian speakers raised the issue of teacher
training, which is organised only in Slovenian. This has consequences on the provision and quality of
bilingual education, since the teachers are supposed to teach subjects in Italian. Seminars and trainings,
financed by Italy, have been organised to help overcome this problem. The Slovenian authorities informed
the Committee of Experts that they are aware of the problem and that further training is organised to deal
with this issue. A new project on training teachers for bilingual teaching in Hungarian and Italian will be
launched in December 2013 (see also paragraph 124).

29

191. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking is fulfilled. It
encourages the Slovenian authorities to provide adequate basic and further training for teachers working
in schools with Italian as the language of instruction.
i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken and progress
achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority languages and for drawing
up periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.

192. In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking fulfilled. It
however requested the Slovenian authorities to report, in the next periodical report, on the progress in
monitoring education in Italian.
193. The fourth periodical report refers to the National Education Institute, which monitors the
developments in the field of minority language education.
194. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled. However, it asks the Slovenian
authorities to report, in the next periodical report, on the progress in monitoring education in Italian.
Article 9 – Judicial authorities
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents using the regional or minority
languages justifies the measures specified below, according to the situation of each of these languages and on condition
that the use of the facilities afforded by the present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper
administration of justice:
a

in criminal proceedings:
i
to provide that the courts, at the request of one of the parties, shall conduct the proceedings in the
regional or minority languages;
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations involving no extra expense for the persons
concerned;

b

in civil proceedings:
i
to provide that the courts, at the request of one of the parties, shall conduct the proceedings in the
regional or minority languages; and/or
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

c

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
i

d

195.

to provide that the courts, at the request of one of the parties, shall conduct the proceedings in the
regional or minority languages; and/or
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;
to take steps to ensure that the application of sub-paragraphs i and iii of paragraphs b and c above and
any necessary use of interpreters and translations does not involve extra expense for the persons
concerned.

These undertakings were considered fulfilled in the previous monitoring cycles.

196. According to the fourth periodical report, on 12 July 2011 the State Prosecutor Act was passed,
providing that in the “ethnically-mixed area”, state prosecutor’s offices shall also conduct their affairs in
Italian. The costs shall be covered by funds earmarked for state prosecutor’s offices. Moreover, a state
prosecutor and his personnel should have advanced knowledge of Italian.
197. The representatives of the Italian speakers informed the Committee of Experts that there are no
judges able to conduct the proceedings in Italian, and, as a rule, interpretation is used. This increases the
length of the proceedings. Moreover, all the written documents of the courts, including decisions, are
issued only in Slovenian and are translated into Italian if the party so requests.

30

198. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking is fulfilled. The
Committee of Experts encourages the Slovenian authorities to take practical measures facilitating the use
of Italian before courts.
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
199. In the third monitoring cycle, the Committee of Ministers recommended to Slovenia to “take
proactive measures to reduce the gap between the legislative framework and practical
implementation regarding the use of […] Italian in the provision of public services, […] as well as
in relations with local branches of State administration”.
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of regional or minority
languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake,
as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

i

to ensure that the administrative authorities use the regional or minority languages;

200. In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking formally
fulfilled. It urged the Slovenian authorities to take proactive measures to promote the use of Italian in local
branches of state administration.
201. In the fourth periodical report, the Slovenian authorities inform the Committee of Experts that the
police are bound to use Italian in the “ethnically-mixed area”. All forms are issued in Italian as well and
communication with members of minority takes place in Italian. In addition, the police employees can take
Italian language courses. In 2012, in the area of the Koper/Capodistria Police Directorate, the bonus for
certified knowledge of Italian was foreseen for 175 posts. Furthermore, the Regional Unit
Koper/Capodistria of the Inspectorate for Agriculture and Environment operates in Italian. Fisheries
inspectors use Italian and issue documents in Italian. Other inspectors from the Koper/Capodistria
Regional Unit seldom use Italian in their working time, mainly for communication with clients by phone or
in the field.
202. During the on-the-spot visit, however, the Committee of Experts was informed by the Italian
speakers that, in practice, Italian is rarely and only orally used by the local branches of the state
authorities. A number of institutions (Tax Authority, Ministry of the Interior, police, geodetic office) continue
to operate only in Slovenian. According to a survey conducted by the Italian speakers in June 2013, at the
employment offices in Koper/Capodistria, Izola/Isola and Piran/Pirano, the job announcements and
notifications were only in Slovenian. Webpages are mainly in Slovenian. Italian speakers insisting on the
use of their language tend to be perceived as “trouble-makers”, while the use of Italian in administration is
seen as an additional cost. Representatives of the Italian speakers also informed the Committee of
Experts that the formal qualifications on knowledge of Italian often differed significantly from the ability to
use the language and it remains unclear how the knowledge of Italian is assessed. Language courses
have been organised by the Italian organisation in the framework of the Jezik/Lingua project, part of the
Slovenia-Italy Crossborder Cooperation Programme 2007-2013 and financed by the European Regional
Development Fund and the two states.
203. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that this undertaking is partly fulfilled.
It again urges the Slovenian authorities to take proactive measures to promote the use of Italian in local
branches and to provide concrete examples of the practical implementation of this provision in the next
periodical report.

31

b

to make available widely used administrative texts and forms for the population in the regional or
minority languages or in bilingual versions;

204. In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking partly fulfilled.
It encouraged the Slovenian authorities to make available widely used administrative texts and forms for
the population in Italian or in bilingual versions and to provide the Committee of Experts with examples of
such documents.
205. In the fourth periodical report, the authorities refer to the Italian portal established as part of the
E-government State Portal. However, not all forms are available in Italian for the moment.
206. During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed by the representatives of the
speakers that a considerable number of widely used administrative texts and forms are not translated into
Italian and, where they exist, they are not directly available; forms in Italian are provided only if the
applicant so requests. The Committee of Experts was informed by the Italian speakers of a survey
conducted by them in June 2013 that showed that no forms in Italian were offered at the
Koper/Capodistria and Piran/Pirano administrative units and at the tax office in Lucija/Lucia (municipality
of Piran/Pirano).
207. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that this undertaking is partly fulfilled.
It urges the Slovenian authorities to make systematically available widely used administrative texts and
forms for the population in Italian or in bilingual versions.
c

208.

to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in a regional or minority language.

In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking fulfilled.

209. During the on-the-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed by the representatives of the
Italian-speakers that in practice administrative authorities rarely, if at all, draft documents in Italian.
Moreover, the representatives of the Italian speakers have pointed out that on personal documents only
the template is bilingual, while the information, including place-names, is added in Slovenian.
210. The Committee of Experts must therefore revise its previous conclusion and consider the
undertaking partly fulfilled.

Paragraph 2
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents who are users of regional or
minority languages is such as to justify the measures specified below, the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
f

the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their assemblies, without
excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

211. In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking formally
fulfilled. It urged the Slovenian authorities to promote the use of Italian in the municipalities concerned,
including, where necessary, by providing financial resources for interpretation.
212. The fourth periodical report does not contain relevant information. During the on-the-spot visit, the
Committee of Experts was informed by the Italian speakers that Italian is used in local assemblies. In
practice, the councillors representing the Italian national community speak Italian, while the other
councillors have a sufficient command of Italian to understand them.
213.

The Committee of Experts considers the undertaking fulfilled.

32

g

the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official language(s), of traditional
and correct forms of place-names in regional or minority languages.

214. In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking partly fulfilled.
It urged the Slovenian authorities to clarify, in co-operation with the Italian speakers, the complaints
regarding the adoption and use of place-names inside the “ethnically-mixed area” where only Slovenian
place-names had been used.
215. According to the fourth periodical report, local communities designate the names of settlements in
the Slovenian and Italian languages. The Act on Designating Areas and Naming and Marking Settlements,
Streets and Buildings provides for public participation in decision-making, which also applies to
determining or changing the names of settlements and prevents the choice or change of a name without
prior consultation with "the persons involved" in the area concerned. These persons should have the
opportunity to express their opinion on the “new” name of the settlement in which they live. According to
the authorities, in the municipalities of Koper/Capodistria, Izola/Isola and Piran/Pirano, place names are
consistently used in both Slovenian and Italian.
216. The representatives of the Italian speakers have confirmed that place-names are regularly used
both in Slovenian and Italian. However, in many cases, these are not the traditional Italian place-names,
but Slovenian names, introduced after the Second World War, translated into Italian. For example, the
traditional Italian place name Santa Lucia became Lucija in Slovenian, and its current name in Italian is
Lucia. The majority of street names were also changed and do not have any connection to the local
tradition anymore. No consultations take place when street names are decided.
217. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that the undertaking is only partly
fulfilled. It encourages the Slovenian authorities to ensure the use or adoption of traditional and correct
forms of place-names in Italian.

Paragraph 3
With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting on their behalf, the Parties
undertake, within the territory in which regional or minority languages are used, in accordance with the situation of each
language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in the provision of the service;

218. In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered the undertaking formally
fulfilled. It urged the Slovenian authorities to ensure that Italian was used in the provision of public
services in the area concerned and that Slovenia’s legal framework in this field was consistently applied.
219. According to the fourth periodical report, notifications, including invoices, sent by the “Koper Public
Utility Company” and the water supply company “Rižanski vodovod Koper” to users are bilingual.
220. However, the Committee of Experts was informed by the representatives of the Italian speakers
that public services mainly operate in Slovenian. The post offers only few forms bilingually, while the
electricity and phone companies operate exclusively in Slovenian.
221.

The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled.

The Committee of Experts strongly urges the Slovenian authorities to ensure that Italian is used in
the provision of public services in the area concerned.

33

Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the Parties undertake to take
one or more of the following measures:
a
b
c

translation or interpretation as may be required;
recruitment and, where necessary, training of the officials and other public service employees required;
compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees having a knowledge of a
regional or minority language to be appointed in the territory in which that language is used.

222. In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered these undertakings fulfilled
both for local and for state administration. As regards public services, the undertakings remain not fulfilled.
The Committee of Experts requested the Slovenian authorities to provide more information in the next
periodical report regarding public services.
223. The Committee of Experts received no specific information on this issue during the fourth
monitoring cycle.
224. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking fulfilled for local and state administration. As
regards public services, the Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that this undertaking
is not fulfilled. The Committee of Experts asks the Slovenian authorities to submit more information in the
next periodical report as regards public services.
Article 11 – Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in which those languages
are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are
competent, have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence and autonomy of the
media:
a

to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:
i

to ensure the creation of at least one radio station and one television channel in the regional or
minority languages;

225. In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking fulfilled.
Nevertheless, it encouraged the Slovenian authorities to take urgent steps to develop a structured human
resources policy regarding Italian-speaking broadcast media.
226. According to the fourth periodical report, the radio and television programmes for the Italian
national community were produced, at 1 October 2011, by a total of 215 people. During the on-the-spot
visit, however, the Committee of Experts was informed by the Italian speakers that this number comprises
also the technical staff, which provides assistance to all productions, not only to those in Italian. The
number of staff producing Italian programmes is lower. Representatives of the Italian speakers raised
again concerns regarding the overall budgetary situation of the Italian programmes of RTV Capodistria
and about the on-going generation shift, namely that lost media posts (e.g. as a result of retirements or
non-renewal of temporary contracts) are not replaced. These developments lead to a decrease in the
extent and quality of the Italian-language television and radio programmes in Koper/Capodistria.
227. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking still fulfilled at present. However, it urges the
authorities to take steps to develop a structured human resources policy regarding Italian-speaking
broadcast media.

34

Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to ensure that the interests of the users of regional or minority languages are represented or taken
into account within such bodies as may be established in accordance with the law with responsibility for guaranteeing the
freedom and pluralism of the media.

228. In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking fulfilled.
Nevertheless, it requested the Slovenian authorities to provide information in the next periodical report on
how the interests of the Italian speakers are taken into account.
229. In the fourth periodical report the Slovenian authorities state that the interests of Italian speakers
are represented and taken into account within the Programme Committee and the Programme Council.
However, the representatives of the Italian speakers have reiterated that the representation of the
members of the Italian community in the Council of RTV Slovenia is purely formal, without any real
opportunity to contribute to decisions about relevant issues.
230. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that this undertaking is fulfilled. It
requests the Slovenian authorities to provide information in the next periodical report on how the interests
of the Italian speakers are taken into account.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 2
In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties
undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or provide
appropriate cultural activities and facilities in accordance with the preceding paragraph.

231. In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking not fulfilled. It
encouraged the Slovenian authorities to support appropriate cultural activities and facilities for the Italian
language in parts of Slovenia other than the coastal municipalities where the number of speakers justifies
it.
232. The fourth periodical report does not contain specific information about this issue. During the onthe-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed about a cultural event organised in Maribor in 2012,
part of the Maribor European Cultural Capital 2012 activities. However, this was financed by Italy and was
the only cultural activity organised outside the territories where Italian is traditionally used.
233. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled. It urges the Slovenian
authorities to support appropriate cultural activities and facilities for the Italian language in parts of
Slovenia other than the coastal municipalities, where the number of speakers justifies it.
Article 13 – Economic and social life
234. In the third monitoring cycle, the Committee of Ministers recommended to Slovenia to “take
proactive measures to reduce the gap between the legislative framework and practical
implementation regarding the use of […] Italian […] in economic and social activities […]”.
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole country:
b

to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of companies and private documents of any clauses
excluding or restricting the use of regional or minority languages, at least between users of the same
language;

35

235.

In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking not fulfilled.

236. According to the fourth periodical report, the Companies Act provides that in areas inhabited by
the Italian minority communications with employees may also be conducted in Italian. Although the acts
of the company must be written in Slovenian, in the “ethnically-mixed area”, Italian may also be used. The
Committee of Experts points out that this provision concerns the whole country and not only in the territory
where Italian is used.
237. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It asks the Slovenian
authorities to inform, in the next periodical report, whether the legislation prohibits, within the whole
country, the insertion in internal regulations of companies and private documents of any clauses excluding
or restricting the use of Italian, at least between users of this language.
c

to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority languages in connection with
economic or social activities;

238. In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking fulfilled.
Nevertheless, it requested the Slovenian authorities to report on the implementation of the Consumer
Protection Act in the next periodical report.
239. The fourth periodical report does not contain any relevant information on the practical
implementation of the Consumer Protection Act.
240. The Committee of Experts underlines that the undertaking applies within the whole territory of the
country. It asks the Slovenian authorities to provide information about the implementation of these
undertakings also outside the “ethnically-mixed area”.
d

to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by means other than those
specified in the above sub-paragraphs.

241. In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking partly fulfilled.
It encouraged the Slovenian authorities to take measures to facilitate and/or encourage the use of Italian
in accordance with this undertaking.
242. According to the fourth periodical report, leaflets on the prevention of family violence were issued
also in Italian. Furthermore, the police have issued bilingual posters and leaflets. However, the
representatives of the Italian-speakers have informed the Committee of Experts that private companies do
not use Italian, although the legislation foresees that in some business processes companies in the
“ethnically-mixed area” must use Slovenian and Italian. Information relating to the characteristics, intended
use of the product, composition and the use of products or services are only provided in Slovenian on
products of Slovenian origin
243. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It urges the Slovenian
authorities to take measures to facilitate and/or encourage the use of Italian in accordance with this
undertaking.
Paragraph 2
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the public authorities are competent,
within the territory in which the regional or minority languages are used, and as far as this is reasonably possible:
a

to include in their financial and banking regulations provisions which allow, by means of procedures
compatible with commercial practice, the use of regional or minority languages in drawing up payment
orders (cheques, drafts, etc.) or other financial documents, or, where appropriate, to ensure the
implementation of such provisions;

36

244. In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking formally
fulfilled. It encouraged the Slovenian authorities to ensure the implementation of the financial and banking
regulations which require the use of Italian.
245. The fourth periodical report refers to the public services companies of Koper/Capodistria. These
issue bilingual invoices, but not money order forms, which are only in Slovenian. The Committee of
Experts was also informed by the Italian speakers that all payment orders and other financial documents
are in Slovenian.
246. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking formally fulfilled. It urges the Slovenian
authorities to ensure the implementation the financial and banking regulations which require the use of
Italian.
b

in the economic and social sectors directly under their control (public sector), to organise activities to
promote the use of regional or minority languages;

247. In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking not fulfilled. It
requested the Slovenian authorities to provide information concerning the organisation of relevant
activities to promote the use of Italian in the public sector.
248. In the fourth periodical report the Slovenian authorities refer to the National Programme for
Language Policy 2014-2018, which aims at providing conditions for the equal public use and development
of Hungarian or Italian in “ethnically-mixed areas”.
249. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking not fulfilled at present. It asks the Slovenian
authorities provide further information on the National Programme for Language Policy 2014-2018,
including its implementation, and concerning the organisation of relevant activities to promote the use of
Italian in the public sector in the next periodical report.
c

to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and hostels offer the possibility
of receiving and treating in their own language persons using a regional or minority language who are in
need of care on grounds of ill-health, old age or for other reasons;

250. In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking partly fulfilled.
It encouraged the Slovenian authorities, after consultation with the Italian speakers, to ensure that social
care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and hostels offer the possibility of receiving and treating
persons using the Italian language in Italian.
251. According to the fourth periodical report, several regulations enable the admission and treatment
of Italian speakers in their own language. For regional social work centres in the coastal region
bilingualism is required by the Rules on the organisation and job structuring, which ask for additional skills
in minority languages. House rules are bilingual. Moreover, health care staff working directly with patients
in bilingual areas must have a command of the national community language, i.e. Italian. During the onthe-spot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed by the Italian speakers that in practice Italian is
rarely used in social care facilities. Only few staff have adequate knowledge of Italian and the hospital
staff in Izola/Isola uses only Slovenian. All written documents issued by the doctors are in Slovenian.
Language courses have been organised by one Italian organisation in the framework of the Jezik/Lingua
programme.
252. The Committee of Experts considers this undertaking partly fulfilled. It urges the Slovenian
authorities, after consultation with the Italian speakers, to ensure that social care facilities such as
hospitals, retirement homes and hostels offer the possibility of receiving and treating persons using the
Italian language in Italian.

37

d

to ensure by appropriate means that safety instructions are also drawn up in regional or minority
languages;

253. In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking partly fulfilled.
It encouraged the Slovenian authorities to ensure that safety instructions are also drawn up in Italian.
254.

The fourth periodical report does not contain specific information about this issue.

255. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that this undertaking is partly fulfilled.
It requests the Slovenian authorities to provide specific information concerning the implementation of this
undertaking in the next periodical report.
e

to arrange for information provided by the competent public authorities concerning the rights of
consumers to be made available in regional or minority languages.

256. In the third evaluation report, the Committee of Experts considered this undertaking formally
fulfilled. It requested the Slovenian authorities to provide, in the next periodical report, information on the
practical implementation of the amendment to the Consumer Protection Act (2007) that placed the use of
Slovenian and Italian on the same footing in the “ethnically-mixed area”.
257.

The fourth periodical report does not contain the requested specific information.

258. The Committee of Experts maintains its previous conclusion that this undertaking is formally
fulfilled. It requests the Slovenian authorities to provide information on its practical implementation in the
next periodical report.

38

Chapter 4
round

Findings of the Committee of Experts in the fourth monitoring

A.
The Committee of Experts appreciates the good co-operation it enjoyed with the Slovenian
authorities during the on-the-spot visit. As already noted by the Committee of Experts in its previous
evaluation reports, Slovenia has a very high legal standard of protection for the Hungarian and Italian
languages, which it has maintained and developed during the fourth monitoring cycle. While gaps in the
implementation of this legal framework persist in certain areas, Slovenia should be complimented for its
continued commitment to the protection and the promotion of the Hungarian and Italian languages, as well
as for its efforts to protect Romani.
B.
As for Part III languages, the provision for Hungarian and Italian in the Slovenian education
system in the respective areas remains satisfactory. Certain deficiencies seem to exist with respect to the
teacher training system, but the Slovenian authorities are aware of these problems and are trying to deal
with them.
C.
The highly developed legal framework regarding the use of Hungarian and Italian in relations with
local branches of State administration remains poorly implemented in practice. In addition, difficulties still
exist concerning the use of Hungarian and Italian in the provision of public services.
D.
Hungarian and Italian are only rarely used before courts, and when this happens, it is always with
the use of interpreters. For the long-term protection and promotion of Hungarian and Italian it would be
beneficial if staff have an adequate working knowledge of these languages. Measures to monitor and
evaluate the actual use of these languages in practice are needed, both for the judicial and administrative
staff.
E.
The Committee of Experts has received information that the Constitutional Court of Slovenia has
decided that a new municipality of Ankaran/Ancarano, currently part of the municipality of
Koper/Capodistria, has to be established, following a local referendum in 2009. The National Assembly
has until now rejected the creation of the new municipality, but this will most likely be established in 2014.
The creation of the new municipality might have repercussions for the protection of the Italian language.
Measures are needed on behalf of the Slovenian authorities to prevent any negative developments for the
use of Italian.
F.
Slovenia chose a very high level of undertakings for Hungarian and Italian with respect to the
media, including the creation or maintenance of one radio station and one television channel. There is a
need to gradually increase the existing offer with respect to the Hungarian language, and to maintain it, at
least, with respect to Italian. Concerning Italian, there are financial problems leading to the reduction of
staff.
G.
Regarding social and economic activities, there is a wide gap between the legislative framework
and the actual practice, and Hungarian and Italian are almost absent from economic activities. There is
still a clear need for a pro-active approach by the authorities with a view to ensuring a more systematic
enforcement of the applicable legislation and to continuing to promote the bilingual character of the
relevant areas.
H.
Slovenia’s domestic legislation still makes no provision for German to be recognised as a regional
or minority language, which hampers the implementation of Part II of the Charter to this language. There
is a need to develop instruction in/of German as a regional or minority language. The financial support by
the Slovenian authorities remains limited and insufficient to safeguard this language. German as a
regional or minority language is largely absent from public life in Slovenia and not present in the
broadcasting media. Measures to promote German should be developed in close co-operation with the
speakers.
I.
Slovenia’s domestic legislation also makes no provision for Croatian to be recognised as a
regional or minority language. No steps have been taken by the Slovenian authorities to develop

39

instruction of Croatian as a regional or minority language in the areas where this language is traditionally
used. Protection is offered for Croatian as a language spoken by “citizens of the former Yugoslav
Republics” or by “members of the nations of the former Yugoslav State”, but this does not correspond to
the purpose of the Charter. Croatian as a regional or minority language remains largely absent from public
life in Slovenia and is not present in the broadcasting media. Resolute measures are needed to apply Part
II of the Charter to this language in the areas where it is traditionally spoken, and should be developed in
co-operation with the speakers.
J.
Serbian is also not recognised in the Slovenian legal framework as a regional or minority
language. Similar to Croatian, it is considered a language of the citizens of the former Yugoslav Republics
or an “immigrant language”. Instruction for Serbian as a regional or minority language, in the areas where
this language is traditionally used, has not been developed. Serbian as a regional or minority language
remains largely absent from public life in Slovenia and is not present in the broadcasting media. Resolute
steps are needed to apply Part II of the Charter to Serbian in the areas where it is traditionally spoken, in
co-operation with the speakers.
K.
Developments have continued with respect to the protection and promotion of the Romani
th th
language. Romani is taught in the framework of the “Roma culture” optional subject, offered in the 7 -9
years of primary education. The “Strategy for Education of Roma in the Republic of Slovenia” was
amended in 2011 and pre-school activities established. Codification of the varieties of Romani is still in
progress and should be pursued. Although at present there are no qualified Romani-speaking teachers,
the authorities have continued to support projects for the training of Roma teaching assistants.
Nevertheless, there is a need for continued efforts to strengthen the offer of Romani education at all
appropriate stages. There is also a need to increase the awareness and acceptance of Roma language
and culture as an integral part of Slovenia’s cultural wealth. In the field of the broadcast media, Romani is
present on public radio and TV, as well as on private radio.
L.
Finally, there is still a significant need to increase awareness in the Slovenian population on the
whole about Slovenia’s heritage of linguistic diversity and to promote mutual understanding and further
contacts between the different language groups. Co-ordinated measures should notably be taken
regarding the media and education, including teaching materials and teacher training as well as journalist
education.

The Slovenian government was invited to comment on the content of this report in accordance with Article
16.3 of the Charter. The comments received are attached in Appendix II.
On the basis of this report and its findings the Committee of Experts submitted its proposals to the
Committee of Ministers for recommendations to be addressed to Slovenia. At the same time it
emphasised the need for the Slovenian authorities to take into account, in addition to these general
recommendations, the more detailed observations contained in the body of the report.
th

At its 1197 meeting on 16 April 2014, the Committee of Ministers adopted its Recommendation
addressed to Slovenia, which is set out in Part B of this document.

40

Appendix I: Instrument of Ratification

Slovenia:

Declaration contained in a Note Verbale from the Permanent Representation of Slovenia, dated
19 September 2000, handed to the Secretary General at the time of deposit of the instrument of
ratification, on 4 October 2000 - Or. Fr.
In accordance with Article 7, paragraph 5, of the Charter, the Republic of Slovenia will apply mutatis
mutandis the provisions of Article 7, paragraphs 1 to 4, also to the Romani language.
Period covered: 1/1/2001 The preceding statement concerns Article(s): 7

Declaration contained in a Note verbale from the Permanent Representation of Slovenia, dated
26 June 2007, registered at the Secretariat General on 27 June 2007 - Or. Engl.
The Republic of Slovenia declares that it accepts several other obligations of the Charter not already
specified in a Note verbale handed to the Secretary General at the time of deposit of the instrument of
ratification. At the same time the Republic of Slovenia specifies the paragraphs or sub-paragraphs chosen
in accordance with Article 2, paragraph 2, and Article 3, paragraph 2, of the Charter, from among the
provisions of Part III of the Charter it applies in respect of each of the two languages it declared are
considered as regional or minority languages in the territory of the Republic of Slovenia, respectively. In
accordance with Article 3, paragraph 3, these undertakings are deemed to form an integral part of the
ratification and have the same effect as from their date of notification. Within the meaning of the abovesaid, the Republic of Slovenia replaces the declaration contained in a Note verbale, dated 19 September
2000, with the following declaration:
"The Republic of Slovenia declares that the Italian and Hungarian languages are considered as regional
or minority languages in the territory of the Republic of Slovenia within the meaning of the European
Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. In accordance with Article 2, paragraph 2, of the Charter, the
Republic of Slovenia will apply to these two languages the following provisions of the Part III of the
Charter:
Article 8
For the Italian language:
Paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a (i), b (i), c (i), d (i), e (iii), f (iii), g, h, i
Paragraph 2
For the Hungarian language:
Paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a (ii), b (ii), c (ii), d (ii), e (iii), f (iii), g, h, i
Paragraph 2
Article 9
For the Italian and Hungarian languages:
Paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a, b, c, d
Paragraph 2, sub-paragraph a
Article 10
For the Italian and Hugarian languages:
Paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a (i), b, c
Paragraph 2

41

Paragraph 3, sub-paragraph a
Paragraph 4
Paragraph 5
Article 11
For the Italian and Hungarian languages:
Paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a (i), e (i)
Paragraph 2
Paragraph 3
Article 12
For the Italian and Hungarian languages:
Paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs a, d, e, f
Paragraph 2
Paragraph 3
Article 13
For the Italian and Hungarian languages:
Paragraph 1
Paragraph 2
Article 14
For the Italian and Hungarian languages:
Paragraph a
Paragraph b".
Period covered: 27/6/2007 The preceding statement concerns Article(s): 2

42

Appendix II: Comments from the Slovenian authorities
Having received the Fourth Report of the Committee of Experts of the European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages on the application of the Charter in Slovenia, the Government of the Republic of
Slovenia has examined it with great interest. We would like to take this opportunity and thank the
Committee of Experts for acknowledging the high level of protection of the Italian and Hungarian
languages in Slovenia and the progress achieved and would like to submit additional information in
connection with certain statements and recommendations in the report:
1.

With regard to the second proposal for recommendations (p. 41, item 4.2) and the statements in
paragraphs 26 and 105 through 118, the Government wishes to emphasize that the Strategy for the
Education of the Roma in the Republic of Slovenia of 2004, as amended in 2011, is being
implemented comprehensively. The implementation of the Strategy has significantly influenced the
education of Roma and brought visible results, especially in terms of introducing Roma assistants in
schools and providing for their training and the creation of a network of teachers working with Roma.
It has also contributed to a better school climate, social incubators with different activities for parents
and children in Romani, publications in Romani for different age groups (fairy tales, books,
dictionaries, grammar books etc.), codification of Romani (varieties), etc. The optional subject Roma
culture is taught by teachers, in cooperation with Roma assistants. The Ministry of Education,
Science and Sport will continue to strive for better availability of teaching materials both in textbook
and online format.

2.

With respect to the statement in paragraph 28 that information about minority languages is largely
absent from the media or contributes to the promotion of a negative image of these, the Government
would like to emphasise that neither the report nor the meeting with the delegation of the Committee
of Experts have clearly identified the specific case or cases justifying such an assessment. The
Government is of the opinion that such tendencies cannot be considered as wide-spread or prevailing
in Slovenian media.

3.

As regards the statements in paragraph 46, the Government would like to underline that data on
projects co-financed in the 2010–2012 period include projects for the German-speaking ethnic group,
regardless of the project organiser or applicant. The project target group was the criterion for granting
co-financing.

4.

With regard to statements in paragraph 103 on the involvement in the drafting of the 4th Periodic
Report of the Republic of Slovenia on the implementation of the Charter, the Government would like
to clarify that the draft report was made available on the website of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
together with an open call for amendments to all stakeholders.

5.

As regards the statement in paragraph 197 that there are no judges able to conduct the proceedings
in Italian and that in item D of Chapter 4 with regard to court personnel and their knowledge of the
Hungarian and Italian languages, the Government would like to note that the Koper District Court
employs 15 judges and 5 advisers, and the Koper Higher Court 3 judges and 3 advisers who also use
Italian in their work; paragraph 131 correctly states the information on Lendava Court personnel who
use Hungarian.

6.

With regard to the findings and proposals for recommendations of the Committee of Ministers in
Chapter 4, the Government would like to note that, ever since 1991, the Ministry of Culture has been
implementing systematic measures for all the linguistic groups mentioned therein (alongside the
Italian, Hungarian and Roma communities). Pursuant to articles 14, 61 and 62 of the Constitution of
the Republic of Slovenia, all of them are guaranteed individual rights for the preservation of their
linguistic and cultural traits. Cultural projects in different fields (language, cultural education, media,
publishing, etc.) are co-financed by public funds, enhancing their cultural wealth (Part II of the
Charter).

43

The competent ministry protects the cultural rights of minority or regional languages and of other
social groups not only through financial, but also organisational means (expert assistance and advice
to all entities in this field, the head of the relevant department organises annual open days for artists
etc.) and normative tools (mediation, legal counselling and awareness-raising etc.).
A study commissioned in 2012 by the Ministry of Culture shows that special attention should be paid
to regional integration and maintaining local identities, as the groups concerned are relatively small.
The Republic of Slovenia has adopted measures for the preservation of their cultural heritage and
provided more funds in the state budget despite the harsh economic situation in the country, as may
be gleaned from the Resolution on the National Programme for Culture 2014–2017 (Official Gazette
of the Republic of Slovenia, No. 99/13). The objective "A higher level of minority integration in all
areas and regions" also includes measures targeting small autochthonous groups, the preservation of
their specific ethnic identities, especially on the local level (regional integration), as well as highquality cultural integration of members of the German-speaking ethnic group, especially the Gottchee
community, whose culture is under threat of extinction and therefore requires particular attention.
In the period 2007–2013, the Ministry of Culture received funding from the European Social Fund to
build capacities of NGOs in the field of enhancing cultural diversity. In the 2014–2020 EU financial
perspective, the Ministry will support capacity building of NGOs which develop and promote cultural
diversity.
Within the Ministry of Culture, the language policy concerning languages for which Slovenia took on
commitments by ratifying the Charter is implemented by the Department for Slovenian Language,
particularly through strategic documents. Based on the Resolution on the National Programme for
Language Policy for the 2014–2018 period, which was adopted in the National Assembly in July
2013, two working groups were established tasked with preparing an action plan on language
education and on language reference tools, respectively. The working group on language education
includes representatives of the Ministry of Education, Science and Sport. The issue of education,
promotion and language reference tools of the languages concerned will be dealt with by these two
working groups. Specific measures for further development and promotion of these languages will be
proposed. The two action plans will be adopted by the Government by September 2014.
7.

With regard to the third proposal for recommendations (paragraph 4.2, page 41) to the Slovenian
authorities to "take proactive measures to reduce the gap between the legislative framework and
practical implementation regarding the use of Hungarian and Italian in the provision of public
services, in economic and social activities, as well as in relations with local branches of State
administration", the Government would like to inform the Committee that a law on the autochthonous
Italian and Hungarian national communities in the Republic of Slovenia is being drafted.

The Government would like to take this opportunity and thank the experts for the prompt compilation of
the report, which will be thoroughly examined with a view to remedying any shortcoming. The Republic of
Slovenia consistently implements its commitments taken on with the ratification of the Charter. The
Government would like to thank the experts for recognising Slovenia's high standards enshrined in its
Constitution and legislation.
These high standards imposed by Slovenian legislation occasionally give rise to the perception that, in
practice, we do not always follow through, when in fact there are only minor or transitional inconsistencies.
The Republic of Slovenia will continue to regularly report and cooperate with the experts, and invest
further efforts to make headway in the issues mentioned. In accordance with Article 61 of its Constitution,
Slovenia already provides for individual rights of all the other groups not included in the ratification of the
Charter to freely express their national affiliation and culture and to use their language.

44

B.
Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on
the application of the Charter by Slovenia

Recommendation CM/RecChL(2014)4
of the Committee of Ministers
on the application of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
by Slovenia
(Adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 16 April 2014
th
at the 1197 meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies)
The Committee of Ministers,
In accordance with Article 16 of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages;
Having regard to the instrument of ratification submitted by Slovenia on 4 October 2000 and the
Declaration of 26 June 2007;
Having taken note of the evaluation made by the Committee of Experts on the Charter with respect to the
application of the Charter by Slovenia;
Bearing in mind that this evaluation is based on information submitted by Slovenia in its fourth periodical
report, supplementary information given by the Slovenian authorities, information submitted by bodies and
associations legally established in Slovenia and the information obtained by the Committee of Experts
during its on-the-spot visit,
Having taken note of the comments made by the Slovenian authorities on the contents of the Committee
of Experts' report;
Recommends that the authorities of Slovenia take account of all the observations and recommendations
of the Committee of Experts and, as a matter of priority:
1.
recognise German, Croatian and Serbian as minority languages traditionally spoken in Slovenia
and apply the provisions of Part II to these languages, in co-operation with the speakers;
2.

develop the teaching of the Romani language and Roma culture at all appropriate stages;

3.
take proactive measures to reduce the gap between the legislative framework and practical
implementation regarding the use of Hungarian and Italian in the provision of public services, in economic
and social activities, as well as in relations with local branches of State administration;
4.
intensify measures to raise public awareness of the regional or minority languages in mainstream
education and in the mass media.

45

