Strasbourg, 9 May 2014

MIN-LANG (2014) PR 5

EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES

Fourth periodical report
presented to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe
in accordance with Article 15 of the Charter

SPAIN

STATE SECRETARY
FOR PUBLIC ADMINISTRATIONS

MINISTERY
FOR FINANCES AND
PUBLIC ADMINISTRATIONS

DIRECTORATE GENERAL
FOR COORDINATION OF COMPETENCES WITH AUTONOMOUS
COMMUNITIES AND LOCAL ENTITIES

FOURTH REPORT ON THE APPLICATION BY SPAIN OF THE
EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY
LANGUAGES, OF THE COUNCIL OF EUROPE
2010 - 2013

2

INDEX
PAGE
I. INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................

3

II. LANGUAGES RECOGNISED AS CO-OFFICIAL IN THE
STATUTES OF AUTONOMY OF THE AUTONOMOUS
COMMUNITIES .........................................................................................

4

A) SITUATION OF THESE CO-OFFICIAL LANGUAGES IN EACH
AUTONOMOUS COMMUNITY ...........................................................

4

Catalan in Catalonia .............................................................................

4

Catalan in the Balearic Islands .............................................................

32

Galician in Galicia ................................................................................

46

Valencian in Valencia ...........................................................................

69

Basque in the Basque Country .............................................................

90

Basque in Navarre ...............................................................................

116

Occitan/Aranese in the Aran Valley ......................................................

142

B) CO-OFFICIAL LANGUAGES IN THE GENERAL STATE ADMINISTRATION 160
III. NON-OFFICIAL REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES ...................

160

Asturian in Asturias ..............................................................................

160

Languages and language modalities native to Aragon ........................

170

Tamazight in Melilla .............................................................................

175

Darija in Ceuta .....................................................................................

178

3

I.

INTRODUCTION

This fourth report by the Kingdom of Spain, 2010-2013, on the application of the European
Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, is made in response to the provisions in this
respect set out in Article 15 of the Charter, according to which the first report should be
presented one year following the entry into force of the Charter, and subsequent ones should
be presented to the General Secretariat of the Council of Europe at three-yearly intervals after
the first report. The Charter came into force for Spain on 1 August 2001, and so the first report
was presented in 2002, the second one (for the period 2002-2005) in 2006, and the third one
(for the period 2006-2009) in 2010.
As indicated in the previous reports, it is immediately apparent from these documents that
multilingualism is one of the essential features of modern Spain, established in the form of
Autonomous Communities, a structure that generates cultural, social and economic wealth, as
well as a common heritage that should be respected and promoted, not only to comply with
the commitments arising from the Charter, but also to meet Spain’s constitutional, statutory
and legal obligations.
This Report addresses the issues raised with respect to the previous one by the Committee of
Experts, and the recommendations made by the Committee of Ministers of the Council of
Europe.
In this Introduction it should be stressed that both the progress made and, on occasion, the
perpetuation of the former situation with regard to compliance with the commitments made in
relation to the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, have taken place
against a background of significant budgetary constraints arising from the economic crisis that
has affected Spain during the period described in the Report.
This Report was prepared with the cooperation and information provided by the Autonomous
Communities in question, by the cities of Ceuta and Melilla, and by the ministerial
departments of the Central Government.
In view of the volume of information provided by the authorities consulted, this report includes,
as concisely as possible, or in summary, fundamentally the changes made and recent
activities during the period in question, as requested by the General Secretariat of the Council
of Europe, and does not reproduce the information provided in previous reports made by the
Kingdom of Spain.
This Report was coordinated by the Ministry for Finances and Public Administrations
(Secretariat of State for Public Administration), through the Directorate-General for
Coordination of Competences with the Autonomous Communities and Local Entities.

February 2014

4

II.

LANGUAGES RECOGNISED AS CO-OFFICIAL IN THE
STATUTES OF AUTONOMY OF THE AUTONOMOUS
COMMUNITIES

A) SITUATION OF THESE CO-OFFICIAL LANGUAGES IN EACH
AUTONOMOUS COMMUNITY
CATALAN IN CATALONIA
1. INTRODUCTION
Data on the number of speakers
56. The Committee of Experts encouraged the Spanish authorities to carry out
surveys in cooperation with the speakers of regional or minority languages in order to
have accurate updated data concerning the number of users of regional or minority
languages and their geographic distribution.
Studies have reported that Catalan is spoken by over 10 million people, in Spain, Andorra,
France and Italy (Sardinia). A Catalan speaker is defined as a person who can both
understand Catalan and speak it.
The most recent data available on language proficiency and the habitual use of Catalan in
Catalonia reflect the following: the population of Catalonia, according to the Idescat population
register, is about 7,500,000 (in 2012, the figure was 6,439,000 persons aged over 14 years),
of whom approximately 17% are of foreign origin; in 2008, there were 4,823,400 persons
Catalan-speakers aged over 15 years in Catalonia. These data were obtained from the 2008
Survey of Language Use (EULP08), which also reported the following data on the Catalanlanguage skills of the population aged over 15 years in Catalonia:
Survey of Language Use, Catalonia, 2008
Understand
Speak it
Read it
it
Percentage
Absolute
numbers
Total
population
>15 years

Write it

94.6%

78.3%

81.7%

61.8%

5,832,000

4,823,400

5,034,400

3,807,300

6,162,500

The Official Survey of Language Use in Catalonia is conducted every five years, and the 2013
edition is currently in preparation. Therefore, the data for the period 2009-2011, which are
presented below, are for the years 2009-2012, and obtained from the Barometer of
Communication and Culture.

5

There has been a progressive increase in the proportion of Catalan speakers among the
population. Thus, the 2012 data show that 97.1% of the adult population understand Catalan,
84.3% can speak it and 70.1% can write it.

Knowledge of Catalan
Understand it
Speak it
Write it
Total population aged >14 years

2012
6,252,269
5,428,077
4,513,739
6,439,000

Increase since 2009
213,139
484,947
819,639
93,750

Conocimiento de catalán. Población de más de 14 años. 2009-2012 (%)
120
100
80
60

95,2
77,9

95,3

96,3

77,5

58,2

60,6

2009

2010

97,1

80,5

84,3

65

70,1

40
20
0

Lo entiende

2011

Lo habla

2012

Lo escribe

Source: FUNDACC, Barómetro de la Comunicación y la Cultura, 2009-2012.

Almost 100% of the adult population in Catalonia understand and can speak Castilian. This
percentage has remained constant despite increasing immigration in recent years.

Legislative changes
With respect to the application of the Charter, the following significant developments took
place during the period covered by this report:


A drastic reduction in budgets assigned to activities that enhance the implementation of
the Charter (mainly due to the financial and economic crisis).



Further development of legislation in Catalonia with respect to the Catalan and Occitan/
Aranese in Aran, languages, to better apply the Charter in areas subject to this new
regulation, and to develop the regulatory provisions concerning linguistic issues that are
specified in the Catalonian Statute of Autonomy of 2006, approved by Organic Act 6/2006
of 19 July, on the reform of the Statute of Autonomy of Catalonia.
During the period described in this report, the Parliament of Catalonia has conducted
significant legislative activity with respect to language issues. It has developed and greatly
expanded the legal framework, with nine laws, two of which are specifically linguistic, and
the following seven sectoral laws with special impact on language issues, listed in order of
adoption:
o

Act 12/2009, of 10 July, on Education
This Act develops the language regime applicable within the education system, as
derived from the Statute of Autonomy. It seeks to ensure that the entire school

6

population, whatever their habitual language when entering the education system,
complies with the duty and exercises the right to achieve oral and written proficiency in
Catalan and Castilian. Appeals have been presented to the Constitutional Court
regarding certain aspects of this Act.
o

Act 10/2010, of 2 May, on reception for immigrants and returnees to Catalonia
This Act regulates the issue addressed in its title, namely the right to receive
assimilation assistance, including language education. Appeals have been presented to
the Constitutional Court regarding certain aspects of this Act.

o Act 13/2010, of 21 May, on the Statistical Plan for Catalonia, 2011-2014
This Act is intended to facilitate the implementation of a language census, to obtain
statistics on language use by the population and by institutions and companies,
together with a system of linguistic indicators. Appeals have been presented to the
Constitutional Court regarding certain aspects of this Act.
o Act 17/2010, of 3 June, on Catalan sign language
This Act develops the relevant articles of the Statute and the basic national legislation
regarding sign language.
o Act 20/2010, of 7 July, on Film Act
This Act regulates questions such as promoting different versions of film titles – original,
dubbed and subtitled in Catalan – and the percentages of copies of films released in
Catalonia, as dubbed or subtitled versions, which must be distributed in Catalan, and
the exemptions applicable. The latter regulation has been challenged by the European
Commission for possible contravention of the principle of the free movement of
services. Appeals have been presented to the Constitutional Court regarding certain
aspects of this Act.
o

Act 22/2010, of 20 July, on the Consumer Code of Catalonia
This Act regulates consumers’ language rights, the language requirements of consumer
relations and violations of language rights. It partially replaces the language-related
provisions of the former Market Discipline Act 1/1990 and, in its entirety, Act 3/1993 on
the Statute for Consumers. Appeals have been presented to the Constitutional Court
regarding certain aspects of this Act.

o

Act 29/2010, of 3 August, on the use of electronic media in the public sector in
Catalonia
This Act regulates, in electronic media enabling communication between the public and
the government, the creation of multilingual tools that include the official languages, in
order to facilitate document processing, consultation and participation, in citizens’
language of choice.

o

Act 33/2010, of 1 October, on youth policies

7

This Act regulates the promotion and protection of the use of Catalan and of OccitanAranese by young people.

2. APPLICATION OF THE CHARTER
Article 7 – Objectives and principles
Paragraph 1
In respect of regional or minority languages, within the territories in which such
languages are used and according to the situation of each language, the Parties shall
base their policies, legislation and practice on the following objectives and principles:
c) the need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in order
to safeguard them;
In addition to the legislation specified in other sections, the Catalonian Government has
approved or modified regulations containing provisions relating to the use of languages, such
that, at least, the use of the official languages is allowed and that of Catalan and, where
appropriate, Occitan-Aranese is promoted.
Furthermore, in addition to the promotional activities and institutional arrangements detailed
throughout this report in the respective sections, many agreements have been reached
among institutions affected by these issues in Catalonia regarding the normalisation and
extension of the use of Catalan.

d) the facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of regional or minority
languages, in speech and writing, in public and private life;
In addition to the information provided in previous reports by Spain, the following actions have
been taken by the Catalonian Government in relation to the period concerned.
The concept of language volunteer has been implemented in Catalan universities, in the form
of language exchanges aimed at facilitating the understanding and use of Catalan by students
from the rest of Spain or from abroad. In this practice, a Catalan speaker is partnered with a
non-Catalan student, so that each may converse in their own language and at the same time
learn and practice their partner’s language.

Language exchange volunteer
programmes

2009-10

2010-11

2011-12

Number of language exchange
volunteer partnerships

1,838

2,485

1,534

Tax deductions continue to be available with respect to donations made to foundations and
associations recorded in the register of non-profit organisations dedicated to the promotion of
the Catalan language, subject to the applicable regulations. From 2012 to 2013, the number of
such entities increased significantly, from 86 to 120.
In addition, various provisions have been issued governing the award of grants for initiatives
aimed at promoting the use of Catalan in Catalonia.

e) the maintenance and development of links, in the fields covered by this
Charter, between groups using a regional or minority language and other groups

8

in the State employing a language used in identical or similar form, as well as the
establishment of cultural relations with other groups in the State using different
languages;
In 2012, Catalonia assumed the vice presidency of the Network to Promote Language
Diversity. This Network was created in 2007 with the aim of influencing EU language policies
on the recognition of regional and minority languages and on the management of linguistic
diversity in general.

179. The Committee of Experts regretted the lack of appropriate cooperation between
communities sharing identical or similar languages, such as Valencia with Catalonia
and the Balearic Islands. It therefore encouraged the authorities to promote mutual
cooperation and understanding for the benefit of the languages.
The Ramon Llull Foundation, previously referred to in Spain’s third report, was incorporated
on 31 March 2008 under an agreement between the Government of Andorra and the Ramon
Llull Institute (administered by the Catalonian Government) and is based in Andorra. On 15
January 2009, the Foundation was associated with the General Council of the Eastern
Pyrenees (Northern Catalonia, France), the city of Alghero (on the island of Sardinia, Italy),
and the Ramón Llull Network of Valencian Cities, a grouping of 25 towns and cities in the
Autonomous Community of Valencia. As indicated before, the main aim of this Foundation is
to study, promote and preserve the Catalan language and to foster its external presence and
that of the cultural environments in which it is employed. In 2010, the Foundation promoted
the presence of Catalan as the guest of honour at the Paris Expolangues Fair, and organised
the Ramón Llull Prize for Catalan Writing, which until then had been administered by the
Government of Andorra.
Regarding collaboration with the Balearic Islands, in 2010 an addendum was attached to the
2009 cooperation agreement between the Governments of the Balearic Islands and of
Catalonia, to enable the mutual reception of TV channels in their respective territories and to
promote cooperation in audiovisual matters. In the same year, a specific cooperation
agreement was signed between the two Governments with respect to the dubbing or subtitling
of films in Catalan.
In late 2012, the Government of the Balearic Islands decided not to make any financial
contribution to the Ramon Llull Institute in 2013, in accordance with its criteria of budget
austerity and taking into account that it has its own agencies for the dissemination of language
and culture, such as the Consortium-Institute for Balearic Studies.
As regards collaboration with Aragon, in 2010 a collaboration protocol was signed between
the Department of Education of the Catalonian Government and the Department of Education,
Culture and Sport of the Government of Aragon. In the same year, moreover, a collaboration
agreement was signed between these two Autonomous Communities to facilitate the diffusion
of television broadcasts by public-sector channels in each other’s territories.

f) the provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of
regional or minority languages at all appropriate stages;
The Catalonian Government promotes adult education courses throughout the region, through
the Consortium for Language Normalisation (CPNL) and the online course Parla.cat
www.parla.cat.
Registrations for Catalan courses provided by the CPNL have varied significantly in the last
four years, and two opposing biennial trends can be distinguished. On the one hand, the
years 2008-2009 and 2009-2010 presented the highest growth to date in numbers of students
enrolled, up to 117,608. But on the other hand, in 2010-2011 and 2011-2010 this trend was

9

reversed, with registrations falling back to 98,444. This decline is accounted for by the present
economic and financial crisis and by the reduction in immigration to the region. Nevertheless,
classroom courses continue to play an essential role in helping immigrants adapt, with
elementary and basic-level courses representing 70% of all enrolled students. 66% of the
students in these courses were born abroad.
The online course Parla.cat was launched by the Catalonian Government in late 2008, to
make learning Catalan accessible to all. The course is structured into four levels of learning:
basic, elementary, intermediate and fluent, which correspond to levels A2, B1, B2 and C1,
respectively, of the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages of the Council
of Europe. Students can choose between two types of study: open (free of charge) or tutored.
In 2012, the platform had had over 130,000 registered users, from an initial level of only
10,097 in 2008.
In university education, there are Catalan-language courses and plans for linguistic and
cultural integration.
Government-funded Catalan courses for international students and for those from elsewhere
in Spain are mostly non-classroom based, or in the form of blended learning, and supplied
through the Parla.cat portal. In 2011-2012, 3,465 foreign students were registered for these
courses.
University plans for linguistic and cultural integration are supported by and provided in
collaboration with the Secretariat for Universities and Research. These plans are aimed at
students who come to Catalonia under student-mobility programmes, and present activities to
facilitate knowledge of the linguistic and cultural environment in Catalonia, together with
others aimed at enhancing relations between different languages and cultures. Among these
activities are the language partnerships described above. In 2011-2012, a total of 6,022
students took part in these linguistic and cultural integration plans.

190. As regards Catalan, the Committee of Experts welcomed the measures taken by
the authorities to develop bilingual education in the Catalan-speaking areas in Aragon.
It expressed the hope that such education would also be developed at secondary level
and looked forward to receiving information in the next periodical report on the
outcomes of the pilot project and on the implementation of the Agreement with the
Autonomous Community of Catalonia.
As stated above, in 2010 a collaboration protocol was signed between the Department of
Education of the Catalonian Government and the Department of Education, Culture and Sport
of the Government of Aragon.

g) the provision of facilities enabling non-speakers of a regional or minority
language living in the area where it is used to learn it if they so desire;
In this respect, please note the following actions.
The Citizenship and Immigration Plan 2009-2012, adopted by the Catalonian Government,
brings together the various programmes and activities carried out by Government
departments, and also impacts on the Catalan model for the integration of immigrants, which
has evolved over many years and involves not only the regional Government but also local
governments, economic and social partners, civil society organisations and society at large,
including newcomers to the region. Its main objective is to develop, advance and coordinate
immigration policies in Catalonia. Outstanding actions in this respect include the language
integration plans of the Consortium for Language Normalisation (CPNL), with the provision of
Catalan-language courses and educational support actions for the holiday period, which in
2009 and 2010 provided language integration projects for young people recently arrived,
under family reunification schemes.

10

Various resources and materials for language integration programmes have been created,
including a database in this respect, comprising a virtual space with over 400 records (such as
“Living together” or “Living in Catalonia. Learn Catalan from …”). During 2012 this facility
received a total of 6,715 queries
Also noteworthy is the newcomers’ adaptation portal in Catalonia (www.acollida.gencat.cat),
which offers basic, useful and interesting information for persons who have just arrived in
Catalonia or plan to do so. It is available in the ten languages most common among
immigrants to Catalonia: Catalan, Castilian, English, French, Arabic, Tamazight, Chinese,
Urdu, Romanian and Russian.

i) the promotion of appropriate types of transnational exchanges, in the fields covered
by this Charter, for regional or minority languages used in identical or similar form in
two or more States.
Please see the information provided in this respect in the following areas of the report on
Catalan in Catalonia: letter e) of this paragraph and the article on the Ramón Llull Foundation;
in Part III, Article 8 “Education”, paragraph 2; in Article 12 “Cultural services and activities”;
paragraph 3; in Part III, Article 11, section 2; and in Article 14, paragraph 1.a).

Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake to eliminate, if they have not yet done so, any unjustified
distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference relating to the use of a regional or
minority language and intended to discourage or endanger the maintenance or
development of it. The adoption of special measures in favour of regional or minority
languages aimed at promoting equality between the users of these languages and the
rest of the population or which take due account of their specific conditions is not
considered to be an act of discrimination against the users of more widely-used
languages.
In Catalonia, the Language Guarantee Offices continue to operate.

Paragraph 4
In determining their policy with regard to regional or minority languages, the Parties
shall take into consideration the needs and wishes expressed by the groups which use
such languages. They are encouraged to establish bodies, if necessary, for the
purpose of advising the authorities on all matters pertaining to regional or minority
languages.
Catalonian Government Decree 142/2012, of 30 October, created the Social Council for the
Catalan Sign Language. This Decree developed the earlier Act 17/2010, on the Catalan sign
language, and provided fresh impetus to the recognition of this language by extending its
encoding. This legislation complies with the provisions in this regard set out in Article 50.6 of
the Statute of Autonomy of Catalonia. The Council was created as an advisory and
consultation agency, enabling participation by society in the Government’s language policy on
Catalan sign language, and has been assigned many functions in this area. Its 14 members
include representatives of the regional administration, users of Catalan sign language and
professionals in this field.
Furthermore, the Catalonian Government approved Decree 371/2011, of 19 July, on the
cross-cutting organisation of language policy. This Decree provides the Directorate-General
for Language Policy with a more streamlined and operative interdepartmental structure, thus
ensuring a greater capability for cross-cutting penetration and action, and enhanced
coordination with the Government of the Autonomous Community in this field.

11

Finally, under Decree 117/2012 of 9 October, the Statutes of the Institute of Catalan Letters
were approved.

Paragraph 5
The Parties undertake to apply, mutatis mutandis, the principles listed in paragraphs 1
to 4 above to non-territorial languages. However, as far as these languages are
concerned, the nature and scope of the measures to be taken to give effect to this
Charter shall be determined in a flexible manner, bearing in mind the needs and
wishes, and respecting the traditions and characteristics, of the groups which use the
languages concerned.
The Comprehensive Plan for the Roma population in Catalonia 2009-2013, approved by
Government Decision GOV/114/2009, of 30 June, represents a continuation of the first such
Plan (2005-2008), and incorporates improvements and changes arising from joint work
between the Government and the various Roma associations and those working with the
Roma people. Among other basic general objectives, it seeks to administer action policies to
benefit the Roma population in Catalonia, including as a significant element the recovery of
the Romani language. Numerous activities (conferences, training sessions, workshops,
exhibitions, etc.) have been organised in the framework of this Plan.

PART III
Article 8 – Education
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such
languages are used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without
prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
b)
i) to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
c)
i) to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages;
Catalonia maintains its policy of welcoming school-age immigrants, as described in Spain’s
third report. In education, the following programmes are being continued:
-

Plan for Language and Social Cohesion: the most visible impact of this Plan is the
creation of reception classrooms for newcomer students (1,180 classrooms in 20092010, 1013 in 2010-2011 and 950 in 2011-2012) and the introduction of
neighbourhood education plans (95, among 80 municipalities).

-

Language Immersion Programme Update Plan: this plan reached 221 schools and
3,317 teachers in 2009-2010. In 2010-2011, it was first extended to secondary
schools, with the application of strategies to implement a comprehensive language
adaptation programme.

During this period, too, Order ENS/205/2011, of 28 July, was published, announcing a public
tender for the award of grants to collaborating private schools to support adaptation and
Catalan-learning processes for foreign newcomer students.
Shortly afterwards, Decree 101/2010, of 3 August, was issued, to regulate teaching during the
first stage of pre-school education. This Decree stipulated that Catalan, as the native
language of Catalonia, should normally be used as the language of instruction and learning,

12

and that the internal and external activities of the educational community, both oral and
written, as well as communication with the students’ families, should normally be in Catalan. It
also provided that children have the right to be taught in Catalan and not to be separated into
different schools or class groups by reason of their habitual language. The Decree also stated
that the students’ individual language rights would be respected in accordance with the
current law.
At the same time, Decree 102/2010, of 3 August, on the autonomy of schools, was issued.
This Decree governs, in the framework of each school’s education regime, the language
programme applicable, which must be carried out taking into account the sociolinguistic reality
of the school’s environment and in accordance with the language rules laid down in the
legally-established educational system. This Decree repealed the previous legislation on the
subject, dating from 1983.
251. … … In a series of decisions in 2010 and 2011, the Supreme Court ruled in their
favour in that Castilian is to be introduced as the language of instruction
“proportionately and equally to Catalan at all class levels”. The Committee of Experts
asks the authorities to report on how much practical impact this decision has had on
the Catalan language education in the next periodical report.
Among the provisions of the Statute of Autonomy of Catalonia, Article 35 on language rights in
the field of education states that “Each individual has the right to receive an education in
Catalan, as established in this Statute. Catalan shall be used as the teaching and learning
language for university and non-university education”, and that “Pupils have the right to
receive an education in Catalan at the non-university level”. The Constitutional Court ruled
that these provisions were in accordance with the Constitution (STC 31/2010, FJ 24), but
stipulated that they should always be interpreted in the terms set out in the legal ruling in
question.
The Constitutional Court stated in this legal ruling that “… nothing prevents the Statute in this
sense from recognising the right to be taught in Catalan, and for this to be the teaching and
learning language at all levels of education. However there is nothing to prevent Spanish from
being the object of an identical right enjoyed with Catalan as a teaching and learning
language”…; that “from the perspective of Article 27 CE it must be concluded that neither the
content of the Constitutional right to education recognised in that provision, nor its paragraphs
2, 5 and 7 in particular can take away the right to be taught in just one of the two co-official
languages of the Regional Territory, at the election of the subjects”; that “the public powers the State and the Autonomous Community - are authorised to determine the use of the two
co-official languages of an Autonomous Community as languages for communicating that
teaching, according to the distribution of competencies in the sphere of education”; that “Since
both languages must be not just taught, but also a means of communication in the educational
process as a whole, both co-official languages constitutionally must be recognised by the
public powers as teaching and learning languages and therefore each individual has the right
to be taught in either of them”; and that “Consequently it is perfectly legitimate for Catalan to
be the centre of gravity of this model of bilingualism, in accordance with the objective of
linguistic regulation, although always with the limit that this does not exclude Spanish as a
language used for teaching, so that the knowledge and use of this language is guaranteed in
the Autonomous Community”.
The above-mentioned Constitutional ruling, which is questioned by the Catalonian
Government, on the grounds that once again it encourages litigation by parents who wish
education in Castilian for their children, has been taken into account in subsequent
pronouncements by the Supreme Court.
It should be recalled that Catalonian Act 12/2009, of 10 June, on education, recognises the
right of linguistic choice for the parents of children in primary education, but not that of those in
higher levels of education. Nevertheless, the report by the Catalonian Government highlights

13

the high level of Castilian language proficiency among students in the Autonomous
Community (71.2% in Castilian, and 73.7% in Catalan).
In particular, the rulings of the Supreme Court in recent years have recognised (STS 19
February 2013) the right of appellant parents to have their children, in the school and year in
which they are enrolled, to be educated in both Catalan and Castilian as languages of
instruction, and have ruled that the Catalonian educational administration should adopt the
necessary measures to enable this outcome. This means that parents’ rights’ are not satisfied
by the mere provision to their children of individual attention in Castilian, but that this measure
should affect the entire school and student group corresponding to the appellants’ children.
The Court added that the proportions of the use of Castilian and Catalan in satisfying this right
should be decided by the Catalonian Government.
That judgment, too, is opposed by the Catalonian Government, which considers that Article 27
of the Constitution does not provide the right to be instructed in the language of choice of
parents, students or guardians.
Regarding the impact of this ruling on the teaching of Catalan, the Catalonian Government
observes in its report that the linguistic environment in the education system in Catalonia
remains basically unchanged from previous years.
Finally, reference should be made to new national legislation, promulgated under the
exclusive competence of the State, derived from Article 149.1 paragraph 30 of the
Constitution, which empowers the State to issue basic rules for the implementation of Article
27 of the Constitution, to ensure the compliance of public authorities with their obligations in
the field of education. The legislation in question is Organic Act 8/2013, of 9 December, to
improve educational quality (LOMCE). This Act, based on the above-mentioned rulings by the
Constitutional Court and the Supreme Court, includes a provision (the 38th Additional
Provision) which, after noting that the education authorities must guarantee the right of
students to be taught in Castilian, the official language of the State, and in the other co-official
languages in their respective territories, and that Castilian is the language of instruction
throughout the State and that the co-official languages are also languages of instruction in
their respective Autonomous Communities, in accordance with their Statutes and the
applicable regulations, stipulates that the education authorities must guarantee the right of
students to receive lessons in both official languages, and schedule teaching in accordance
with the criteria applicable. This provision also states that as parents have the right for their
children to receive instruction in Castilian, within the framework of education management, if
the annual schedule of the competent education authority does not ensure, from public funds,
the satisfaction of this right, in which Castilian is used as the language of instruction, the
Spanish Ministry of Education, after verification of this situation, will pay in full, on behalf of the
corresponding education authority, the real schooling costs for these students in private
schools where this language option exists, under the conditions and procedures legally
applicable, and these costs will be chargeable to the education authority in question.
These provisions of the LOMCE are disputed by the Catalonian Government, which holds that
Catalonia already complies with the objective of these provisions by guaranteeing, in this
respect, the co-official status of Castilian and Catalan in its Autonomous Community.

e)
i) to make available university and other higher education in regional or minority
languages;
In this area, the regulations applicable and the actions taken continue as reported previously,
in general terms, with the exception of the changes and data presented below.
The presence of Catalan in the University system is uneven, varying considerably from one
degree course to another, but overall it is around 60%.

14

In 2010, Decree 128/2010, of 14 September, on the accreditation of the language proficiency
of teachers in the Catalan university system, was adopted.
During this period, activities aimed at the promotion and dissemination of Catalan in
universities continued to be supported. Such funding offers are made annually. In 2010, the
offer of aid for projects and activities aimed at language normalisation (NORM) amounted to
€819,521.91 and the corresponding figure for 2011 was €560,000.00. In 2012, the NORM
funding was replaced by a new concept, INTERLINGUA, the value of which amounted to
€726,400.00 that year.
In 2010 and 2011, the previously-established system of funding for the publication and
distribution of Catalan-language university textbooks and manuals, and of scientific and
technical books, whether in paper or electronic format, was maintained (€330,281.36 in 2010,
and €197,615.19 in 2012). Financial assistance for Ph.D. students, to promote the use of
Catalan in doctoral theses, was also continued.
In 2011, collaborative activities were conducted in this field in the framework of the activities of
the Commission, based on the parameters of the Common European Framework of
Reference for Languages, with respect to the unification of Catalan-teaching programmes.
In the academic years from 2010-2011 to 2012-2013, the use of Catalan in university
education, compared with that of other languages present in the Catalan university system,
was as follows:

Language-use proportions in university teaching
Language
2010-11
Catalan
76.2%
Castilian
21.7%
English
1.6%
Others
0.5%

2011-12
75.9%
17.9%
4.7%
1.5%

2012-13
72.4%
18.1%
6.6%
2.9%

In this respect, the INTERCAT platform, a set of electronic resources for learning about
Catalan language and culture, is specially designed for mobility students visiting Catalan
universities. Also available is the application for mobile devices Guies de conversa
universitària (University Conversation Guide), which combines Catalan with Castilian, French
or English, and presents various communicative situations that may be encountered by
mobility students at a Catalan university.
All the above activities are conducted in close collaboration and cooperation between the
Secretariat for Universities and Research and the universities of Catalonia. The Language
Policy Office of the Secretariat is the unit responsible for coordinating university language
services and for implementing the language policies decided by the competent government
department for universities and with the consent of the University Council of Catalonia.
The Catalonian government, through various institutions and agencies, also provides financial
support for university research in the area of Catalan language.
Finally, the statutes of some Catalonian universities contain provisions favourable to the
Catalan language, in the framework of the current co-officiality of Castilian and Catalan; this is
the case of the Rovira i Virgili University and the Polytechnic University of Catalonia, which
have modified their Statutes in this sense.

f)

15

i) to arrange for the provision of adult and continuing education courses which
are taught mainly or wholly in the regional or minority languages;
Decree 161/2009, of 27 October, which regulates the provision of the compulsory secondary
education syllabus in adult education, and which partially repeals Decree 213/2002 of 1
August, states: “Catalan, as the native language of Catalonia, is normally used as the
language of instruction and learning and in the internal and external activities of the education
community including oral and written activities of students and teachers, presentations by
teachers, textbooks and learning materials, learning activities and evaluation”.
With respect to non-formal education, Order VCP/233/2010, of April 12, amended Order
VCP/491/2009 of 12 November, to consolidate and update the education qualifications,
diplomas and certificates equivalent to the certificates of knowledge of Catalan issued by the
Secretariat for Language Policy.

Paragraph 2
With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the
regional or minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the
number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage or
provide teaching in or of the regional or minority language at all the appropriate stages
of education.
The Ramon Llull Institute, referred to above, is also active in the teaching of Catalan outside
Catalonia. In addition, it funds the University Network of Catalan Studies and University Chairs
and centres for Catalan studies.
The Catalonian Government also participates in this field, promoting the use and presence of
Catalan in Catalonian communities abroad, and supporting the organisation of Catalan
courses at language centres worldwide.
The Delegation of the Catalonian Government in Madrid, during the years 2009-2012,
organised 61 Catalan courses at different levels, for a total of 1,114 adults and children.
These numbers are increasing year-on-year.
Furthermore, Catalan courses are regularly offered by the Official School of Languages in
Madrid.
It should also be noted that the Cervantes Institute, which forms part of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation, offers Catalan-language classes; in 2011-2012, it conducted 147
activities promoting Catalan worldwide, and received 202 registration applications, together
with another seven Catalan courses given at the Madrid Space for Iberian Languages, which
received 174 registrations. These activities included meetings with writers and artists held in
various cities around the world, translations of Catalan poetry into other languages, the
performance of events highlighting Catalan traditions (San Jordi Day in Tokyo, theatre
performances in Prague, etc.) and collaboration with institutions to promote Catalan culture,
for example with the government of Catalonia, the Ramon Llull Institute, the City of Barcelona
and the Pompeu Fabra University, among others.

Article 9 – Judicial authorities
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of
residents using the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified
below, according to the situation of each of these languages and on condition that the
use of the facilities afforded by the present paragraph is not considered by the judge to
hamper the proper administration of justice:

16

a) in criminal proceedings:
i) to provide that the courts, at the request of one of the parties, shall conduct the
proceedings in the regional or minority languages; and/or
ii) to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or minority language;
and/or
iii) to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not be
considered inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a regional or minority
language; and/or
iv) to produce, on request, documents connected with legal proceedings in the relevant
regional or minority language, if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations
involving no extra expense for the persons concerned;
b) in civil proceedings:
i) to provide that the courts, at the request of one of the parties, shall conduct the
proceedings in the regional or minority languages; and/or
ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she
may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional
expense; and/or
iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;
c) in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
i) to provide that the courts, at the request of one of the parties, shall conduct the
proceedings in the regional or minority languages; and/or
ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she
may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional
expense; and/or
iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
1. Amend the legal framework with a view to making it clear that the criminal,
civil and administrative judicial authorities in the autonomous communities
will conduct the proceedings in co-official languages at the request of one
party;
2. Take the necessary legal and practical measures to ensure that an adequate
proportion of the judicial staff posted in the autonomous communities
concerned by the application of Article 9 of the Charter have a working
knowledge of the relevant languages.

273. The Committee of Experts strongly urges the authorities:- to take the necessary
measures to increase the proportion of judicial staff in Catalonia at all levels and

17

particularly among judges and prosecutors, who are able to use Catalan as a working
language in courts.
In relation to the possible use of co-official languages by the judicial, criminal, civil and
administrative authorities, the following provisions set out in Article 231 of the Organic Act on
Judicial Power are applicable:
1.- In all judicial actions, the judges, magistrates, prosecutors, court secretaries and
other officers of the courts shall use Castilian, the official language of the State.
2.- Judges, magistrates, prosecutors, court secretaries and other officers of the courts
may also use the official language of the corresponding Autonomous Community,
if none of the parties objects on the grounds that due to their insufficient proficiency
in this language their legal rights would thereby be prejudiced.
3.- The parties, their representatives, those addressing them, witnesses and expert
witnesses may use the official language of the Autonomous Community in whose
territory the proceedings take place, in both oral and written statements.
4.- Judicial actions conducted and the documents presented in an Autonomous
Community shall, without need of translation into Castilian, have full force and
effect. As standard procedure, they will be translated when they are to have effect
outside the jurisdiction of the judicial bodies situated in the Autonomous
Community, except in the case of Autonomous Communities with the same coofficial language. They will also be translated when so required by law or at the
request of a party on the grounds of insufficient language proficiency, as above.
5.- At the oral proceedings, any person who knows the language used, on making the
requisite oath or promise to this effect, may be co-opted to act as an interpreter.
This article has been interpreted in a judgment handed down by the High Court of Justice of
Catalonia on 16 October 2003, subsequently confirmed by the Supreme Court ruling of 12
June 2007, to the effect that “in judicial proceedings the general rule is that Castilian should
be used, and the language specific to a Autonomous Community can only be used in the
territory of that Autonomous Community, under the conditions established by Article 231 of the
Organic Act on Judicial Power”.
Training for judges and magistrates is the responsibility of the General Council of the
Judiciary, which provides both initial and ongoing training programmes, including courses in
the co-official languages; this is done without prejudice to the judicial staff training activities
that may also be conducted by the Autonomous Communities in their own regions.
This training is taken into account in the assessments made when judicial posts must be filled.
In this respect, the Organic Act on Judicial Power states that knowledge of the language of an
Autonomous Community is positively valued for the purposes of appointing the President of
the High Court of Justice and the President of the Courts of the Autonomous Communities
that have their own co-official languages, and is considered a preferential merit in the
appointment of judges and magistrates to courts located in such Autonomous Communities.
Another relevant factor is that according to the rules on the judiciary, adopted by Resolution
2/2011 of the Plenary of the General Council of the Judiciary, additional years of seniority are
awarded to persons who demonstrate proficiency in a co-official language in procedures to
resolve personnel transfers to the geographic area in question.
Linguistic training for members of the State Prosecution Service and of the Court Secretaries
Service is currently provided by the Ministry of Justice. Training for other staff in the
administration of justice (administrative and trial management officials, administrative and trial
document clerks, judicial cooperation personnel, forensic physicians, etc.) is now provided by

18

the Autonomous Communities that have their own co-official language and which have
received the corresponding transfers of powers to obtain material resources, personnel and
funding for the correct functioning of the judicial system. This is the case of all the
Autonomous Communities that have their own co-official language, with the exception of the
Balearic Islands, which have yet to receive the necessary transfer of powers.
As concerns measures to ensure that a sufficient proportion of justice administration
personnel are proficient in the co-official languages to perform their functions in the
Autonomous Communities that have such languages, the Organic Act on Judicial Power
includes various provisions relating to access to these staff groups. Thus, the positions offered
in the Autonomous Communities that have received the transfer of powers with respect to
personnel management are of a territorial nature and successful applicants for these positions
must be assigned to the Autonomous Community in question. In general, this procedure
facilitates the award of job positions in Autonomous Communities with their own language to
applicants residing in the same geographic area. Moreover, in Autonomous Communities with
their own language, other than Castilian, the selection examination process includes a
specific, optional test by means of which proficiency in this language can be demonstrated.
Forms for the selection process, as well as general information on the website, are provided in
bilingual versions.
78. … The Committee of Experts asks the Spanish authorities to clarify, in the next
periodical report, Royal Decree 775/2011 of 3 June regarding access to the profession
of lawyer. The Decree obliges lawyers to sit an exam, but no reference is made to the
knowledge of co-official languages.
Royal Decree 775/2011, of 3 June, approving the regulation of Act 34/2006, of 30 October, on
access to the professions of lawyer and court solicitor, requires lawyers to pass an exam, but
makes no reference to knowledge of co-official languages. It should be noted that the
evaluation of access to the legal profession is a single process, identical throughout Spain.
This evaluation ascertains the proficiency, in practice, to exercise the profession of lawyer or
court solicitor, and analyses skills and knowledge of a legal nature, but not other instrumental
skills, such as the knowledge of co-official languages. In short, the training procedure is
intended to equip persons to practise the profession of lawyer or court solicitor, in a single,
homogeneous way, throughout the national territory. The training of lawyers and court
solicitors is the responsibility of their respective professional associations.
The information provided above with respect to Article 9, Paragraph 1, of the Charter, is
applicable to all the co-official languages of the Kingdom of Spain discussed in this Fourth
Report.

Actions by the Justice Department of the Government of Catalonia
1.1. General actions
In this respect, the actions of the Government of Catalonia are focused on its own areas of
responsibility, which are basically limited to executive powers on the organisation of justice, on
the promotion and development of Catalan and on safeguarding the language rights of
citizens. The Government does not have significant legislative powers concerning the status
of the language in this field. The actions taken in the period 2010-2012, which are described
below in greater detail, include the training of judicial staff (3,052 students) and of professional
groups working in the judicial field (1,226 students), the translation and review of judicial
documents and the automatic translation service that is made available to justice
administration officials and members of the legal professions, collaboration agreements
between the Catalonian Government and professional associations in the legal field, the
continuing support for the Justice Observatory (an organisation for analysis, reflection,
discussion, participation and action proposals on matters related to the justice administration

19

in Catalonia; this body incorporates a working group on questions of language and justice),
and advice and outreach facilities provided by a network of language experts in support of
legal officials and professionals. In addition, work has continued to ensure the provision of
consolidated basic legislation in Catalan, and to improve access to this legal information with
the incorporation of the legislative database into the legal portal of the Autonomous
Community of Catalonia.
1.2. Linguistic proficiency of judicial officials and Catalan-language training
The Catalonian Government remains active in the area of language training, in the exercise of
its powers, which are related to the Catalan language and to training judicial officials in this
respect.
During the period under discussion, an optional training programme in Catalan was offered to
all staff working in the field of the administration of justice. The following levels of language
were offered: A basic, A elementary, B intermediate and C fluent, together with Catalan legal
language (the first four correspond to A2, B1, B2 and C1 of the Common European
Framework of Reference).
The following table shows the data for justice officials who registered for these Catalanlanguage courses during the period referred to, and also for 2009.

2009
2010
2011
2012

A
basic
70
48
68
23

A
elementary
62
33
86
90

B

C

J

TOTAL

164
159
118
143

456
381
296
335

485
579
320
640

1,237
1,200
888
1,231

The total figure of 4,556 judges and officials enrolled for Catalan-language courses reflects
the considerable effort made by the Catalonian Government to achieve a sufficient level of
language proficiency among the personnel working in the administration of justice.
1.3. Language use within the administration of justice in Catalonia
There have been no significant changes in language use in this field, and thus the data
obtained from the survey and fieldwork conducted in October and November 2008, detailed in
the previous report, remain largely unaltered.
On the other hand, special mention should be made of the slow but progressive fall in the
proportions of rulings (12.7% in 2012) and of procedural documents (12.7% in 2012) issued in
Catalan in the geographic territory of Catalonia.
As in the previous period, the Department of Justice of the Catalonian Government has
deployed a technical and linguistic support team to assist the judicial offices. In 2012, this
team received a total of 3,730 requests for translation and for document editing assistance.
In addition, the Government has established an adaptation plan for judicial staff taking up a
position in Catalonia for the first time. When judges, prosecutors and court secretaries first
take up their posts, they are offered a briefing on the linguistic and legal resources available to
facilitate the acquisition of Catalan-language proficiency and are given a digital memory
device with this information. Once in the workplace, a linguistic expert arranges a meeting to
inform them individually of the best options for language learning and to offer help and advice
in the early stages of their work in Catalonia. Other judicial staff, as part of their initial training

20

before taking up their job, are given a training session on linguistic rights and legislation and
provided with access to the resources necessary to carry out their professional obligations.
In addition to these services, the staff intranet can be used by all judicial staff to access online
services that are useful in facilitating the understanding and use of the Catalan language,
such as legal and general dictionaries, handbooks of grammar and linguistic criteria, guides
for drafting legal and judicial texts, compendiums, terminology search engines and a mailbox
for language queries. Another aspect of particular importance is the automatic translator,
which has a lexical database incorporating various specialised works of judicial terminology.
By means of this application, the judge or other judicial official can send any document to be
translated, from his/her workplace, and then request its linguistic editing by the language
service or do so him/herself.
In 2013, the Catalonian Government, seeking to normalise the use of Catalan in the
administration of justice and as a measure to guarantee the right to use Catalan by the
judiciary, stipulated (by Government Resolution dated 7 May 2013) that “… in legal
proceedings in the ordinary courts in which the Government or the Administration of Catalonia
or public sector agencies is party, in the first procedural act in which it is possible to do so,
their representation and defence shall request of the competent jurisdictional body that the
proceedings be conducted in Catalan at all levels of the proceedings taking place in
Catalonia”. This measure is intended to foster a standard pattern of Catalan use in this field.
As regards the documents received by the courts, the data compiled by the court register
show that the majority of the documents that initiate court proceedings (from public
administrations, law enforcement agencies, the prosecution service or from private
individuals) are written in Catalan (58.75% in 2010, 62.84% in 2011 and 62.60% in 2012).
In fields involving greater intervention as parties by government or public-sector organisations
(municipalities, the Catalonian Government, universities, public bodies, local and regional
police forces, social services, etc.), such as the instruction phase, criminal proceedings or
cases involving minors, the percentage of documents in Catalan used to initiate the judicial
record is much higher than in jurisdictions where the initial documentation usually takes the
form of a summons or an action brought by a private individual (under civil, commercial or
social law). In the contentious-administrative courts, although there is a high degree of
involvement by public lawyers, most appeals are presented by individuals, and so Catalan is
less commonly used, although slightly more so than in the former cases. In short, the data
show that judicial interlocutors in the private sector make very much less use of Catalan in
their professional affairs than do those in the public sector, and that this fact is paralleled by
the scant use of Catalan in the corresponding proceedings before courts and tribunals.
1.4. Collaboration agreements with legal and judicial professional associations
In 2010-2012, to promote the use of Catalan in this area, the Catalonian Government reached
agreements with relevant professional associations, such as the Council of Bar Associations
of Catalonia, the Council of Colleges of Court Solicitors of Catalonia, the College of Notaries
of Catalonia and the Secretariat of Mercantile and Real Estate Property Registrars of
Catalonia. Among the activities covered by these agreements is the provision of Catalanlanguage training courses, public-speaking courses for lawyers and a linguistic quality plan for
lawyers.
Other noteworthy features for these legal and judicial bodies are the online access to
language support products and the free availability of an automatic translator.
1.5. The Catalonian Observatory of Justice

21

The Catalan Observatory of Justice was created by Catalonian Decree 197/2009 of 22
December. It provides a forum for analysis, reflection, discussion, participation and action
proposals on matters related to the administration of justice in Catalonia, and seeks to
promote communication and exchange among persons and institutions in this field. Its plenary
session is chaired by the President of the Catalonian Government, and its members include
the heads of public institutions and professional corporations in the legal and judicial fields. Its
activities began in October 2011. In 2012, the working group set up for this purpose issued the
report La llengua catalana a la justícia (The Catalan Language in Justice), on the basis of
which a Manual of Best Practices in the Legal and Judicial Sphere was published.
Beyond a doubt, the Observatory has made a positive impact in relation to the situation of the
Catalan language, by bringing together all the agents involved in the administration of justice
and providing a framework for the formulation and promotion of policies to enhance this
situation.
1.6. Safeguarding citizens’ linguistic rights in relation to the provisions of the Charter
The Catalonian Government has accorded special attention to proceedings related to
safeguarding citizens' rights derived from Article 9.1 of the Charter. As highlighted throughout
this section, all the actions and initiatives mentioned are aimed at creating a framework in
which citizens interacting with the justice system can make unobstructed use of Catalan and
be answered in the same language. It is also important to note the information provided to the
public through the website of the Justice Department, that provided to judicial personnel
through their intranet and the availability of a complaints-attention service in this field.

1.7. Catalan in official legal publications and in legislative texts
In this respect, please see the remarks regarding paragraph 3 of Article 9 of the Charter, since
this is directly related to the use of Catalan in the administration of justice in Catalonia.

Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake:
a) not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State
because they are drafted in a regional or minority language;

solely

With respect to the Commercial Register, Article 1 of Order 1698/2011 by the Minister of
Justice (JUS), of 13 June, approving the model for the presentation of consolidated financial
statements to the Commercial Register, authorised the Directorate-General of Registries and
Notaries of the Ministry of Justice to publish translations of the Castilian-language model of
annual accounts into the other languages of the Autonomous Communities, in harmony with
the Constitutional principle of co-officiality of Castilian and the languages of Autonomous
Communities within their respective territories.

b) not to deny the validity, as between the parties, of legal documents drawn up
within the country solely because they are drafted in a regional or minority
language, and to provide that they can be invoked against interested third parties
who are not users of these languages on condition that the contents of the
document are made known to them by the person(s) who invoke(s) it; or
c) not to deny the validity, as between the parties, of legal documents drawn up
within the country solely because they are drafted in a regional or minority
language;

22

Although the Catalonian Government has conducted its executive powers in the normal way,
under Article 147.1 of the Statute of Autonomy of Catalonia, with respect to the appointment of
notaries, through the announcement, administration and resolution of competitive procedures
to this end, it should be noted that on 29 July 2011, an agreement was signed between the
Catalonian Government and the Catalonian Association of Notaries (an agreement that
replaced the earlier one dated 23 December 2009) to promote measures to enable the
linguistic integration of notaries newly arrived in Catalonia and to provide training for those
already holding a post in Catalonia. This agreement sought to improve the linguistic
competence of notaries and that of staff working in notarial offices, and to enable the
compilation of data on the knowledge of Catalan and its use in documentation. In preparing
this agreement, informative sessions were held on the right to linguistic choice, the Lexcat
database and the online translator for notarial deeds, among other questions.
As regards the use of Catalan in notarial documents, the statistics for 2012, following the
pattern that began in 2006, reflect a fall in the absolute number of authorised documents
within notarial offices in Catalonia, both in Catalan and in Castilian, as a result of the
economic crisis affecting the country. In the past five years, the percentage of deeds written in
Catalan has remained at around 11%, compared to the 88% written in Castilian. This
decrease is also apparent in the policies analysed, in this case, affected also by the
restructuring of the banking sector.

Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or minority languages the most
important national statutory texts and those relating particularly to users of these
languages, unless they are otherwise provided.
As indicated in the previous report, under a cooperation agreement signed between the
Official State Gazette (BOE) and the Catalonian Government, since 1998 all statutory Acts
and some Regulations have been published in Catalan. Currently these texts are available
from 1979. The BOE pays the cost of publication and distribution, and refunds 50% of the
translation costs paid by Catalonia. In 2012, 290 supplements were published in Catalan,
together with 209 provisions, of which 53 were laws or rules of equivalent effect.
The Lexcat project was created in 2006 by the Catalonian Government to enable the online
publication, in Catalan, of the consolidated legislation currently in force. During the period
referred to in this report, three advances are of particular importance: the expansion of the
catalogue of available laws; the improved technical performance of the online publication of
statutory texts; and the publication in Catalan, in paper format, in 2010, of the Civil Procedure
Act and of the Criminal Procedure Act, and the distribution of these texts to judges and judicial
secretaries in the respective jurisdictional areas.

Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are
users of regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and
according to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is
reasonably possible:
a)
i) to ensure that the administrative authorities use the regional or minority
languages; or
ii) to ensure that such of their officers as are in contact with the public use the
regional or minority languages in their relations with persons applying to them in
these languages; or

23

iii) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or
written applications and receive a reply in these languages; or
iv) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or
written applications in these languages; or
v) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a
document in these languages;
b) to make available widely used administrative texts and forms for the population in the
regional or minority languages or in bilingual versions;
The information related to paragraph 1 of this Article in the Charter is provided in point II.B of the
present report by Spain.
Paragraph 2
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents
who are users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures
specified below, the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
a) the use of regional or minority languages within the framework of the regional or
local authority;
In the opinion of the Catalonian Government, during the reporting period there has been no
decrease in the use of Catalan in the administration of the Government or in that of the local
authorities of the territory of Catalonia.
In accordance with the linguistic rules and regulations in force, these local authorities and the
Catalonian Government maintain the same criteria of good linguistic practices and, therefore,
continue to use and promote the use of Catalan, using the majority language of the State when
its citizens so desire and when so required.
In this respect, too, Decree 127/2010, of 14 September, to regulate the Catalonian Network of
Information, Publication and Tourist Assistance Services, is intended to ensure satisfactory
attention is provided not only in Catalan and in the other official languages, but also in other
languages commonly encountered in the tourism sector.
During this period, few local governments have adopted regulations on the use of Catalan. The
majority of municipalities in the most populated areas already have such linguistic rules, as
required under the language laws in force since early 1983.
Paragraph 3
With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other persons
acting on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which regional or
minority languages are used, in accordance with the situation of each language and as far
as this is reasonably possible:

a) to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in the provision of the
service; or

Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
4. Ensure the presence of all regional or minority languages in State public
services.

24

Both the Catalan Language Policy Act of 1998 and other linguistic rules in force in Catalonia
set out specific requirements for financial and insurance companies (Article 15), for public
companies (Article 30), for those providing public services (Articles 30 and 31), for those
operating in collaboration with the public sector or which receive subsidies (Article 33), for
certain types of businesses or activities and for some companies that manufacture labelled
products.
Furthermore, Act 22/2010, of 20 July, on the Consumer Code of Catalonia, states that
consumers, in their relations as such, have the right, in accordance with the provisions of the
Statute of Autonomy and the applicable law on language issues, to be addressed orally and in
writing in the official language of their choice (Article 128-1, 1).

Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by
them, the Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
a) translation or interpretation as may be required;
The information related to paragraphs 1, 3 and 4 of this Article 10, as regards the Administration
of the State, is provided in point II.B of the present report by Spain.

Article 11 – Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the
territories in which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each
language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent,
have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence
and autonomy of the media:

a) To the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:
i) To ensure the creation of at least one radio station and one television channel in
the regional or minority languages;
Of all the media, language use is most equal in the radio, although Catalan is becoming
increasingly present in this medium, and the two most popular radio stations (the public station
Catalunya Radio and the private one, RAC1), broadcast entirely in Catalan. The audience data
are as follows:

Radio

Language
used
Catalan
Castilian

2009

2010

2011

2012

48.5%
62.7%

53.3%
60.2%

57.4%
60.9%

57.9%
59.9%

Television has much larger audiences, and in this medium Castilian is considerably more
prevalent, because there are many more channels. The TV audience data are as follows:

25

Television

Language
used
Catalan
Castilian

2009

2010

2011

2012

52.9%
85.0%

53.6%
85.7%

59.6%
86.8%

63.3%
86.9%

 The presence of Catalan in privately-owned radio and TV channels in Catalonia
In relation to privately-owned broadcasting in Catalonia, more than half of the frequencies used
by private radio stations broadcast 100% in Catalan, and in the rest the proportion of
programmes in Catalan is around 50%, according to the computational criteria established in the
regulations in this respect. The private television channels in Catalonia, in general, comply with
the percentage of broadcasts in Catalan that is legally required.
The most recent survey of private television (2011), based on a sample of 19 TV channels,
reported that 58% transmitted entirely in Catalan; 21% transmitted over 60% (64-73%) of their
programming in Catalan; and in the remaining 21%, the presence of Catalan as the main
programme language was below 50%. A striking fact is that in 95% of the channels analysed,
virtually all the self-produced programming is in Catalan.
e)
i)
to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least
one newspaper in the regional or minority languages;
Sales of newspapers in Catalan have increased considerably in the past three years, coinciding
with the emergence of the new daily Ara and the new edition in Catalan of the daily La
Vanguardia. The mainstream daily press in Catalan increased its circulation by 83% in two years
(2011-2012), and now represents about a third of all copies sold in Catalonia.
With respect to the digital press in Catalan, in 2013, three of the major titles gained readers,
compared to 2012, while others fell back slightly.
f)
ii) to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual
productions in the regional or minority languages;
The Catalonian Government awards annual grants to media published in Catalan or Aranese,
and to communication projects that aim to incorporate Catalan or Aranese into their programmes
or sections.
Between 2009 and 2012, these subsidies were provided in nine specific areas, divided by
medium (print, digital media, radio and television) and purpose. While structural subsidies are
designed to ensure the continuity of media supplied in Catalan or Aranese, project subsidies
contribute to the creation of new initiatives that benefit communication in Catalan. Between 2010
and 2012, the Government funded subsidies to a value of €35 million.

Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to
a regional or minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and
television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language. They further
undertake to ensure that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and
free circulation of information in the written press in a language used in identical or

26

similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of the above-mentioned
freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such
formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are
necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity
or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or
morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for preventing disclosure of
information received in confidence, or for maintaining the authority and impartiality of the
judiciary.
As observed in response to question 179, in February 2010 an addendum was attached to the
Agreement signed in January 2009 between the Government of the Balearic Islands and the
Catalonian Government to enable the mutual reception of television channels. This addendum
detailed the channels and programmes subject to such reciprocity.
In November 2012, the Government of the Balearic Islands terminated IBSAT, its satellite
channel, and so this programming ceased to be available in Catalonia.
On 25 June 2010, an agreement on transfrontier television was signed between the
Government of the Principality of Andorra, the Catalonian Government and the municipalities
of La Seu d'Urgell, Puigcerdà, Tremp, La Pobla de Segur, El Pont de Suert and Sort. This
agreement regulated the reception of Televisión de Cataluña in Andorra and enabled Andorra
Televisión to be viewed in the above-mentioned municipalities.
In October 2010, the Government of Aragon and that of Catalonia signed an agreement to
enable the public-sector television channels of each territory to be viewed in that of the other.

Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries,
cultural centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary
work and film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the
culture industries, including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties
undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used and to the extent that the
public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this field:
a) to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority
languages and foster the different means of access to works produced in these
language;
Catalonian Act 20/2010, of 7 July, on the cinema industry, is the regulatory framework governing
the film and audiovisual industry, concerning, among other aspects, the production, distribution,
marketing and exhibition of films and audiovisual works, the promotion, preservation and
dissemination of film heritage and the promotion of films in the original version and of those
dubbed or subtitled in Catalan.
The Catalan Institute of Cultural Companies (ICEC), which until 2011 was known as the Catalan
Institute of Cultural Industries (ICIC), continues its activity, mainly through the provision of grants
and subsidies for Catalan companies and other entities and agencies to promote the
dissemination and consumption of cultural works. Its main areas of activity, which include the
promotion of the Catalan language, are the audiovisual industry, the performing arts, music,
literature and the visual arts.

27

c) to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other
languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and
subtitling activities;
Previous reference was made in Spain’s Third Report (pages 377 and 378) to the difficulties
encountered in screening films that are dubbed or subtitled in Catalan.
In recent years, the initiative of showing a season of children's films in Catalan has become
consolidated, and audiences for it have increased.
d) to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural
activities of various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the
knowledge and use of regional or minority languages and cultures in the
undertakings which they initiate or for which they provide backing;
As stated above, the Catalonian Government, through its Department of Culture, publishes an
annual report on the grants awarded in which the use of Catalan is taken into consideration as
an assessment criterion. While this factor is not essential to the grant in question being
awarded, the policy is to support the incorporation of Catalan in sectors such as the
performing arts, audiovisual works and literature.
g) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for
collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the
regional or minority languages;
The Catalonian Government has approved Decree 116/2012, of 9 October, on the legal deposit
system (repealing the 1981 and 1982 regulations in this respect), to regulate the management of
the legal deposit system, in accordance with State Act 23/2011, of 29 July, on the legal deposit
system, and Act 4/1993, of 18 March, on the library system in Catalonia.
h) if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and terminological
research services, particularly with a view to maintaining and developing
appropriate administrative, commercial, economic, social, technical or legal
terminology in each regional or minority language.
In this respect, TERMCAT, the Centre for Catalan Terminology, continues the activities begun
some years ago.

Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy
abroad, for regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.

The Ramon Llull Institute is very active in this field, promoting the presence of Catalan language
and culture in international exhibitions and events (in cultural sectors such as literature, art,
cinema and music).

28

Article 13 – Economic and social life
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole
country:
a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without
justifiable reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating
to economic or social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical
documents such as instructions for the use of products or installations;
Catalonian legislation with respect to language issues remained unchanged during the period in
question, although during 2012 some new regulatory provisions were made which did impact
upon Catalan language rights, albeit indirectly (such as legislation concerning mediation in
private law, tourist accommodation and travel agencies).
b) to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of companies and private
documents of any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or minority
languages, at least between users of the same language;
Changes in language use in the workplace since 2007 have been characterised by the increased
use of all languages: Catalan, Castilian and, above all, other languages. By 2012, the proportion
of people who use Catalan at work had risen to 70.4% (an increase of over 10 percentage points
compared to 2007), while that of those using Castilian reached 78.6%. There was a notable
increase in the proportion of use of other languages in the workplace, to 13.9%.
c) to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority
languages in connection with economic or social activities;
Article 34 of the Statute of Autonomy recognises the right to language choice in establishments
open to the public, albeit subject to the adoption of subsequent legislation to this effect, which
has since been passed, namely Act 22/2010, of 20 July, on the Consumer Code of Catalonia.
The above-mentioned Article 34 of the Statute, on the linguistic rights of consumers and users,
states that “Everyone has the right to be addressed in speech and in writing in the official
language of their choice in their capacity as users or consumers of goods, products and services.
Organisations, businesses and establishments open to the public in Catalonia are subject to the
duty of enabling language choice in the terms established by law”. This provision was declared
constitutional under Constitutional Court ruling 31/2010, albeit interpreted in the terms set out in
the corresponding legal justification, namely that the duty of private organisations, businesses or
establishments open to the public to enable linguistic choice cannot mean the imposition on
these bodies, their owners or their personnel of any individual obligation to use either of the two
official languages in a general, immediate and direct form in their private relations, this being so
because the right to be addressed in either of these languages can only be enforced in relations
between government bodies and citizens.
The main change in this area is the adoption of the above-mentioned Act 22/2010, of 20 July, on
the Consumer Code of Catalonia, which stipulates the linguistic rights and obligations previously
regulated by Act 3/1993, of 5 March, on the Consumer Statute, and Act 1/1998, of 7 January, on
language policy. Act 22/2010 repealed Act 3/1993, and maintained and complemented the
regulation of Act 1/1998 with respect to socio-economic issues. Its provisions addressed, among
other areas, the language rights of consumers, the language requirements of documentation and
the details regarding product use that should be made available to consumers. However, certain

29

provisions of this Act have been challenged before the Constitutional Court, which has yet to
pass judgment.
Most of the provisions governing language rights in the socio-economic area are set out in the
website http://www.gencat.cat/llengua/legislacio.
Measures to promote the use of Catalan in economic and social activities in Catalonia, or
promoted by the Catalonian Government (in the understanding that Article 50 of the Statute of
Autonomy contains provisions relating to the promotion and dissemination of Catalan in these
areas) include measures such as awareness-raising campaigns and industry-specific actions
(subsidies, grants, awards, etc.), the PROFIT programme, on customer-service training (courses
in commercial sectors such as catering, hotels and retail trade), linguistic volunteering
(partnerships to practice Catalan), the Oberts to catalá (Open to Catalan) campaign for the retail
trade, services and tourism, information provided on the Catalonian Government’s websites, the
“Company helpline” (to advise companies and entrepreneurs) and language-related clauses
inserted in announcements offering subsidies and grants to support companies and
organisations.
Paragraph 2
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the
public authorities are competent, within the territory in which the regional or minority
languages are used, and as far as this is reasonably possible:
a) to include in their financial and banking regulations provisions which allow, by
means of procedures compatible with commercial practice, the use of regional or
minority languages in drawing up payment orders (cheques, drafts, etc.) or other
financial documents, or, where appropriate, to ensure the implementation of such
provisions;
Regarding the application of this recommendation, Article 15 of Act 1/1998, on language policy,
which was cited in the Third Report by Spain, remains in force in Catalonia.
c) to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and
hostels offer the possibility of receiving and treating in their own language persons
using a regional or minority language who are in need of care on grounds of illhealth, old age or for other reasons;

Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
5. Ensure the presence of all regional or minority languages in the provision of
health care services.
319. … Representatives of the speakers drew the attention of the Committee of Experts
to the fact that in some sectors, services in Catalan are still unavailable. The Committee
of Experts … encourages the authorities to comment on this in the next periodical
report.
The public and the public/private healthcare systems in Catalonia are subject to the same
linguistic rules as are all areas of public administration dependent on the Catalonian
Government.
In the area of private healthcare, the language rights and duties set out in the Statute of
Autonomy of 2006, in Act 1/1998, of 7 January, on language policy, and in Act 22/2010, of 20
July, on the Consumer Code of Catalonia, are applicable.

30

In addition to the above-mentioned regulations, many initiatives have been applied to promote
the use of Catalan in healthcare. For example, the Catalonian Government regularly
organises general Catalan-language courses for staff working in health centres, as well as
specific courses tailored to the needs of various professional groups and specialised courses
on health science terminology. More than 350 healthcare professionals have enrolled in these
Catalan-language courses.
Other actions in this respect include the Sant Jaume d'Olot Language Normalisation Plan, the
Melisa Programme (for language mediators in healthcare), the use of the TERMCAT database
for the dissemination of health terminology in Catalan, the digital publication in 2011 of a
health magazine in Catalan, the activities of the Consortium for Language Normalisation to
provide language training for healthcare workers, and the provision of advice and translations
of labels, signs and forms to reinforce the presence of Catalan in the public healthcare sector
in Catalonia.

d) to ensure by appropriate means that safety instructions are also drawn up in
regional or minority languages;
322. The Committee of Experts … ask the authorities to provide more information on
safety instruction in Catalan in the next periodical report.
The provisions in this respect contained in the Consumer Code of Catalonia (Act 22/2010),
according to which safety instructions, information and data should be stated in Catalan, have
been challenged before the Constitutional Court, which has yet to pass judgment. Given the
present disparity between national regulations (which prioritise the provision of information in
these respects in Castilian) and Catalan legislation, which has led to numerous legal disputes,
manufacturers currently choose, in general, to use Castilian in their labelling.
e) to arrange for information provided by the competent public authorities
concerning the rights of consumers to be made available in regional or minority
languages.
In 2011, the Catalonian Consumer Agency described the changes made in the new Consumer
Code of Catalonia, in briefings presented to leading business organisations.

Article 14 – Transfrontier exchanges
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake:
a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the
States in which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if
necessary to seek to conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster contacts
between the users of the same language in the States concerned in the fields of
culture, education, information, vocational training and permanent education;
325.

The Committee of Experts encourages the authorities to pursue bilateral
agreements with the countries in which the same or similar languages are
spoken.

There is a high level of communication, collaboration and information exchange between the
Catalonian Government and relevant agencies and institutions that make use of Catalan.

31

As regards Andorra, as well as the conventions signed concerning the media (as described
above), on 10 September 2010, the Government of Andorra signed a collaboration agreement
with Catalonian cinemas to screen more films in Catalan.
With respect to Northern Catalonia, in March 2010 the Euroinstitut Transfronterer Català (the
Transfrontier Catalan Euro-Institute), formed by the universities of Perpignan and Girona, initiated
its activities, and on 8 October 2010, the Girona office was inaugurated of the Perpignan
Mediterranean Area Community, an association that includes Perpignan and over 20 other
municipalities in the region. Although neither organisation seeks primarily to promote Catalan,
their existence certainly favours the dissemination of this language.
The Catalonian Government Office in Perpignan also contributes to the dissemination and
promotion of Catalan language and culture, sponsoring activities such as Catalan-language
courses and the organisation of tests to award certificates of Catalan proficiency. A total of 473
adults enrolled in these tests during the period 2010-2012.
In Alghero (Sardinia), municipal actions with respect to Catalan have continued since the
previous reporting period (for example, the course in Catalan language learning) and this has
been encouraged by the increased presence of Catalan-speaking tourists and by the
establishment of a Catalonian Government Office in the city (the Llull Centre) which, among other
aims, seeks to facilitate contacts between institutions in Alghero and elsewhere in Sardinia and
the Catalonian Government.
As a result of this contact with Catalonian institutions, on 31 March 2009 the Catalonian
Government and the city authorities of Alghero signed an agreement to promote the social use of
Catalan and the dissemination of Catalan culture in the city, over a period of ten years. Under this
agreement, the Llull Centre would support the dissemination and teaching of Catalan in its
Algherese modality, for different uses and levels, providing technical and logistical support, as
well as any advice required, to develop appropriate teaching resources, and to address other
aspects that will be detailed in a future joint action plan, to be reviewed annually.
Reference should also be made to the Vives University Network, which is constituted of 21
universities located in 4 European countries (Spain, France, Italy and Andorra), and which in their
respective areas share the Catalan language as a factor of cultural importance.
Finally, the various editions of the Congress of Language Services for Catalan-speaking
Territories (CONVIT) have highlighted the importance of the relationship between language and
the economy. In the second edition of this Congress, in 2011, it was observed that one of the
strategic lines of business activity is the incorporation of languages as part of their social
responsibility.

32

CATALAN IN THE BALEARIC ISLANDS
1. INTRODUCTION
Data on the number of speakers
56. … The Committee of Experts encouraged the Spanish authorities to carry out
surveys in cooperation with the speakers of regional or minority languages in order to
have accurate updated data concerning the number of users of regional or minority
languages and their geographic distribution.
In 2010, a questionnaire was commissioned on linguistic use to assess the current situation of
the Catalan language in the Balearic Islands and to compare the data with those of previous
surveys. The main issues assessed in the linguistic module are:
 Knowledge of the four skills (listening comprehension, oral expression, reading
comprehension and written expression).
 Use of the Catalan language in different social contexts (habitual use, language change
and inter-generational transmission).
 Opinions on language questions.
The aim of the questionnaire was to obtain information about citizens’ knowledge of, use
made and attitudes toward the Catalan language at a time when recent major demographic
changes suggest significant changes in these respects will take place. Full details of the data
can be found through the following link: <http://www.caib.es/govern/archivo.do?id=792554>
The statistical data resulting from the replies to the 2010 questionnaire on the Catalan
language skills of the population of the Balearic Islands are as follows:
Balearic Islands
Percentage
Total population

Understand it
85%
888,840

Speak it
63.41%

Read it
70.82%

Write it
47.90%

Understand it
85.47%
708,502

Speak it
63.37%

Read it
71.48%

Write it
47.78%

Understand it
88.99%
70,591

Speak it
68.50%

Read it
72.69%

Write it
53.18%

Understand it
78.51%
102,076

Speak it
59.45%

Read it
65.03%

Write it
45.20%

Mallorca
Percentage
Total population
Menorca
Percentage
Total population
Ibiza
Percentage
Total population

33

Formentera
Percentage
Total population

Understand it
90.85%
7,671

Speak it
73.03%

Read it
68.79%

Write it
46.72%

Legislative and organisational changes
In the period covered by the report, various changes of an organisational nature have taken
place within the Autonomous Community, to rationalise the number of agencies and bodies
involved and to reduce their number. Thus, in April 2012 the Institute of Balearic Studies was
renamed the Consortium-Institute of Balearic Studies, and it was assigned functions
concerning non-formal instruction in Catalan, the certification of adult proficiency tests in
Catalan, language assessment in secondary and high school education, exemption from such
assessment, certificates of equivalency in Catalan, the study of varieties of Catalan in the
Balearic Islands, linguistic counselling in IB3 (the regional broadcasting corporation) and the
promotion and defence of linguistic rights, among others.
Another, related, issue is the adoption of Decree 16/2011, of 25 February, on the evaluation
and certification of knowledge of Catalan, which amended the certification system officially
accrediting knowledge of Catalan among the adult population, including people resident
beyond its linguistic boundaries. The certificates awarded correspond to the Common
European Framework of Reference for Languages (CEFR) established by the Council of
Europe.
Other new provisions, for example, the Balearic Islands Audiovisual Act 5/2013, of 1 October,
are addressed in the relevant point of this response to the report.
Numerous other provisions (Orders and Decrees) concerning degrees, diplomas and
certificates of proficiency in Catalan have also been adopted in this period.

40. The Committee of Experts invites the authorities to take measures so that the
introduction of the compulsory trilingual model does not disproportionately affect the
education in co-official languages, including their promotion and support structure.
Decree 15/2013, of 19 April, regulates the approach taken to languages in non-university
education in the Balearic Islands. The aim of this Decree is that by the conclusion of
compulsory education, students should possess the language and communication skills
required in both official languages (Catalan and Castilian) and in one foreign language
(preferably English).
All non-language subjects or modules (in the case of vocational education) may be taught in
either of the two official languages or in the foreign language. In fact, all three languages
should be taught and studied in the corresponding language areas and constitute,
simultaneously, the means by which non-linguistic subjects are taught, and this teaching
should be divided in a balanced way among the three languages.
Implementation of this project began in 2013-2014, at least in the first year of the second cycle
of pre-school education (children aged 3 years), in the first, third and fifth years of primary
education and in the first year of compulsory secondary education (ESO). In high school and
vocational education, it will be introduced progressively depending on the resources available
to each school or college.
The Regional Ministry of Education, Culture and Universities has trained a total of 3,875
teachers to implement this project. These teachers have been prepared to obtain certification

34

from the Official School of Languages. Moreover, courses have been given to teachers who,
although they already had the qualifications required to teach a subject in English, needed to
improve their speaking proficiency.
Among the measures adopted by the Regional Ministry of Education, Culture and Universities
to monitor the introduction of the compulsory trilingual model so that the introduction of the
compulsory trilingual model does not disproportionately affect education in the co-official
languages, including their promotion and support structure, are the following:
 Legislation has been adopted to ensure a comprehensive approach is taken to language
teaching.
 Counselling will be provided on teaching the native language of the Balearic Islands, as
part of the Integrated Language Project.
 Counselling will be provided on actions to be taken in language teaching at schools and
colleges, suggesting organisational strategies and offering teaching guidelines for the
language to be used in primary education.
 Seminars and specific training courses will be organised on the use of language in
education.
 Educational materials for language teaching will be promoted and coordinated.

2. APPLICATION OF THE CHARTER
Article 7 – Objectives and principles
Paragraph 1
In respect of regional or minority languages, within the territories in which such
languages are used and according to the situation of each language, the Parties shall
base their policies, legislation and practice on the following objectives and principles:
c) the need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in order
to safeguard them;
132. The Committee of Experts asks the authorities to provide information, in the next
periodical report, on the implementation of the General Language Normalisation Plan
for the Balearic Islands.
Under this Language Normalisation Plan, the Regional Ministry of Education, Culture and
Universities has updated the rules for qualifications to teach Catalan and to teach in Catalan
in the Balearic Islands in public non-university education. In this respect, the rules for the
Linguistic and Cultural Education Plan have also been updated. The corresponding
Parliamentary Order is being prepared and will be issued once it is approved. Rules for
academic standards and curriculums, teacher training, planning, etc., in language teaching,
have also been prepared.
e) The maintenance and development of links, in the fields covered by this
Charter, between groups using a regional or minority language and other groups
in the State employing a language used in identical or similar form, as well as the
establishment of cultural relations with other groups in the State using different
languages;
179. The Committee of Experts regretted the lack of appropriate cooperation between
communities sharing identical or similar languages, such as Valencia with Catalonia
and the Balearic Islands. It therefore encouraged the authorities to promote mutual
cooperation and understanding for the benefit of the languages.

35

Regarding cooperation between Autonomous Communities that share identical or similar
languages, to promote cooperation and mutual understanding for the benefit of these
languages:
 We are continuing to work with the Education Ministry of the Catalonian Government, in
matters relating to the adaptation and publication of teaching materials, taking into account
the cooperation agreement signed between the two institutions.
 Educational and teaching exchanges are taking place with the Catalan Teaching Services
for Catalan-speaking communities, and with the corresponding Directorate-General with
responsibilities for language policy:
a) The programme Gust per la lectura (Enjoyment of reading) is being continued, in
collaboration with the Education Ministry of the Catalonian Government.
b) Exchanges have begun among students following the Gust per la lectura programme.
c) A programme of participation by teaching centres in a shared activity (the ARCE
programme) is sponsored by the Ministry of Education (the programme is “Learning
literature through ICT”, and the participating centre, the Pau Casesnoves Secondary
School).
d) Exchanges of students and teachers with their counterparts from other Catalanspeaking institutions are being encouraged.
 Active collaboration continues in the field of terminology, where regular contacts have been
established, as detailed in the comments on Article 12, paragraph 1, letter h.
 There has been close cooperation (in intensive training sessions) between the DirectorateGeneral for Culture and Youth and the official language schools in Catalonia, which have
advised the department responsible for convening tests in Catalan regarding the training
of examiners for tests that have been adapted to the CEFR.

Part III
Article 8 – Education
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such
languages are used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without
prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State, to:
a)
i) to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
b)
i) to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
c)
i) to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages

633. The Committee of Experts urges the authorities to make available Catalan-medium
primary and secondary education in the Balearic Islands.
d)
i) to make available technical and vocational education in the relevant regional
or minority languages

36

636. The Committee of Experts encourages the authorities to make available technical
and vocational education in Catalan.

The co-official status of Castilian and Catalan in the Balearic Islands is guaranteed by the
provisions in this respect of the corresponding Statute of Autonomy (Articles 4, 35 and 36.2),
and by Act 3/196 of 29 April on linguistic normalisation (Articles 18, 20 and 22.3). This
legislation has been referred to in previous reports by Spain. This co-official status of the two
languages in education has been underlined by the jurisprudence of the Spanish
Constitutional Court and of the Spanish Supreme Court, which have repeatedly ruled that in
Autonomous Communities which have co-official languages, the two should be treated as
vehicular languages in all stages of education.
Moreover, measures taken to provide and guarantee pre-school, primary and secondary
education in Catalan, include, among many others, learning support and counselling for
schools, teachers and the education community; promotion and coordination to develop
teaching materials, rules and academic management; the coordination of programmes to
promote the use of Catalan in schools; publications in this respect; language integration
workshops for young newcomers; and learning-stimulus activities.

e)
i) to make available university and other higher education in regional or
minority languages; or
ii) to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and
higher education subjects; or
iii) if, by reason of the role of the State in relation to higher education
institutions, sub-paragraphs i and ii cannot be applied, to encourage and/or
allow the provision of university or other forms of higher education in regional
or minority languages or of facilities for the study of these languages as
university or higher education subjects;
639. … The Committee of Experts again urges the authorities to provide information on
the proportion of subjects taught in Catalan at University level in the next periodical
report.
Previous reports by Spain have referred to the use of Catalan in the University of the Balearic
Islands (UIB). The Survey of Language Use (2011-2012), a biennial publication, prepared by the
UIB Language Service, presents the use of Catalan, by departments and by degree of use.
The study is based on students’ answers to questions regarding the language most often used
by their teachers, the language in which class materials are mainly presented, and the language
in which exam questions are presented.
This study has been published by the Balearic Islands Autonomous Community and can be
freely consulted. It is a large publication, providing data on the number of students consulted,
the percentage of use of languages in each university department and the percentage of use of
Catalan in university entrance exams. Among other findings, it reports that subjects are taught in
Catalan in 44.5% of the departments, in Castilian in 40.7%, and in both Catalan and Castilian or
in other languages in the remaining departments.

i) to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the
measures taken and progress achieved in establishing or developing the
teaching of regional or minority languages and for drawing up periodic reports
of their findings, which will be made public.

37

649. The Committee of Experts asks the authorities to provide information on the
developments with regard to monitoring of teaching in regional or minority languages in
the next periodical report.
A provision is currently being drafted to regulate the operation of the Technical Advisory
Committee for Teaching in Catalan (currently inactive). Its duties will mainly involve preparing
and issuing reports on the teaching of Catalan in education, studying applications for
exemption from assessment of proficiency in Catalan, studying applications for the approval of
study plans in Catalan, reporting on the award of certificates in this field and proposing to the
corresponding regional ministry measures to improve the teaching of Catalan.
Article 9 – Justice
658. The Committee of Experts urges the Spanish authorities to take the following
measures with a view to complying with Article 9:
-

take the necessary measures to increase the proportion of judicial staff in the
Balearic Islands, at all levels and particularly among judges and prosecutors,
able to use Catalan as a working language in courts;

-

develop adequate training schemes for the judicial staff as well as for lawyers.

Recommendations of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
1. Amend the legal framework with a view to making it clear that the
criminal, civil and administrative judicial authorities in the autonomous
communities will conduct the proceedings in co-official languages at the
request of one party.
2. Take the necessary legal and practical measures to ensure that an
adequate proportion of the judicial staff posted in the autonomous
communities concerned by the application of Article 9 of the Charter
have a working knowledge of the relevant languages.

Please see the general, non-specific information for the Autonomous Community, provided for
Article 9 of the Charter, and Recommendations 1 and 2 of the Committee of Ministers, in the
section of this report on Catalan in Catalonia.
Actions in the Autonomous Community
Article 10 of the Balearic Islands Language Normalisation Act states: “1. In the territory of the
Autonomous Community of the Balearic Islands, all citizens have the right to address the
Justice Administration in the official language of their choice, and no kind of translation shall
be required of them. Moreover, this choice must not result in any delay in the processing of
their claims”. Moreover, “2. Regarding the language used, all actions, documents and forms,
published or drafted in Catalan, are fully valid and effective before the courts and judges of the
Balearic Islands”. In addition, “In all cases, the parties are entitled to be informed in the
language of their choice”.
Furthermore, although the Autonomous Community of the Balearic Islands does not have the
legislative power to provide resources for the Justice Administration, the corresponding

38

personnel have access to the courses organised by the Balearic Islands School of Public
Administration (EBAP) to obtain official certification in Catalan language proficiency.
In 2011, 64 Catalan language courses were organised, exclusively for personnel of the
Balearic Islands Justice Administration, with a total of 227 students enrolled. In 2012, 99
students enrolled in 24 courses and in 2013, 34 students enrolled. These courses range from
elementary level to advanced, although specific courses in administrative language are also
offered. Online study is also possible.
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are
users of regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and
according to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is
reasonably possible:
a)
i) to ensure that the administrative authorities use the regional or minority
languages; or
ii) to ensure that such of their officers as are in contact with the public use the
regional or minority languages in their relations with persons applying to them in
these languages; or
iii) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or
written applications and receive a reply in these languages; or
iv) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or
written applications in these languages; or
v) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a
document in these languages.
b) to make available widely used administrative texts and forms for the population in
the regional or minority languages or in bilingual versions;
Information relating to Paragraph 1 of this Article of the Charter is set out in point II.B) of this
report by Spain.
Paragraph 3
With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other
persons acting on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which
regional or minority languages are used, in accordance with the situation of each
language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
a) to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in the provision of
the service; or

Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
4. Ensure the presence of all regional or minority languages in State public services

691. The Committee of Experts again invites the authorities to inform in the next
periodical report on the use of Catalan in public services.

39

The Language Normalisation Act was amended by Act 9/2012 of 19 July (BOIB. No. 106 of 21
July 2012), in which Title II provides with respect to the official use of Catalan:
Article 8
1. Citizens have the right to use Catalan, in oral or written form, in their relations with the
public administration in the Balearic Islands.
2. In the Balearic Islands, administrative actions are valid and fully effective whatever the
official language used.
Article 9
1. Public documents issued in the Balearic Islands must be written in the official language
chosen by the author, or, if there is more than one author, in the language they agree on.
In there is any dispute, the documents must be written in both languages. Copies will be
issued in the language used in the original.
2. Public authorities acting in the Autonomous Community must ensure that all printed
documents and official forms used in the public administration, and available to the public,
are written in Catalan and Castilian.
Article 11
1. With respect to the inclusion of documents in the public records of the Autonomous
Community, entries must be in the official language in which the document was declared,
assigned or drafted, or in which the statement was made. If the document is bilingual, this
must be recorded in the official language used by the person who presents it to the
registry. In any case, entries must be made in the language requested by the person or
persons (by common consent) concerned.
2. With respect to the issue of certifications, the officials responsible for these records must
ensure their translation into any of the official languages of the Autonomous Region, at the
request of the person requesting the document.
Regarding the Mallorca Island Council, the regulations currently in
and Castilian must be used by the Council’s administrative bodies.
the use of Catalan specify that Catalan may be used in all areas
oral, administrative, institutional relations, relations with citizens,
records, etc.).

force provide that Catalan
The regulations governing
of the institution (general,
notices and publications,

Regarding the Menorca Island Council, both in its internal regulations and in those concerning
the use of official languages, the provisions are similar to those of the Mallorca Island Council,
and fully guarantee the language rights of citizens.

Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by
them, the Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
a) translation or interpretation as may be required;

693. The Committee of Experts invites the authorities to comment on the
implementation of this undertaking with regard to public services in the next periodical
report.
The provisions of the above-mentioned Balearic Islands Language Normalisation Act, as
amended in 2012, enable and require the fulfilment of this undertaking.
b) recruitment and, where necessary, training of the officials and other public
service employees required;

40

697. The Committee of Experts invites the authorities to comment on the recruitment or
training policy of public services in the next periodical report.
Today, the vast majority of staff working for the public administration of the Autonomous
Community of the Balearic Islands possess a certificate of proficiency in Catalan to ensure
that citizens’ linguistic rights can be met.
In addition, the implementation of Decree 92/1997, of 4 July, which regulates the teaching of
and in Catalan in the Balearic Islands, in non-university schools and colleges, and that of
Decree 16/2011, of 25 February, on the evaluation and certification of proficiency in Catalan,
means that the education system in the Balearic Islands ensures the existence of a large
number of potential applicants to civil service employment who can assure compliance with
the citizens’ right of free choice of official language. Therefore, it is no longer necessary to
require of these employees the possession of a certain level of proficiency in Catalan.
In this respect, Act 9/2012, of 19 July, amending Act 3/2007, of 27 March, on the Civil Service
in the Autonomous Community of the Balearic Islands, eliminates the general requirement of a
given level of proficiency in Catalan as a requirement to enter employment in the
Administration or to take any job, with certain exceptions, for example, posts in public
teaching, language consulting, information and customer service and call centres.
Finally, an important role is played by the Balearic School of Public Administration (EBAP),
under its statutes approved by Decree 31 /2012, of 13 April, in providing training activities and
personnel selection for public administrations in the Balearic Islands. EBAP trains officials of
the General Administration of the Autonomous Community, of local governments and of
personnel of the General State Administration posted to the Balearic Islands. In 2012 and
2013, EBAP published teaching materials for use in the courses it organises annually. In
2011, 67 courses were given to 1,875 students; in 2012, there were 53 courses for 1,490
students, and in 2013, 32 courses for 880 students. Some of these courses are offered online.
Information responding to paragraphs 1, 3 and 4 of this Article 10, referring to the General
State Administration, is provided in section II.B) of this report on Spain.
Article 11 – Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the
territories in which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each
language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent,
have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence
and autonomy of the media:
a) to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:
i) to ensure the creation of at least one radio station and one television
channel in the regional or minority languages; or
706. … The Committee of Experts encourages the authorities to ensure the existence of
at least one television station broadcasting in Catalan in the Balearic Islands.
IB3 Television, the regional broadcaster for the Balearic Islands, broadcasts content in
Catalan (in the Balearic Island variety), Castilian and English 24 hours a day. Specifically,
52.60% of the content is in Catalan, 17.80% in Castilian and 1.28% in English. The remaining
content is constituted of musical videos, self-promotion and advertising (which is also wholly

41

or partly in Catalan). All IB3’s own audiovisual productions last year were produced in
Catalan.
IB3 Radio uses the Balearic form of Catalan in all its output (news, entertainment, sports,
etc.).
The Formentera Island Council uses Catalan in its Radio Illa and ensures that the
programmes it creates are in Catalan. This use by local radio, which is taken as a yardstick by
many, enhances both the dissemination and the learning of the language.
iii) to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer programmes in the
regional or minority languages;
The Balearic Islands Audiovisual Act 5/2013, of 1 October, was adopted in the context of
existing legislation with respect to audiovisual questions in the Balearic Islands and
complements this legal system. This law presents some points that specifically address
language issues in this area, granting users the right to receive audiovisual communication
including programming that reflects the cultural and linguistic diversity of the Balearic Islands;
it requires broadcasters to promote awareness of the two official languages of the Balearic
Islands and their dissemination, and establishes as fundamental lines of institutional action the
strategic nature of the audiovisual sector as an instrument for the promotion and
dissemination of the region’s culture and language and the need to ensure appropriate
treatment of its two co-official languages (Articles 6, 25 and 36).
b)
i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one radio station in the
regional or minority languages; or
c)
i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one television channel in
the regional or minority languages; or
710. … The Committee of Experts urges the authorities to encourage and/or facilitate
the creation of at least one radio station in Catalan in the Balearic Islands.
As indicated above, IB3 Radio uses Balearic Catalan for its entire production (news,
entertainment, sports broadcasts, etc.).
As also noted above, the Formentera Island Council uses Catalan in Radio Illa, a fact that
enhances dissemination of the language and, at the same time, contributes to the learning of
Catalan, by virtue of this radio station’s yardstick, local status.
d) to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and
audiovisual works in the regional or minority languages;

715. The Committee of Experts invites the authorities to comment on the audiovisual
productions in Catalan produced on the Balearic Islands in the next periodical report.
Audiovisual productions in Catalan produced by IB3 in the last year include the following inhouse productions: Uep com anam, a programme on farmers and country life; Això és mel,
which describes the islands, their people, food and scenery; Tira Tira, with proposals for
excursions, walks, hiking, and mountaineering, by land, sea and air; and the fiction series
Migjorn and Mossèn capellà.
e)
i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one
newspaper in the regional or minority languages; or

42

719. The Committee of Experts … encourages the Spanish authorities to maintain their
support for newspapers in Catalan.
Mallorca Island Council favours the promotion of Catalan in the press, providing grants to
various organisations in this respect, such as the Public Institution Antoni Maria Alcover and
Premsa Forana de Mallorca.
Moreover, since 2010 Menorca Island Council has provided financial aid to promote the use of
Catalan in the local press and continues to edit a cultural magazine, Àmbit, that is published
entirely in Catalan. Since the last quarter of 2011 this magazine has been published in digital
format, through the website of the Menorca Island Council.
f)
ii) to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual
productions in the regional or minority languages;
723. The Committee of Experts … encourages the Spanish authorities to provide
concrete examples of audiovisual productions financed by the funds, or other existing
measures for financial assistance to audiovisual productions, in the next periodical
report.
In this respect, please see the above response to Question 715.
g) to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using regional or
minority languages.
726. … The Committee of Experts asks the authorities to provide information on the
training of media staff in Catalan in the next periodical report.
Since 2012, the Balearic Studies Institute has provided language consulting services to the
Balearic Islands Public Broadcasting Corporation.
In 2005, the Mallorca Island Council, in conjunction with the University of the Balearic Islands,
published the Llibre d’estil per als mitjans de comunicació orals i escrits [Style book for oral
and written communication], which was reprinted in 2010, to facilitate the work of audiovisual
media personnel.
Furthermore, in 2011, 2012 and 2013 the Mallorca Island Council organised specific training
courses in Catalan for media personnel, on subjects such as phonetics, elocution, journalistic
writing, vocal technique and improving diction and phonics.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries,
cultural centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as
literary work and film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and
the culture industries, including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties
undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used and to the extent that
the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this field:

43

f) to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given
regional or minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;
735. The Committee of Experts asks the authorities to provide more specific information
about these cultural activities and the direct participation by Catalan speakers.
During this period, the programmes established in previous years have been maintained,
including book clubs, storytelling in the Palma library and the culture project Viu la culturea
(Live culture). Catalan is used exclusively in these programmes.
Also in 2013, numerous activities related to Catalan culture were held, such as the
commemoration of the centenary of the birth of the poet María Villangomez, a great writer and
poet in Ibizan-Catalan literature, and the commemoration of the third centenary of the birth of
Friar Junípero Serra.
The Mallorca Island Council has published various literary works, all in Catalan, related to the
culture of Mallorca. During 2012-2013, these included the books A Robines també plou o La
rebellió dels titelles, by Llorenç Moyà and La vida en rosa, by Bernat Vidal i Tomas, in the
“L’In6” narrative collection, together with Ofrena de sonets. Flama, by Miquel Dolç, Poesía
completa, by Miquel Gayà Sitjar and Totes les aus del món. Versions de poesia
galaiocoportuguesa, by Josep Maria Llompart, in the “Mixtàlia” poetry collection.
In addition, the Mallorca Island Council publishes in Catalan and in other languages all the
catalogues for cultural activities in Mallorca, under the collective title Cultura en xarxa (Culture
online), and provides various lines of support for activities promoting Catalan language and
culture. It also manages a network of 70 libraries that function in Catalan and publish in
Catalan material from their archives and museums. These activities are promoted on their
websites in Catalan.
The Menorca Island Council, too, has scheduled numerous activities in recent years to
promote Catalan language and culture. In 2011, it created the web for popular culture,
organized a Conference on Popular Culture and commemorated the 50th anniversary of the
completion of the Diccionari català-valencià-balear. In 2012, support continued to be provided
for text and music publishing in Catalan, together with aid for contemporary music concerts
and music festivals in Catalan.
Similarly, the Ibiza Island Council is continuing to support numerous activities in this area, for
example by encouraging the use of Catalan among young people, through prizes for fiction
and poetry, and through the signing of an agreement in 2011 with the Regional Ministry of
Education to carry out activities aimed at the normalisation and dissemination of Catalan in
various aspects of society in Ibiza. Furthermore, in 2010 and 2012 support was given for text
publishing in Catalan in Ibiza.
h) if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and
terminological research services, particularly with a view to maintaining and
developing appropriate administrative, commercial, economic, social, technical or
legal terminology in each regional or minority language.
740. … The Committee of Experts asks the authorities to clarify whether there is
adequate cooperation with Catalonia with regard to compliance with this undertaking.
The Terminology Office of the University of the Balearic Islands continues to devote efforts to
the essential task of terminological research and to resolving terminology queries.
Cooperation activities with Catalonia by the Terminology Office of the University of the
Balearic Islands in recent years include the following:

44

In 2010, the NEOXOC project was initiated with the Pompeu Fabra University to undertake
research and development concerning a network of neology observatories of geolectal
varieties of Catalan. In the same year, a meeting was held at the Polytechnic University of
Catalonia at which terminology projects conducted at the Xarxa Vives (Vives Network)
universities were presented.
In 2011, a cooperation agreement was concluded with the TERMCAT Terminology Centre, for
the computer processing of terminological data. In the same year a collaborative process was
initiated by the Working Group on Terminology and Nomenclature, within the Vives Network of
Universities, to exchange information on terminology projects developed by these universities.
In 2012, in collaboration with the Institute of Catalan Studies, a conference was held on
science and terminology (“New Challenges in the European Framework for Higher Education.
Dissemination of Scientific and Technical Terminology”).
Article 13 – Economic and social life
Paragraph 2
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the
public authorities are competent, within the territory in which the regional or minority
languages are used, and as far as this is reasonably possible:
b) in the economic and social sectors directly under their control (public sector),
to organise activities to promote the use of regional or minority languages;
c) to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and
hostels offer the possibility of receiving and treating in their own language
persons using a regional or minority language who are in need of care on
grounds of ill-health, old age or for other reasons;

Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
5. Ensure the presence of all regional or minority languages in the provision of
health care services.

753. The Committee of Experts invites the authorities to comment on the developments
with regard to this undertaking in the next periodical report.

The Regional Ministry of Health and the Regional Ministry for Family and Social Welfare have
a permanent, exclusive language consulting service with specialised technical staff.
Campaigns, handbooks and publications are written in Catalan.
Medical personnel have access to Catalan-language courses provided by the Balearic School
of Public Administration (EBAP). 732 people enrolled for these courses in 2012, and 360 in
2013.
The personnel of the Mallorca Island Council have the necessary language proficiency to
respond in Catalan, including those employed in nursing homes and hostels that are managed
directly by the Council (Bonanova Home for the Elderly, Huialfàs de sa Pobla Home and
Felanitx Assisted Living Home). In the Home for the Elderly, the residents are addressed in
Catalan. The Son Espases University Hospital in Palma de Mallorca has its own language

45

service, and its signposting, documentation, forms, cards and stamps are all in Catalan,
although external documentation to users is usually bilingual.
The Formentera Island Council has a linguistic advisory service, which signed an agreement
in 2012 with the Formentera Hospital for staff training in Catalan. This agreement was
expanded in 2012-2013 to provide a new course in Catalan for beginners, for 20 persons.

d) to ensure by appropriate means that safety instructions are also drawn up in
regional or minority languages;
756.
… The Committee of Experts strongly urges the Spanish authorities to further
elaborate on this undertaking in their forthcoming report, regarding in particular, safety
instruction (food, in construction sites and in lifts, fire instructions, etc.).
In addition to applicable State regulations in this respect, the Safety Service of the
Government of the Balearic Islands issues versions in Catalan of all documentation addressed
to users, and also regarding emergency plans and information for workers about buildingevacuation procedures.
As regards food security, the Food Safety and Nutrition Service portal allows users to choose
the language in which they wish to receive information. Bilingual handbooks in this respect are
available.

e) to arrange for information provided by the competent public authorities
concerning the rights of consumers to be made available in regional or minority
languages.
759. … The Committee of Experts strongly urges the Spanish authorities to come back
to the issue of the availability of information on general consumers’ rights in Catalan in
their next periodical report.
Under the Consumers and Users Charter of the Autonomous Community of the Balearic
Islands (Balearic Islands Act 1/1998), information provided to consumers must be written in at
least one of the two official languages. Moreover, the labelling of healthcare or safety products
must include information at least in the official language of the State. In addition, the
government of the Balearic Islands must promote the use of Catalan in product labelling and
in service information.
Finally, with regard to education and training activities for consumers and users, in 2010 and
2012 publications were issued for the dissemination of specialised vocabularies and other
materials to facilitate the use of Catalan in contracts and, in general, in business and
professional activities. Furthermore, a well-known artist has been contracted to design
cartoons to encourage responsible forms of consumption.

46

GALICIAN IN GALICIA
1.

INTRODUCTION

Data on the number of speakers
56… The Committee of Experts encouraged the Spanish authorities to carry out
surveys in cooperation with the speakers of regional or minority languages in order to
have accurate updated data concerning the number of users of regional or minority
languages and their geographic distribution.
According to data provided by the Galician Institute of Statistics in its “Survey of living
conditions of families. Leisure and cultural habits, 2008”, which addressed a study population
aged 5 years and over and resident in the Autonomous Community of Galicia, of the almost
2,800,000 inhabitants of Galicia, 1,500,000 are habitual speakers of Galician, and another
500,000 use it as a second language. The habitual use of languages other than Galician and
Castilian is limited to an extremely small minority of the population, estimated at little over 1%.
Moreover, around 50,000 people habitually speak Galician in Galician-speaking areas in the
neighbouring autonomous communities of Asturias and of Castilla y León. In addition,
important centres of Galician speakers are to be found in the migrant population of Galicia in
other Autonomous Communities and Spanish cities (Madrid, Barcelona, the Basque Country
and the Canary Islands), in Europe (Portugal, France, Switzerland, Germany, UK and
Netherlands) and the Americas (Argentina, Chile, Uruguay, Brazil, Venezuela, Cuba, Mexico
and the United States).
In regard to knowledge of Galician in Galicia, the levels of proficiency are shown below,
distinguishing between oral comprehension (Understand), oral proficiency (Speak), reading
proficiency (Read) and written proficiency (Write).

47

Proficiency in Galician (%)

70.00%
66.02%

60.00%
54.13%

50.00%

40.00%
35.02%

30.00%

28.77%

20.00%

10.00%
5.21%

0.00%
Understand

Speak

48

The General Secretariat for Language Policy (SXPL), within the Galician Ministry of Culture,
Education and University Planning, is responsible for the promotion and teaching of Galician,
together with the management, planning, coordination and execution of language policy of the
Galician Government. Its fundamental goal is to promote the development and implementation
of legislation arising from Article 5 of the Statute of Autonomy of Galicia. The evolution of the
SXPL budget during the period in question is as follows: €15,572,633 in 2010, €9,251,115 in
2011, €8,135,514 in 2012 and €5,724,478 in 2013.
As can be seen, the SXPL budget has decreased, as the result of a significantly adverse
economic environment, which has required the rationalisation of expenditure and the
application of principles of effectiveness and efficiency, and procedures to optimise the use of
available resources. The SXPL designed operational programmes for the period 2010-2013,
all of which featured the activation of strategies involving agents of social co-responsibility in
the normalisation of the Galician language.
The SXPL website provides legislative information concerning the Galician language,
including full information on the Charter. This information can be found at:
http://www.xunta.es/linguagalega/lexislacion_0.
In addition, there exists a broad, diverse range of formally-constituted agencies and
organisations that work for the protection and development of Galician in all areas of society.
These bodies include the Galician Royal Academy, the Galician Language Institute, the
Council for Galician Culture and many others. The Galician Government has requested
information and ad hoc data from some of these agencies in developing the present report.
Legislative changes
During the period in question the following rules and regulations relating to the Galician
language were adopted:
 Decree 201/2011, of 13 October, regulating the use of Galician in the Internet presence of
the General Administration of Galicia and of the public sector in this Autonomous
Community.

 Act 2/2012, of 28 March, on general protection for consumers and users. Chapter VI (Arts.
45 and 46) and references throughout the text.

2.

APPLICATION OF THE CONTENT OF THE CHARTER

Article 8 – Education
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such
languages are used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without
prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
954. The Committee of Experts strongly urges the authorities to make available
Galician-medium education.
Legislation with respect to education, and specifically the presence of Galician in education,
has varied since the last report, with the publication of Decree 330/2009, which regulates the
curriculum for pre-school education in the Autonomous Community of Galicia, and with that of
Decree 79/2010, on multilingualism in non-university education in Galicia (replacing Decree
124/2007 which regulated the use and promotion of Galician in the education system), and the

49

subsequent cancellation in 2012, by the High Court of Galicia, of paragraphs 5.2 and 12.3 of
the latter Decree, the first of which directly affects pre-school education.
Article 15 of the above-mentioned decree 79/2010, of 20 May, on multilingualism in nonuniversity education in Galicia, requires each school to constitute a task force (EDLG) to
promote the use of Galician in schools.
To support the work of these EDLG, the SXPL publishes offers of support for projects to
promote the use of Galician in non-university education in schools and colleges dependent on
the Galician Ministry of Culture, Education and University Planning. Two such offers are
published each year, one for public schools and one for private ones. The total budget for this
action in the period 2010-2013 amounted to €1,441,300.
Language-promotion measures and activities related to the EDLG include aspects such as
competitions, exhibition design and management, the provision of teaching materials and
resources through the SXPL website, visits to schools and colleges, direct advice to EDLG
coordinators and team members, technical support and telephone and online counselling to
the teams and their members, collaboration with the media to publicise the benefits of EDLG
activities, and collaborative work with the University of Santiago de Compostela, the Galician
Language Institute and the University of Vigo.
a)
i) to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority
languages;
The outcome of these legislative changes, and most directly with respect to the publication of
Decree 330/2009, is that in pre-school education teachers should use in the classroom the
native language that is predominant among the children, although the other co-official
language should also be introduced, gradually, in order to ensure that by the end of this stage
of education, the children have a similar command of both languages.
The revocation of paragraph 5.2 of Decree 79/2010 means that the predominant language
among students cannot be determined by the automatic transfer of data obtained from
surveys of families regarding the mother tongue of the students. Instead, this should be a
decision taken by the educational administration on the basis of parameters that will be
established. Therefore, the school in question must take a decision taking into account both
the data provided by the families and the information reported by sociolinguistic studies of the
school’s context within society. Furthermore, the other co-official language must be present in
classes, in order to comply with the requirement that all students should acquire a similar
mastery of both Galician and Castilian by the conclusion of pre-school education.
As concerns the practical application of this rule, according to a report published by the
Education Inspection Department of the Galician Ministry of Culture, Education and University
Planning, in 2012-2013, the predominant language among students was Galician in 46.6% of
the classes for children aged 3-6 years, and Castilian in 53.4% of these classes.
According to Decree 79 /2010, to achieve multilingualism in non-university education in
Galicia, up to one third of the timetable can be taught in a foreign language, but at present no
such multilingualism exists in pre-school education. Thus, the vehicular languages for
teaching children aged 3-6 years are Galician and Castilian (except in the foreign language
class, which is timetabled to be taught 1 hour per week). For children aged 0-3 years,
according to data issued by the Galician Consortium for Equality and Welfare Services, which
groups over 80% of the schools comprising the Galiña Azul network, in 43.3% of the classes
Galician is the majority language used, and in 56.5%, Castilian is predominant. In any case, in
their individual interactions teachers are required to adapt their own speech to the children’s
native language, and the documentation and teaching materials are usually provided in
Galician, regardless of the predominant language in the classroom.

50

The Galician Ministry of Culture and Education has launched programmes such as Nós tamén
creamos [We, too, create] to encourage the presence of Galician in pre-school and primary
schools, whatever the students’ predominant language. These programmes include the
provision of children's books in Galician, as well as training and advice for teachers enabling
them to work with their students to create short animation films using a stop-motion technique,
inspired by the books provided. Each year, 60 schools are selected to participate in Nós
tamén creamos, and the selection criteria prioritise schools located in Castilian-speaking
environments, as determined by the latest sociolinguistic data available. A budget of
€44,912.42 was allocated to this project for 2012-2013, and next year the programme will
become an annual event, its duration will be extended and it will be offered to a broader range
of teachers.
In recent years, the Galician government has commemorated International Mother Language
Day (established by UNESCO in 1999), with events in different schools to raise awareness
among families about the importance of passing on knowledge of the Galician language to
forthcoming generations.

b)
i) to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages;
The legislation currently in force in this respect is Decree 79/2010, on multilingualism in nonuniversity teaching in Galicia (paragraphs 5.2 and 12.3 of this Decree were revoked in 2012
by the Galician High Court of Justice). Under paragraph 12.3, in the classroom or in the
preparation of papers and exams for non-language subjects, students were allowed to use the
co-official language of their choice, regardless of which language was stipulated for the
provision of each subject according to the school’s language regime. However, the Galician
High Court of Justice ruled that, in general, students must use the language in which each
subject is taught, in order to ensure language proficiency.
Decree 79/2010 states that Castilian must be used in the teaching of mathematics, and
Galician in that of Knowledge of the Environment, which includes material relating to
geography, history and natural sciences. For the rest of the non-language subjects, the aim is
to achieve a balance between Galician and Castilian in the distribution of teaching hours. This
target is largely achieved, according to a report by the Education Inspection Department for
the year 2012-2013. This analysis was based on data for over 85% of Galician schools, and
concluded that on average 50.9% of teaching hours were given in Galician, 47.5% in Castilian
and 1.6% in a foreign language.
c)
i) to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages;
954. The Committee of Experts strongly urges the authorities to make available
Galician-medium education.
The above-mentioned legislative changes with respect to primary education also affect
secondary education, which is equally subject to Decree 79/2010, together with the changes
required by the Galician High Court of Justice.
In compulsory secondary education, the following subjects must be taught in Galician: social
sciences, geography, history, natural sciences, biology and geology. Castilian must be used to
teach mathematics, technology, physics and chemistry. In the remaining subjects, a balance
between the languages should be established. This goal is largely achieved, according to a
report by the Education Department for the year 2012-2013. According to this report, an
analysis of over 90% of Galician schools shows that the average weekly schedule was as
follows: 47.6% of teaching hours were given in Galician, 50.8% in Castilian and 1.5% in a
foreign language.

51

In high school education, each school must determine in its own language regime for the
subjects to be taught in Galician and in Castilian, such that a balance in the use of each
language is established. According to data provided by the Education Inspection Department,
50.5% of class hours are taught in Galician, 49.4% in Castilian and 0.1% in a foreign
language.

d)
i) to make available technical and vocational education in the relevant regional
or minority languages;
The legislative changes outlined above also affect vocational education, which is governed by
Decree 79/2010, which requires a balanced distribution of teaching hours for the two coofficial languages to ensure the students are proficient in both. This balance should be
stipulated in the school’s language regime, which must be presented to the Education
Inspection Department for monitoring. Moreover, in each technical training module the
students must learn the specific vocabulary in both official languages.
e)
i) to make available university and other higher education in regional or minority
languages; or
ii) to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university and higher
education subjects; or
iii) if, by reason of the role of the State in relation
institutions, sub-paragraphs i and ii cannot be applied,
allow the provision of university or other forms of higher
or minority languages or of facilities for the study of
university or higher education subjects;

to higher education
to encourage and/or
education in regional
these languages as

As noted in Spain’s Third Report on compliance with the Charter, in Galicia there are three
public universities, each of which has a Galician-language normalisation service and
departments for Galician teaching and research. In both cases, the structure is permanent,
with specialised personnel. In all three universities, the main language used must be Galician.
To plan and coordinate work in this field, the Inter-University Committee on Language Policy
was set up, incorporating the three Galician universities, on 23 June 2009. The work of the
Committee was focused on the need to combat preconceived ideas so that Galician might be
used in a normal way, facilitating its use as a language of culture and also as a language to be
used in teaching and research. Other goals stipulated were to achieve savings in human and
material resources, and to coordinate and inter-communicate places, spaces and services.
One of the Committee’s most important activities was to promote the campaign "Scientists
work in Galician, too" (http://www.engalegotamensefaiciencia.eu/), which was implemented by
the language normalisation areas and by the audiovisual services of the three universities.
The research study “Science in Galician” was conducted in 2012 to examine the impact of the
use of Galician in teaching, according to Galician and State administrations. The aim of this
study was to draft and present proposals for change and for a broader objective recognition of
the use of the Galician language in universities. €1,323,026 was assigned to agreements and
contracts with the three Galician universities for training, research and promotion and
development of the Galician language for the period 2010-2013.
University of A Coruña
During 2012, eleven departments conducted activities that were evaluated by the Monitoring
Committee as part of the university’s language normalisation plan.

52

In 2013, the Language Normalisation Committees continued to support departments at the
university, which made various funding requests for activities to promote Galician. These
departments also helped publicise the activities of the Language Normalisation Service (LNS).
Twelve schools applied for funding in 2013, and to date nine of them have convened or
conducted a related activity, in conjunction with the LNS. Within the university, this service has
carried out various activities in 2010-2013, including advisory work, training and promotion, as
well as the production of publications and other language resources.
University of Santiago de Compostela
Although the University has not yet published reports in this respect for the period 2010-2013,
the information available can be found on its website: http://www.usc.es/gl/servizos/snl/.
University of Vigo
The Language Normalisation Service of this University also carries out advisory work, training
and promotion, as well as the production of publications and other language resources.
Teaching in Galician at universities outside Galicia
Galician is currently studied in 37 universities, and 29 of these have lecteurs working in
Centres for Galician Studies, teaching subjects related to the Galician language, adapted to
the needs of students in each university (historical grammar, conversation courses, language
and civilization courses, etc.). In addition, numerous other activities related to the Galician
language and, in general, to Galician culture, complement university study programmes.
During the period 2010-2013, Galician was taught in university faculties and Galician study
centres in the following countries: Germany, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Croatia, Cuba, Spain,
USA, Finland, France, Hungary, Italy, Ireland, Mexico, Poland, Portugal, United Kingdom,
Russia and Uruguay.
The Spanish universities in question were those of Alicante, the Autónoma in Barcelona, the
University of Barcelona, Deusto, Extremadura, Granada, the Complutense in Madrid, Murcia,
Salamanca and the University of the Basque Country.
Other modes of higher education
This sub-section includes the annual summer courses in Galician Language and Culture for
Foreigners, presented under an agreement signed between the Galician Language Institute
and the Galician Royal Academy. In addition, grants are provided for foreign graduates in
research projects undertaken at the Ramón Piñeiro Centre for Humanities Research,
supervised by the General Secretariat for Language Policy.
f)
i) to arrange for the provision of adult and continuing education courses which
are taught mainly or wholly in the regional or minority languages; or
ii) to offer such languages as subjects of adult and continuing education; or
iii) if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult
education, to favour and/or encourage the offering of such languages as
subjects of adult and continuing education;
As noted in Spain’s Third Report on compliance with the Charter, linguistic competence in
Galician is certified by CELGA (a language certification system created in accordance with the
Common European Framework of Reference for Languages), which is administered by the
Galician Ministry of Education.
The General Secretariat for Language Policy (SXPL) organises annual tests for each level of
language proficiency. In addition, to promote knowledge of Galician and competence in its use
(both to prepare for the proficiency tests and for general language instruction), the SXPL
organizes Galician study courses, which are held annually. The SXPL organised 106 such
courses in 2010 (6,030 students), 152 in 2011 (4,560 students), 126 in 2012 (3,780 students),

53

and 121 in 2013 (3,630 students). During the same period, the SXPL also organised other
types of adult education, such as courses for people living outside Galicia who are interested
in studying the language (6 courses in 2010, with 180 students, and 3 in 2011 with 90
students) and refresher courses for teachers engaged in the online provision of special
language courses (1 course in 2010, 2 in 2011 and 1 in 2012). It also conducted a training
meeting for grant recipients (33 students) who teach outside Galicia, to update teaching
techniques and to provide training on specific topics and also to facilitate communication links
among them for better understanding and the exchange of experiences.

g) to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture
which is reflected by the regional or minority language;
The stated goals of the study plans currently in force, set out in Decrees 330/2009 (pre-school
education), 130/2007 (primary education), 133/2007 (compulsory secondary education) and
126/2008 (high school education), include knowledge of Galician language and literature and
of the students’ natural, social and cultural environment, with special attention to the unique
features of Galicia. These goals are required to be achieved by means of the different class
subjects offered at each stage of the education process, as follows.
In pre-school education, fundamentally in terms of the personal environment and languages
(communication and representation).
In primary education, particularly in the subjects of Galician language and literature and
environmental awareness.
In compulsory secondary education (ESO), in the subjects of Galician language and literature,
social sciences, geography and history (in the four years of ESO), the first and second foreign
language, Latin, classical culture, history and culture of religions, visual and plastic arts and
music. Furthermore, although not exactly corresponding to the culture of Galicia, the students
also study the Statute of Autonomy (in the citizenship classes), geology and the major
ecosystems and protected areas of Galicia (in the natural sciences class).
In high school, although almost all subjects place a special emphasis on aspects relevant to
the reality of Galicia, the most direct focus in this respect concerns Galician history and
culture, which are studied in various subjects, including Galician language and literature,
Spanish history, the history of philosophy, the history of art, geography, 20th century Galician
literature, and the history of music and dance and the performing arts.

h) to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement
those of paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;

54

The situation with regard to vocational education was addressed in Spain’s Third Report on
compliance with the Charter. Regarding continuing education, Decree 79/2010 of 20 May on
multilingualism in non-university education in Galicia stated that “education staff admitted
through selective admission procedures who teach subjects regulated by Organic Act 2/ 2006
of 3 May, on Education, shall, during their practical training, take a specific course in
terminology, styles, languages appropriate to the subject and sociolinguistic aspects, enabling
them to perform their functions and duties appropriately in Galician”.
In order to comply with the objective set out in the above-mentioned Decree, the Teacher
Training Service organises, after each phase of selective entry examinations, a Galicianlanguage course for trainee teachers. In the period 2010-2011, 43 such courses were held: 27
in 2010-11 and 8 in each of the following periods, 2011-2012 and 2012-2013.
In addition, in the period 2010-2013, various continuing education courses were given to
teachers, to reinforce their skills both in Galician language and in other aspects of their
professional performance, including courses on linguistic communicative competence and the
teaching of language and literature using new technologies.
In this respect, too, refresher courses are provided for teachers collaborating in the provision
of online language courses, and a training meeting is provided by the SXPL for trainee
teachers working outside Galicia, to update their knowledge of teaching practice and of
specific issues.

i)
to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the
measures taken and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching
of regional or minority languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their
findings, which will be made public.
964. … The Committee of Experts urges the authorities to provide information on this
undertaking in the next periodical report.
The education inspection service of the competent Galician Ministry in this area is responsible
for the inspection of all schools, services, programmes and activities that constitute the
education system in Galicia, both publicly owned and private, at all levels, in order to ensure
compliance with the education laws, to contribute to improving the education system and the
quality of education and to ensure enjoyment of the rights and the observance of the
obligations of everybody involved in teaching and learning.
For the year 2012-2013, the computer management program for schools, Xade, was equipped
with specific data-entry fields for information to be recorded on the use of the Galician
language.

Paragraph 2
With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the
regional or minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the
number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage or
provide teaching in or of the regional or minority language at all the appropriate stages
of education.
In this respect, the following collaborative activities are relevant:
With Catalonia: the Galauda Project promotes the teaching of Galician language and culture
in secondary schools in Catalonia. In addition to classroom activities, the schools participating
in this project also organise group visits to emblematic sites of Galician culture in Barcelona,
such as the Sargadelos Gallery, the University of Barcelona and the Galician Centre. They
also participate in activities organised in Barcelona, such as the Comic Fair, or competitions
such as Mediterranean Tales (Cuentos en el Mediterráneo). The students round off the school
year with a trip to Galicia.

55

With Castilla y León: the education departments of the governments of Galicia and of Castilla
y León have agreed a framework of collaboration to incorporate Galician into study plans in
primary and secondary education. Under this protocol, primary school students who wish to
do so can study the subjects of natural, social and cultural environment or arts education in
Galician, one hour a week, with the same subject content as is given to the students studying
exclusively in Castilian, and in secondary education the subject of social sciences can be
studied in Galician throughout ESO, also with the same subject content as for the students
studying in Castilian. In addition, Galician language and culture is offered as an optional
subject in the 4th year of ESO and in the first and second years of high school. Moreover,
school trips are organised to visit the region of Bierzo in Galicia, to familiarise students with
different towns and cities and to enable them to visit the main centres of culture and heritage.
With the UK, Argentina and Venezuela: The Galician government has a permanent
collaboration agreement with the schools Cañada Blanch in London, Santiago Apóstol in
Buenos Aires and Castelao in Caracas, so that the Galician language can be studied in these
cities.

Article 9 – Justice
Recommendations of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
1.

Amend the legal framework with a view to making it clear that the
criminal, civil and administrative judicial authorities in the autonomous
communities will conduct the proceedings in co-official languages at the
request of one party.

2.

Take the necessary legal and practical measures to ensure that an
adequate proportion of the judicial staff posted in the autonomous
communities concerned by the application of Article 9 of the Charter have a
working knowledge of the relevant languages.

974. - The Committee of Experts urges the Spanish authorities to take the necessary
measures to increase the proportion of judicial staff in Galicia, at all levels and
particularly among judges and prosecutors, who are able to use Galician as a working
language in courts.
Please see the general information, non-specific information to the Autonomous Community,
provided with respect to Article 9 of the Charter, and with respect to Recommendations 1 and
2 of the Committee of Ministers, in the section of this report on Catalan in Catalonia.
Actions taken by the Galician Government
The Justice Department of the Galician Government, in collaboration with SXPL, is
responsible for promoting the use of Galician in the administration of justice. Both
organisations are working to equip the judicial and jurisdictional system in Galicia with the
tools and resources needed to facilitate and enhance the protection of the language rights of
the general public and of justice system staff in Galicia, and to increase the level of use of the
Galician language in the judicial field.
The major actions carried out in this respect include the following:
-

The development and print publication of the Galician Legal Dictionary. The Dictionary
also has an online version, accessible on the Government’s intranet for all public sector
staff, including those in the administration of justice. Also available are other language
tools, such as the Galgo spellchecker and automatic translators of language pairs.

56

-

Collaboration with the activities of the Galician Legal Brotherhood (Hermandad Jurídica
Gallega).

-

Cooperation in the annual publication of the Galician Law Review (Rexurga).

-

Since 2006, an agreement has been in force with the State Prosecutor’s Office to enhance
and promote the use of Galician in the area subject to the Prosecutor’s Office of the High
Court of Justice of Galicia.

-

Collaboration with the School of Legal Practice and the Law Society of Santiago, including
the organisation of the Justice and Language Day.

-

Collaboration with the University of Santiago in publishing a glossary of essential terms in
civil law.

-

The development of a code of Galician civil law by the Ramón Piñeiro Language Research
Centre in collaboration with the Parliament of Galicia.

-

Collaboration, through an agreement between the Ministry of the Presidency and the
Official State Gazette, to produce an edition in Galician of regulatory rules and codes.

-

The performance of activities to extend the use of Galician among justice department
personnel in Galicia.

-

The existence of language teams in the High Court of Justice of Galicia, in the provincial
courts of Lugo, Ourense and Pontevedra, in the Directorate General of Justice and in the
offices of the Deans of Santiago and Vigo.

-

The creation of the Justice Portal in Galicia (www.exustiza.es) as a public information
channel in Galician and Castilian, which increases accessibility to the justice system
through new means of access, information services and streamlined channels of
communication and dialogue. It includes information for the public, government employees
and legal professionals about rights, types of procedures and the regulations applicable.
This website enables court forms to be generated online in PDF format or downloaded.

-

Since late 2011, the external website of the Directorate General of Justice has provided eforms in Galician for payment procedures and documents for presentation to the Civil
Registry. The legal regulations are also available in electronic format. Information and
forms for the Registry of Partnerships can also be obtained in Galician, together with the
full body of regulations of the Civil Law of Galicia.

-

The Galician Government has fully implemented the MINERVA NOX software application,
which is part of the programme of new technologies in the justice system.

The Galician Government, in the exercise of its powers regarding the provision of personal,
material and financial resources necessary for the functioning of the administration of justice
throughout its territory, is responsible for the initial and continuing training of officials in the
justice system. This training is conducted by the Galician School of Public Administration. As
the result of collaboration between the latter and the SXPL, a total of 40 courses in Galician
legal language, eight of which were provided online, were taught during the period 2010-2013.

Paragraph 2. The Parties undertake:
a) not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely
because they are drafted in a regional or minority language.
Please see the general information, non-specific to the Autonomous Community, provided
with respect to Paragraph 2.a) of Article 9 of the Charter, in the section of this report on
Catalan in Catalonia.

57

Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are
users of regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and
according to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is
reasonably possible:
b) to make available widely used administrative texts and forms for the population in
the regional or minority languages or in bilingual versions;
Information concerning Paragraph 1 of this article in the Charter is given in point II.B) of the
present report by Spain.
Paragraph 2
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of residents
who are users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures
specified below, the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
a) the use of regional or minority languages within the framework of the
regional or local authority;
Local Administration
One of the most significant developments in the promotion of the use of Galician in public
administrations in Galicia during the period 2010-2013 was the launch, in October 2011, of the
Language Revitalisation Network, a voluntary association linked to the Regional Ministry of
Culture, Education and University Planning through the General Secretariat for Linguistic
Policy, whose main objectives are to promote the coordination of actions in the field of
language revitalisation and to increase the effectiveness of these actions in the field of local
government.
By July 2013, this Network was composed of 153 local authorities, together with the Provincial
Councils of A Coruña, Pontevedra and Ourense, working in coordination and cooperation with
other organisations. This online resource will constitute a major priority for the SXPL in the
years to come, enabling continuing dialogue on language issues between local and regional
authorities. The budget for the Network’s activities during the period 2010-2013 amounted to
€205,676.90 (€3,740.03 in 2010, €62,045.83 in 2011, €69,031.42 in 2012 and €70,859.62 in
2013).
In addition to the above, a grant-funding facility has been provided to local authorities in
Galicia to promote the use of the Galician language. The aim of this facility is to foster the
provision of a language service, either through its creation or via the maintenance or
strengthening of existing services, and to promote the planning and development of
programmes for the promotion and revitalisation of Galician in municipalities or municipal
associations with over 3,000 inhabitants. To do this, the facility was assigned a budget of
€602,668.00 in 2010, €420,000.00 in 2011, €520,000.00 in 2012 and €400,000.00 in 2013.
Access to public employment and training
Article 35 of Act 2/ 2009 of 23 June, on the public sector in Galicia, refers to the accreditation
of knowledge of Galician in entrance examinations to public service in Galicia. The selective
examinations held for access to employment in the administration of the Autonomous
Community of Galicia and local authorities in Galicia must include a test of proficiency in
Galician, except for candidates who accredit prior knowledge of Galician in accordance with

58

the regulations currently in force. The rules for the examinations set out the nature of all tests
and stipulate how they are to be assessed. In addition, some tests must be completed in
Galician for posts that require special knowledge of the Galician language.
The SXPL organises annual training courses in Galician administrative language, for
personnel in different areas of public administration. These courses were designed in
collaboration with the Galician School of Public Administration (EGAP), the Official Language
Schools, the National Institute of Public Administration (INAP) and the Directorate General for
Justice. A total of 11,340 public-sector employees participated in these courses during the
period 2010-2013.

Paragraph 3
With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other
persons acting on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which
regional or minority languages are used, in accordance with the situation of each
language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
a) to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in the
provision of the service

Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
4. Ensure the presence of all regional or minority languages in State public services

Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by
them, the Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
a) translation or interpretation as may be required;
Information concerning Paragraphs 1, 3 and 4 of Article 10, as regards the administration of the
State, is given in point II.B) of the present report by Spain.
Article 11 – Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the
territories in which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each
language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent,
have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence
and autonomy of the media:
a) to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:
ii) to ensure the creation of at least one radio station and one television
channel in the regional or minority languages;
According to Act 3/1983 of 15 June on linguistic normalisation in Galicia, the Galician
language should be the standard language used in radio, television and other media managed
by the institutions of the Autonomous Community or within their area of competence. The Act
also states that the Galician Government should provide financial and material support to
media that are not dependent on the Government for them to utilise Galician, and should
promote the production, dubbing, subtitling and exhibition in Galician of films and other
audiovisual media.

59

In accordance with these provisions, Act 9/1984 of 11 July, provides for the creation of the
Galician Radio and Television Corporation (CRTVG), to perform “the public service mission of
promoting, disseminating and furthering the Galician language”. Therefore, Galicia has a
public enterprise that is responsible for the direct management of public broadcasting services
under the authority of the Autonomous Community of Galicia.
According to its report on corporate social responsibility (through the UN Global Compact for
2011), the CRTVG, through its four TV channels (two terrestrial and two satellite) and three
radio channels (two analogue and digital and one that is exclusively analogue), transmits
61,000 hours annually in Galician, of which 5,700 are cultural and information programmes,
2,600 are for children and 10,700 hours are newscasts. In addition, the CRTVG website,
http://www.crtvg.es/ can be considered a fifth channel, as it continuously provides content in
Galician.

b)
i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one radio station in the
regional or minority languages;
1015. The Committee of Experts again asks the authorities to provide specific
information on this undertaking in the next periodical report.
c)
i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one television channel in
the regional or minority languages;
1018. The Committee of Experts again asks the authorities to provide specific
information on this undertaking in the next periodical report.
A recent and very noteworthy occurrence is the proliferation of local media, both public and
private, that utilise Galician as the normal language of communication or introduce it as such.
These media have large audiences in their own areas and their coverage has become
increasingly important because of the proximity of the information provided. These media
include Radio Fene, Radio Estrada, Radio Oleiros, Canal Rías Baixas TV, Correo TV and
Santiago TV.

ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in
the regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
In this respect, online television programmes have been launched, such as “Galician
Language in Society” and “Language, camera and action”, accessible on the linguagalega.tv
channel (www.linguagalega.tv), and 50 programmes on current international issues, each with
a duration of 4-5 minutes, are made available on the IGADIT channel.

–
TVG has broadcast 230 new episodes of the programme “Ben falado” (Well said!), a minispace that informs and educates, and brings viewers closer to everyday situations using the
Galician language. This programme has a market share of 18%.
d) to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and
audiovisual works in the regional or minority languages;
1021. … The Committee of Experts asks the authorities to comment on this undertaking
in the next periodical report.

60

The films and series shown by Galician TV are all dubbed into Galician. Audience ratings
confirm that the films are dubbed into Galician are as popular among viewers as the same
films dubbed into Castilian. Annual spending on dubbing into Galician is €3.3 million.
As concerns broadcast media that are not dependent on the Galician Government, regional
disconnections by Spanish National Television and Radio (RTVE) are mainly transmitted in
the Galician language, with the collaboration of a team of linguists to ensure the quality of the
texts that are produced.

e)
i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one
newspaper in the regional or minority languages;
1026. The Committee of Experts is concerned about the negative development with
regard to this undertaking and asks the authorities to provide information in the next
periodical report.
The digital newspaper format has enabled publishers which provide content exclusively or
mainly in Galician to exchange the paper format for a major online presence. This is the case
of Galicia Hoxe (http://www.galiciahoxe.com/) Xornal de Galicia (http://xornalgalicia.com/) and
others which, from the outset, are increasingly opting for the digital medium as a means of
expansion.
The
latter
group
includes
Galicia
Confidencial
(http://www.galiciaconfidencial.com/), which has a daily readership of 6,000, Noticieiro Galego
(www.noticieirogalego.com) and Praza Pública (http://praza.com/), among many others.
Currently, a large number of titles are published entirely in Galician.
Moreover, most publications with a significant presence in paper format also have a digital
version in Galician, thanks to automatic translators used on their websites. This is the case of
La Voz de Galicia (http://www.lavozdegalicia.es/?idioma=galego) Faro de Vigo
(http://galego.farodevigo.es/) and El Progreso (http://elprogreso. galiciae.com/?lang=gl).
Another aspect of interest is the question of the news agencies, which provide daily
information to many media outlets and press offices, performing a strategic role which
facilitates the introduction of news items in Galician in the other media. The General
Secretariat for Language Policy has signed collaboration agreements with the agencies that
provide the largest volumes of information, i.e., Europa Press Comunicación SA, Agencia Efe
SA and Axencia Galega de Noticias.
The first Galician Press Association was formed in 2013. This associative body was created in
order to promote, coordinate and strengthen the presence of media written entirely in Galician.

f)
i) to cover the additional costs of those media which use regional or minority
languages, wherever the law provides for financial assistance in general for the
media; or
ii) to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual
productions in the regional or minority languages;
The departments of the Galician Government with responsibilities for Media and Language
Policy have been working for two decades to implement public policies and measures aimed
at enhancing the use of Galician in the private media, through two lines of assistance: on the
one hand, an awards programme for journalism and broadcasting companies, prioritising the
percentage of publications and information aimed at normalising and disseminating the
language, identity and culture of Galicia; and on the other, a line of financial support provided

61

exclusively for companies that publish periodicals written entirely in Galician, in order to
facilitate the expansion of Galician language and culture in journalism.
By media type, during the period analysed, the financial assistance provided by the Galician
Government for the purpose of promoting Galician was distributed as follows: €4,069,142.57
for newspapers, €813,417.28 for radio, €254,472.43 for internet and €1,405,754.72 for
magazines.
Evidently, a major effort has been made to increase the presence of Galician in the media, in
both paper and digital formats, and as well as radio and specialised press outlets.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries,
cultural centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as
literary work and film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and
the culture industries, including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties
undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used and to the extent that
the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this field:
a) to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority
languages and foster the different means of access to works produced in these
languages;
Article 25 of Act 3/1983 of 15 June on linguistic normalisation states that the Galician
government should promote the standardisation of the use of Galician in commercial,
advertising, cultural, social, sports and other activities.
The Government of Galicia, and in particular its Ministry of Culture, Education and University
Planning, supports the cultural activities of different organisations and institutions in its
territory which involve the promotion of the use of the Galician language. For this purpose, it
has established appropriate partnership agreements, financial aid and other forms of
assistance. This work to promote the presence of Galician is assisted by the SXPL and the
General Secretariat for Culture. To date, the financial contributions of these two bodies to
projects of this nature amount to €1,004,923.23 (€298,498.23 in 2010 and €235,475 in each of
the years 2011, 2012 and 2013).
During the period 2006-2008, the 18 principal companies working in Galician in the performing
arts received from the Galician Government a total of €3,669,391.16, and in the period 20092012 they received €5,312,398.
The Galician Agency for Cultural Industries (AGADIC) forms part of the General Secretariat
for Culture (SGC), and much of its extensive production is in Galician. AGADIC is directly
responsible for the management of three important channels of theatrical and musical
distribution, in collaboration with numerous local authorities and private entities throughout
Galicia. The Galician Network of Theatres and Auditoriums, the Galician Network of Concert
Halls, the Galician Network of Live Music and the Cultural Routes circuit jointly ensure stability
in the scheduling of shows and concerts with a Galician accent, while contributing to providing
a broad-based, plural and open body of cultural activities, in terms both of its content and of its
geographic decentralisation. As an example of the contribution by AGADIC to the promotion of
Galician, it offered grants in 2011 for the development and promotion of audiovisual talent in
Galician.
Another part of the SGC is the cultural complex “Culture City”, which manages eight
museums, throughout Galicia, in which all the information provided appears at least in
Galician.

62

The promotion and dissemination of literature written in Galician
A good example of the vigour of the Galician language is provided by the Calvet language
barometer (2012) (http://wikilf.culture.fr/barometre2012/index.php), which weights the degree
of internet penetration, among other variables. In this respect, Galician ranks 49th in a list of
563 languages analysed.
Another relevant indicator is in the field of book publishing. According to data provided by the
Galician Association of Publishers, 73.6% of the titles published in 2011 were in Galician, an
increase of 1.3% compared to the previous year. In 2011, Galician publishers sold 1,949,256
copies in Galician, accounting for 16.1% of the total market in Galicia.
As regards support for major projects by Galician publishers, over €700,000 have been
invested in grants to support the promotion, production and publication of books in Galician by
leading publishers.
This important work also includes campaigns to promote reading, through activities such as
the Bocaberta campaign organized by the SXPL to promote the use of Galician by children
and young people, through a series of activities related to the use of language in play. This
campaign had a total budget of €864,340.68 for activities carried out in 2010-2011.
In the Living Letters programme, numerous activities in Galician have been organised in 128
libraries. During its four years’ activity, the programme has been assigned €154,000 to
encourage reading and to support literary creators working in the language of Galicia. In
addition, financial support is given for the award of prizes in major literary competitions.
Another important novelty in this field during the period 2010-2013 has been the emergence of
numerous resources in the field of new technologies, including language resources (online
translators and dictionaries, etc.), applications for mobile devices, the translation into Galician
systems of the interfaces of operative systems for fixed and mobile devices, the use of social
sites such as Tuenti, Facebook and Twitter, and the creation of a portal for its own social
network – Redeiras – by the Galician Ministry of Culture, Education and University Planning.
Support for cultural activities for children and young people
Children and young people are among the main areas of attention for policies promoting the
use of Galician. For this purpose, various programmes and activities were designed and
implemented during the period 2010-2013, for example, the programme Axóuxeres (Rattles),
which is aimed at babies aged 0-3 years and their families. The investment in this programme
was €805,889.23 for the period 2010-2013.
FalaRedes! (http://www.xunta.es/linguagalega/falaredes_2013) is a language promotion
programme offered by the SXPL in 2012 and 2013, comprising activities for young people
(cinema, storytelling, arts and music workshops, concerts, musicals and theatre), offered in
municipalities that are part of the language promotion network. In 2012 and 2013, the budget
for these activities was €142,474.49.
Among
other
initiatives
are
El
Gallego
Acampa
(Galician
Camp)
(http://www.xunta.es/linguagalega/o_galego_campa), a training plan for summer-camp
monitors, in which €13,924.11 was invested in 2010-2012, and the campaign “Another
thousand festivals for the Galician language” to support the planning and performance of
village festivals in Galician (this campaign is aimed at committees and others involved in
organising these festivals).

63

b) to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in
regional or minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing,
post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;
In 2012, Galician Literature (http://www.galicianliterature.com/), the first internet portal on
Galician literature in English, was launched. In addition, a catalogue of children's books in
Galician (Galician Books for Children & Young People) has been published, together with the
collection Galician Classics, providing foreign-language versions of outstanding works of
Galician literature by authors such as Rosalía de Castro, Álvaro Cunqueiro, Celso Emilio
Ferreiro, Lois Pereiro and María Reimóndez in English, Italian, French, Russian and Bengali.
Furthermore, the first two anthologies of Galician literature in English have been published: A
Bilingual Anthology of Galician Literature 1196-1981, by Jonathan Dunne, and Breogán's
Lighthouse: An Anthology of Galician Literature.
The portal Galiciana, which forms part of Europeana, enables 3,642 works, with over 1.2
million digitised pages, to be consulted, read and downloaded. In addition, Galicia has been
invited to join the World Digital Library, an international project sponsored by UNESCO
(particularly aimed at non-English speaking cultures).

g) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for
collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the
regional or minority languages;
Cultural entities directly related with the Galician language
As noted in the Third Report by Spain on compliance with the Charter, the following cultural
bodies are directly related to the Galician language.
The Ramón Piñeiro Centre for Research in the Humanities has published over 150 books (all
in Galician) since its inception.
The Instituto da Lingua Galega (Galician Language Institute), a university linguistic research
centre was established in 1971 by the University of Santiago de Compostela, in order to
promote the cultivation and normalisation of Galician and to further synchronic and diachronic
research in this respect. The Galician government has co-financed some of its projects,
including the Oral Archive of Galician Language, which was presented in June 2011. A budget
of €548,523 has been assigned to this project (€156,688 in 2010, €130,000 in 2011, €139,945
in 2012 and €121,890 in 2013).
The Galician Royal Academy (RAG) is responsible for determining Galician language policy
and also takes the final decisions on questions of Galician terminology, through its agency
Termigal, which has been working for 10 years under an agreement between RAG and the
Galician Government. RAG receives annual funding of €550,000 from the Galician
Government, for programmes such as the RAG Dictionary, the largest and most innovative
work of lexicography produced to date by this institution, which is called upon to define and
legitimise the lexicon of Galician (http://www.realacademiagalega.org/dicionario/ # I inicio.do).
The Council for Galician Culture (CCG), in addition to its functions as an advisory body,
conducts research in different fields of culture (language, communication, history, art, etc.)
coordinated by respective committees. A new initiative by the Council is Lingua en Titulares
(Language in Headlines) (http://diario.consellodacultura.org/gl/), a digital newspaper on issues
concerning the Galician language, which compiles information from social networks and a
wide range of electronic media. For this action, the Galician Government contributed
€146,500.00 in the period 2010-2013. The CCG also hosts the Galician Centre for
Sociolinguistic Documentation, whose main objective is to participate in the normalisation of
the Galician language, facilitating the exchange and dissemination of materials generated in

64

this process and creating forums for debate and reflection about language planning in Galicia
(http://consellodacultura.org/cdsg/).
1038. The Committee of Experts … urges the authorities to provide information in the
next evaluation round on audio, audiovisual and other works in Galician.
Increasing numbers of feature films are being made in Galician, and many achieve box-office
success. Proof of this are productions such as "Pradolongo", "Vilamor" and the output of the
emerging animation industry in Galicia, such as “El Apóstol” (The Apostle). All of these have
received funding from the Galician Government and from other public and private institutions.
In collaboration with the General Secretariat for Language Policy, a project is being
undertaken based on “Dragal”, the highly successful trilogy of novels for young teenagers.
Another project planned for the period 2013-2015 is the film "A Esmorga", a major production
with an estimated budget of €2,249,369. Of this capital, Galician public entities will contribute
€1,959,369.

h) if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and
terminological research services, particularly with a view to maintaining and
developing appropriate administrative, commercial, economic, social, technical or
legal terminology in each regional or minority language.
The development of organisations for translation and terminological research
The Linguistic Advisory Division, a unit attached to the SXPL, was created in 1999. Among the
functions carried out by its personnel are the administration of proficiency tests in Galician,
advisory language support, processing requests for Galician-Castilian translations,
considering applications for translation into Castilian of certificates issued in Galician that
produce administrative effects in other regions, considering applications for certificates of
professional competence to provide sworn translation and interpretation services from other
languages into Galician and vice versa, and maintaining the Official Registry of Professional
Translators and Interpreters.
Furthermore, in collaboration with the General Secretariat for the Media, which is part of the
Ministry of the Presidency of the Galician Government, this body monitors Galician
publications, both print and online, by organisations that have requested funding for the
promotion of Galician, in order to ensure the linguistic quality of these publications and their
accordance with the rules for receiving funding. It also assesses and monitors the linguistic
quality of teaching materials and textbooks in Galician produced by publishers who apply for
SXPL grants awarded annually for this purpose.
Finally, the above-mentioned Termigal (Galician Terminology Service) coordinates
terminological activities relating to the Galician language, promotes and implements the
development of terminological resources, ensures their availability and promotes the
development of language engineering products related to terminology. It is also responsible
for reviewing terminology products created by third parties, including lexicons and glossaries,
to ensure that the terms that are catalogued meet the necessary criteria of accuracy and
precision.

Paragraph 2
In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages
are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or

65

minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural
activities and facilities in accordance with the preceding paragraph.
1041. The Committee of Experts … urges the authorities to provide the relevant
information in their next periodical report.
In the area of formal education, in accordance with the information provided in this respect
concerning Article 8, Paragraph 2 of the Charter:

-

In Catalonia, education in the Galician language is provided through the Galauda project:
four high schools offer Galician as a second or third language, and an annual linguistic
and cultural immersion in Galician is offered for 80 students and their teachers.

-

Education in Galician in Castilla y León has expanded from 156 students in pre-school and
primary schools in 2001 to almost 1,000 students last year, and the number of these
schools offering the possibility of studying in Galician has quadrupled.

-

The Galician Government participated in the Collaboration Protocol signed with Catalonia,
the Basque Country and the Balearic Islands (Mallorca), as a result of which various
activities were conducted in 2012.

Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy
abroad, for regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.
During the period 2010-2013, important advances were made in the provision and
dissemination of Galician language and culture outside Galicia. First, in the area of university
studies, through the network of Galician study centres supported by the SXPL (see the
information provided above regarding the teaching of Galician in universities outside Galicia).
In addition, at the Madrid headquarters of the Iberian Language Area, within the Cervantes
Institute, the SXPL organises four annual courses in Galician, in which 240 people
participated during the above-mentioned period.
In 2011, the 3rd Festival of Minority Peoples was held in the Aosta Valley, at which Galicia
presented its language and culture, as the guest of honour.
The International Poetry Translation Workshop “Con barqueira e remador” was held in 2012
and 2013, with the participation of seven well-known poets from other European linguistic
communities, and in which the protagonists were the languages of Galicia, Finland, Croatia,
Russia, Catalonia, Iceland and Slovenia.
The SXPL directed the project “Cultures and Languages on the Route”, which also involved
government, university and academic institutions from Occitania, Brittany, Germany, Navarre
and Aragon. This project examined multilingualism and multiculturalism in Europe by
reference to Europe’s main cultural axis, the Way of St James.
Continuing dialogue and collaboration with various institutions outside Galicia has also
contributed significantly to disseminating Galician language and culture abroad and to raising
its international profile. In this respect, thus:
-

The SXPL, as a founding member, is part of the Network To Promote Linguistic Diversity
and is directly involved in the initiatives of this European associative network for the
promotion of linguistic diversity, which held its executive committee meeting in Santiago de
Compostela in 2012.

66

-

Since 2005, the SXPL has been a member of the Association of Language Testers in
Europe, a benchmark for language learning and for the production of standard
examination models to certify language skills.

Article 13 – Economic and social life
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole
country:
a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without
justifiable reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating
to economic or social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical
documents such as instructions for the use of products or installations;
According to data provided by the Galician Labour Relations Board for the year 2011, 15.97%
of the labour agreements signed this year, affecting 26,136 workers, contained clauses
referring to the use of Galician. Of these agreements, two were sector-wide (representing
7.69% of the sector-wide agreements), affecting 20,920 workers (17.02%), and 17 were
company-specific (representing 18.28% of the company-specific agreements), affecting 5,216
workers (37.37%). The content of the clauses was detailed in Spain's third report of
compliance with the Charter.

d) to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by
means other than those specified in the above sub-paragraphs.
During the period 2010-2013, the SXPL implemented an extensive, dynamic policy to promote
and extend the Galician language throughout economic and social life, drawing on a farreaching network of associations, organisations and companies whose purpose or
involvement includes the expansion of the use of the Galician language in the region as a
whole. In this respect, numerous cooperation agreements have been signed in diverse areas,
involving companies, entrepreneurs (among others, the Entrepreneurs’ Confederation of
Galicia), trades unions, religions (the Catholic Church and several dioceses), universities,
institutions, associations (among others, the National Organisation for the Blind, ONCE),
foundations and the media.
As regards the labelling of products of Galicia, as well as what was pointed out in Spain's third
report of compliance with the Charter, let us note that in Galicia there are now numerous local
products (wine, honey, etc.) that are labelled only in Galician. Most industrial products are
labelled exclusively in Castilian. Some large distributors operating in Galicia label their ownbrand products in all co-official languages, and in 2012-13 their storefronts in this Autonomous
Community were designated in Galician only, and their newsletters and annual reports were
published exclusively in Galician.
In recent years, some food distribution firms have used Galician as a form of publicity,
although others use it habitually in their signs and communication.
Moreover, associations have been created with the purpose of extending the use of Galician
in the fields of business or healthcare.
Galician is also the basic language (together with Castilian) of the Entrepreneurs
Confederation of Galicia, which is comprised of business associations from the four provinces
of Galicia. In addition, most trade associations and local entrepreneurs use Galician as their
fundamental language and as a sign of local identity.

67

Galician is also used widely in the catering industry and in the marketing of leisure products
and entertainment.

Paragraph 2
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the
public authorities are competent, within the territory in which the regional or minority
languages are used, and as far as this is reasonably possible:
a) to include in their financial and banking regulations provisions which allow, by
means of procedures compatible with commercial practice, the use of regional or
minority languages in drawing up payment orders (cheques, drafts, etc.) or other
financial documents, or, where appropriate, to ensure the implementation of such
provisions;
Slowly but surely, Galician is being incorporated into financial and banking documents. The
Galician-language option is activated in most ATMs and in some cases is activated
automatically when the card is inserted, if the client has previously stipulated this preference.
In general, advertising and signage have long been conducted in Galician or bilingually.
With respect to the use of Galician in mortgage deeds, notaries and registries are required to
conduct their procedures and registrations in Galician, at no additional cost and without added
delay in the completion of administrative acts.

b) in the economic and social sectors directly under their control (public
sector), to organise activities to promote the use of regional or minority
languages;
Article 25 of Act 3/1983 of 15 June on linguistic normalisation stipulates that the Galician
Government and the local authorities responsible to it must promote the use of Galician in
commerce, advertising, culture, associations, sport and other activities. To this end, and for
specific acts, exemptions from tax obligations, or reductions in this respect, may be allowed.
Moreover, grants may be made to private companies, professional associations, business
associations, chambers of commerce and nonprofit organisations and associations to promote
the use of Galician.
This year, the agreements concluded in the province of Ourense and in the Autonomous
Community were published in bilingual editions because they are published in this way in the
Official Gazette of Ourense and in the Official Journal of Galicia. Of the remaining 89
agreements, those corresponding to A Coruña, Lugo and Pontevedra, 37 (eight, sector-wide
and 29 company-specific) were published in Galician and the remaining 52 (five, sector-wide
and 47 company-specific) were in Castilian.

c) to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and
hostels offer the possibility of receiving and treating in their own language
persons using a regional or minority language who are in need of care on
grounds of ill-health, old age or for other reasons;

Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
4. Ensure the presence of all regional or minority languages in the
provision of health care services.

68

1054. The Committee of Experts … urges authorities to ensure that social care facilities
offer the possibility of Galician-speakers to be received and threatened in their language.
As detailed in Spain's third report of compliance with the Charter, the official language of
external communication and of the signage at healthcare centres within the Galician Health
Service (SERGAS) is Galician.
Article 14 – Transfrontier exchanges
The Parties undertake:
a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with
the States in which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if
necessary to seek to conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster
contacts between the users of the same language in the States concerned in the
fields of culture, education, information, vocational training and permanent
education;
1060. … The Committee of Experts encourages the authorities to pursue bilateral
agreements with the countries in which the same or similar languages are spoken.
The SXPL has participated, funded or collaborated in cross-border projects whose purpose is
the exchange of language and cultural experiences between Galicia and Portugal.
Outstanding in this respect is the educational experience “Ponte... nas ondas!” (Get in tune!)
between primary and secondary schools in Galicia and in northern Portugal, with the
participation of other countries, too. These are day-long encounters that began with a radio
broadcast lasting 12 hours, entirely produced by Galician and Portuguese students. Since
then, this has been extended to reach 24 hours of broadcasting, with programmes produced
by over 50 schools.

b) for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/ or promote
co-operation across borders, in particular between regional or local authorities in
whose territory the same language is used in identical or similar form.
1062. … The Committee of Experts asks the authorities to provide information on the
practical implementation of this undertaking in the next periodical report.
On 17, 18 and 19 October 2013, Galicia took part in the Language Fair held in Minde
(Portugal), which included a session on the Galician language.

69

VALENCIAN IN VALENCIA
1. INTRODUCTION
Data on the number of speakers
56. The Committee of Experts encouraged the Spanish authorities to carry out
surveys in cooperation with the speakers of regional or minority languages in order to
have accurate updated data concerning the number of users of regional or minority
languages and their geographic distribution.
In 2010 a general survey was conducted into the use and knowledge of Valencian. A
summary
of
the
data
obtained
in
this
survey
is
available
at:
ttp://www.cece.gva.es/polin/docs/sies_docs/encuesta2010/index.html>.
The survey considered six regions (five of which are Valencian-speaking and one, Castilianspeaking). In each case, an independent sample was examined, namely the region of
Alicante, the region of Alcoy-Gandía, the city of Valencia and its metropolitan area, the region
of Valencia, the region of Castellón and the Castilian-speaking region.
The survey, from the standpoint of view of language proficiency, addressed the following basic
dimensions: listening comprehension, speaking, reading and writing. The fundamental data
obtained are summarised below.
With respect to listening comprehension, 96.1% of the population within the Valencianspeaking region understand Valencian.
Most of the population (76.7% overall) can speak Valencian (this proportion rises to 82.4% in
the Valencian-speaking region). The most important factors in acquiring proficiency in the
spoken language are the family and the school.
In terms of reading ability, most of the population (85.9% overall, and almost all, 89.3%, in the
Valencian-speaking region) understand written Valencian, ranging from “a little” to “perfectly”
with respect to signs, signals, communications, advertising, flyers, etc. Of this population,
45.3% read Valencian (in magazines or books) fairly well or perfectly. Schools are the
decisive factor underlying the steady increase in these figures.
About a quarter of the respondents claimed to write in Valencian “fairly well” or “perfectly well”.
while 41.7% responded “not at all” in this respect. Once again, the most decisive factor in this
proficiency is the school.
The survey also considered the social use of Valencian in diverse situations, such as the
home (where Valencian is always used by 28.8% of people in the Valencian-speaking area),
with friends (always, by 48.3% of persons in the same area), at work (always, by 13.4% of
people, in internal communications in this context, in the same area), in department stores
and supermarkets (always, by 19.4% of people in traditional stores and by 11.7% in
department stores and hypermarkets, in the same area), in the street (always, by 12.9% of the
people in the same area) and in the internet (always, by 24.4% in their e-mails, in the same
area).
Finally, the survey addressed the social situation of the Valencian language, from the
standpoint of social perception, preferences and expectations for the future. It was concluded
in summary, that opinions favouring a greater extension of the use of Valencian (19.6%) and
those contrary to this outcome (27.3%) are minority views in the context of a majority which is
in favour of the current situation.

70

2. APPLICATION OF THE CHARTER
Article 7 – Objectives and principles
Paragraph 1
In respect of regional or minority languages, within the territories in which such
languages are used and according to the situation of each language, the Parties shall
base their policies, legislation and practice on the following objectives and principles:
d)
the facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of regional or minority
languages, in speech and writing, in public and private life;
177. … The Committee of Experts looked forward to receiving further information on
the use of Valencian in other spheres of public life in Murcia in the next periodic report.
In addition, the Committee of Experts was informed that there are plans to prepare a
special issue of "Toponymy of Valencian Villages" including the Valencian names of
the three municipalities of Murcia that form the Carche comarca.
178. No information in this respect was provided in the third periodical report. The
Committee of Experts therefore encourages the authorities to provide information in
their next report.
Yecla, Jumilla and Abanilla are three municipalities in the Region of Murcia which have a
Valencian-speaking area bordering the Valencia area: these municipalities constitute the district
of El Carche. Some actions taken in this area are detailed below.
Valencian courses in Yecla (Murcia): In 2005, the local authority of Yecla requested the
collaboration of the Academy of the Valencian Language (AVL) to provide courses in Valencian.
The AVL granted the request and has collaborated since then. This course is taught at the
People's University of Yecla; the AVL hires a teacher and provides the students with educational
materials. Since 2005, Valencian-language courses have been held every year. In the last two
years (2011-2012 and 2012-2013), the number of courses has been increased to two per year.
Study of Valencian place names in the district of El Carche in Murcia: a researcher at the
University of Alicante, commissioned by the AVL, conducted a study to compile place names in
El Carche, locating them cartographically and recording each toponym individually (374 records,
in total).

e) The maintenance and development of links, in the fields covered by this
Charter, between groups using a regional or minority language and other groups
in the State employing a language used in identical or similar form, as well as the
establishment of cultural relations with other groups in the State using different
languages;
179. … The Committee of Experts regretted the lack of appropriate cooperation
between communities sharing identical or similar languages, such as Valencia with
Catalonia and the Balearic Islands. It therefore encouraged the authorities to promote
mutual cooperation and understanding for the benefit of the languages.
An example of such cooperation is that in the edition of the Writer of the Year dedicated to
Enric Valor, an itinerant exhibition was taken to Mallorca (University of the Balearic Islands),
Ibiza and Formentera (Government of the Balearic Islands and City of Ibiza) and the city hall
of Tortosa (Catalonia). This exhibition is scheduled to visit the city hall of Manacor (Mallorca),

71

the city of Alghero (Sardinia), the Ramon Llull Institute in Barcelona, the Museum of Rural Life
in L’Espluga de Francolí and the city hall of Tarragona (Catalonia).
Another example of cooperation is the “Introductory course to the teaching of the regional
language as a foreign language”, which has been organised during the past three years by the
AVL, the Ramon Llull Institute and the Vives University Network, in order to provide training
for people interested in teaching the language to speakers of other languages. This course is
held in the municipalities of Vinaros and Morella, in the region of Valencia.
Another example of cooperation in this regard is the library of ancient texts in Catalan,
Valencian and the Balearic language, collected by the University of Barcelona with the
financial collaboration of the AVL. The aim of this library is to compile all the bibliographic
references in ancient texts in the respective co-official languages from the book deposits in
Catalonia, Valencia and the Balearic Islands. In 2008-2010, the AVL invested €16,000 in a
review of the documentary sources and in preparing the publication of the volume
corresponding to the Valencian texts. This volume was published in 2013. In total, the AVL
has invested €23,000 in this initiative.

Part III
Article 8 – Education
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such
languages are used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without
prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
a)
i) to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority
languages;
b)
i) to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages.
In 2012, Decree 127/2012 of 3 August, of the Valencian Council, regulating multilingualism in
non-university education in Valencia, was approved (Valencian Official Gazette (DOCV) No.
6834).
This Decree is intended to help students achieve linguistic competence in the two co-official
languages, and to be aware of the priceless cultural heritage of living within a bilingual
community. The multilingual programmes that have come into operation as a result of the new
Decree will have no negative impact on the co-official languages.
Based on the rules of 2007 and 2008 for the study plans for the second stage of pre-school
and primary education in Valencia, which guarantee the use of Valencian as a teaching
language, the general policy of the Education Ministry with respect to promoting education in
Valencian is not to impose a language option on families with respect to the education of their
children. The Valencian educational administration allows parents full freedom to choose the
principal language they deem appropriate for their children’s education, either Valencian or
Castilian. All demand for education in Valencian will be met. In the next academic year, 20132014, another 38 schools, in addition to the above, will begin to apply the Multilingual
Teaching Programme in Valencian (PPEV).

72

783. … The Committee of Experts would welcome information the next periodical report
on the measures planned to meet the demand for Valencian-medium education in the
future. The Committee of Experts furthermore invites the authorities to take measures so
that the introduction of the compulsory trilingual model does not disproportionately
affect Valencian-medium education.
The Academy of the Valencian Language (AVL) participated in the drafting of Decree
127/2012, which regulates multilingualism in non-university education. Many of the
amendments proposed by the AVL, which clarified the meaning of the institution’s statements
to preserve and strengthen the presence of Valencian in education, were incorporated into the
final text.
The AVL, taking into consideration the importance of multilingualism for the vitality of the
language, has made several official statements on the question, such as that adopted on 28
January 2011, on Valencian in the education system, and that of 25 November 2011
approving the document “Considerations on the establishment of a multilingual general plan in
the Valencian education system”.
In these statements, the AVL addresses the Valencian Government to point out the need for
educational measures to be adopted to ensure that situations do not occur in which citizens
suffer discrimination by reason of language; to note the timeliness of the generalised
introduction in the Valencian education system of a multilingual general plan that guarantees
the rights and objectives arising from the legal provisions contained in the Statute of
Autonomy and in the Law on the Use and Teaching of Valencian, for all students in the
Autonomous Community of Valencia; and to observe that learning Valencian and studying in
Valencian should complement, not replace, the learning of Castilian and of English and other
European languages.

c)
i) to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages;
This requirement has been met since the entry into force of Decree 112/2007, of 20 July, of
the Valencian Council, which established the study plan for compulsory secondary education
in Valencia, and according to which one of the objectives of this stage of education is to
assess the communicative potential of Valencian as a language rooted in its territory and as a
fundamental part of its cultural heritage. Another section of this Decree stipulates the goal of
achieving understanding and appreciation, from a knowledge of the sociolinguistic reality, of
the need to recover the habitual use of Valencian, which is a symbol of cultural identity and an
essential medium for understanding the reality of the context and for accessing the cultural
heritage of the Valencian people.
777. … The Committee of Experts asks the Spanish authorities to provide a breakdown
of the figures concerning the percentage of pupils attending PEV and PIL in the next
periodical report, including, for both models, the share of subjects taught through the
medium of Valencian.
The data that the Language Teaching Service is able to provide on the percentage of students
attending PEV and PIL and, for both models, the share of subjects taught in Valencian, are as
follows, for the academic year 2011-2012.
In the Autonomous Community of Valencia, a total of 222,907 students were enrolled in
programmes of education in Valencian (PEV and PIL), in pre-school education and in primary,
secondary and high schools. This figure represents 31.22% of all students enrolled in these
schools.

73

Under current legislation, Education in Valencian (PEV) is characterised by the fact that all or
most subjects are taught in Valencian. The Language Immersion Programme (PIL) is
restricted to pre-school and primary education. This is a programme for education in
Valencian, and is designed for students who are mainly non-Valencian-speaking, and whose
families voluntarily choose this programme.
779. … The Committee of Experts asks the Spanish authorities to clarify in the next
periodic report whether the progressive inclusion of Valencian (PIP) is restricted to only
one subject taught in Valencian.
It is not true that in this programme only one area or subject is taught in Valencian. Under
current rules, at least one area or subject must be taught in Valencian. Similarly, in the
Multilingual Teaching Programme in Castilian (PPEC), which will gradually replace the
Progressive Incorporation Programme (PIP), at least one area or subject must be taught in
Valencian. It is up to the institutions and their respective language projects to decide how
many subjects should be taught in each of the co-official languages.
Education in the family’s co-official language of preference is guaranteed, and under current
regulations, the continuity of language programmes is assured in the transition from primary to
secondary education, in accordance with families’ wishes and with the aim of satisfying the
interests of mothers, fathers and students. In all these programmes, the teaching of Valencian
is also guaranteed. Thus, the provision of education in Valencian is guaranteed at all stages of
education and throughout the region. At the conclusion of the compulsory education stage,
students are expected to have an equal mastery of both co-official languages.
In the Castilian-speaking area, too, any language programme can be provided, at the request
of families and school boards. In the part of Valencia where Castilian is predominant, the
education administration guarantees the teaching of Valencian in all schools, but allows
students and their parents to request exemption from this area of teaching, which will be
granted subject to certain requirements.
784. The Committee of Experts strongly urges the authorities to make available
Valencian-medium education throughout the territory of Valencia where Valencian is
used, and especially to ensure continuity from primary to secondary education.
In accordance with the replies given with respect to this article of the Charter, the educational
model ensures the provision of education in Valencian throughout the Autonomous Community
of Valencia, at all stages of education and for the whole territory.
d)
i) to make available technical and vocational education in the relevant regional
or minority languages;
788. The Committee of Experts urges the competent authorities to develop an
educational model essentially in Valencian for technical and vocational education and
to make it available throughout the relevant territory.
The bilingual and multilingual programmes implemented within the education system in Valencia
are also applicable to technical and vocational education. Therefore, the schools offering this
mode of education also implement the programmes referred to above. The Education in
Valencian (PEV) programme assures the provision of education in Valencian in all or most of
the modules of technical and vocational education.

e)

74

i) to make available university and other higher education in regional or
minority languages, or
ii) to provide facilities for the study of these languages as university
and higher education subjects; or
iii) if, by reason of the role of the State in relation to higher education
institutions, sub-paragraphs i and ii cannot be applied, to encourage and/or
allow the provision of university or other forms of higher education in regional
or minority languages or of facilities for the study of these languages as
university or higher education subjects;
793. … The Committee of Experts … again encourages the authorities to step up their
measures with a view to increasing the percentage of university subjects taught in
Valencian.
In 2011, the Academy of the Valencian Language published a sociological study on the use of
the co-official languages. This study was authored by teachers and specialists at public
universities in Valencia, who concluded, fundamentally, that the universities have a very
important role to play in the normalisation of the Valencian language; that there exists a
linguistic diversity among the population, depending on their place of residence, and so the
geographic location determines the current status of the Valencian language in the
universities of the region; and that the two best performing universities are the University of
Valencia-General Studies and the Jaime I University of Castellón.
The Valencian Government provides detailed data on teaching practices in the Valencian
public universities for the years 2011-2012 and 2012-2013.
f)
i) to arrange for the provision of adult and continuing education courses which
are taught mainly or wholly in the regional or minority languages; or
ii) to offer such languages as subjects of adult and continuing education.
The programme of courses to obtain the certificate of Secondary Education continues to be
implemented. These courses are offered at regional and municipal adult education centres,
and Valencian language is a compulsory study subject. In the period 2008-2013, this
programme provided over 3,500 courses to more than 64,000 students.
As regards certification of proficiency in Valencian for the adult population, the Board of
Assessment of Valencian-language Proficiency (JQCV) has stated that during the period
2009-2013, almost 287,000 enrolments were made to take the corresponding test.
g) to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture
which is reflected by the regional or minority language
As indicated in Spain’s Third Report, under current official study plans in Valencia, Valencian
history and culture must be taught at all levels of non-university education.
h) to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement
those of paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party.
Almost 90% of teachers are proficient in Valencian. In recent years, there has been a
significant increase in the numbers of persons with accredited knowledge of Valencian,
especially among teachers and regional civil servants. Currently, most of the teachers in the
Valencian education system hold a certificate of Valencian-language proficiency.

75

i) to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures
taken and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of
regional or minority languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their
findings, which will be made public.
The Education Ministry of the Valencian Government provides periodic reports on the
progress made in establishing or developing Valencian at all levels of the education system.

Paragraph 2
With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the
regional or minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the
number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage or
provide teaching in or of the regional or minority language at all the appropriate stages
of education.
In recent years, courses in Valencian, at different levels, have been provided in Madrid (167
students in 2009-2011).
The Barcelona Judicial School also organises courses in Valencian for future judges and
magistrates (109 students at different levels, from 2008 to 2013).
Article 9 – Justice
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of
residents using the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified
below, according to the situation of each of these languages and on condition that the
use of the facilities afforded by the present paragraph is not considered by the judge to
hamper the proper administration of justice:
a) in criminal proceedings:
i) to provide that the courts, at the request of one of the parties, shall conduct the
proceedings in the regional or minority languages; and/or
ii) to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or minority
language; and/or
iii) to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not be
considered inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a regional or
minority language; and/or
iv) to produce, on request, documents connected with legal proceedings in the
relevant regional or minority language.

b) In civil proceedings:
i)
to provide that the courts, at the request of one of the parties, shall conduct
the proceedings in the regional or minority languages; and/or
ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he
or she may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby
incurring additional expense; and/or

76

iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages,
c) in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
i) to provide that the courts, at the request of one of the parties, shall conduct the
proceedings in the regional or minority languages; and/or
ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he
or she may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby
incurring additional expense; and/or
iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority
languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

Recommendations of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
1. Amend the legal framework with a view to making it clear that the
criminal, civil and administrative judicial authorities in the
Autonomous Communities will conduct the proceedings in co-official
languages at the request of one party;
2. Take the necessary legal and practical measures to ensure that an
adequate proportion of the judicial staff posted in the autonomous
communities concerned by the application of Article 9 of the Charter
have a working knowledge of the relevant languages.

Please see the general information section, non-specific to the Autonomous Community,
which has been facilitated for this Article 9 of the Charter, and for Recommendations 1 and 2
of the Committee of Ministers, in the section of this Report regarding the Catalan language in
Catalonia.

Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services

820. The Committee of Experts invites the authorities to comment on the use of
Valencian languages and its use in Administration.

Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who
are users of regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and
according to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is
reasonably possible:
b)
to make available widely used administrative texts and forms for the
population in the regional or minority languages or in bilingual versions;

831. The Committee of Experts invites the authorities to comment on the availability of
administrative forms in Valencian in the next periodical report.

77

Information regarding Paragraph 1 of this Article of the Charter is provided in point II.B) of this
Report.

Paragraph 2
In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of
residents who are users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the
measures specified below, the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
a) the use of regional or minority languages within the framework of the regional
or local authority;
- The regional authority
Regarding the use of languages in administrative proceedings, the staff employed by the
regional authorities in Valencia reply in the same language used by citizens in addressing
them (whether verbally or in writing). Any written action to be carried out in Valencian is
forwarded for translation to the Valencian Translation and Advisory Service. In the case of
proceedings brought by applications presented in a bilingual format, if no express reference is
made to the language to be used, the proceedings are conducted in Castilian.
In 2011, the AVL created a new set of publications (several of which have already been
published) entitled “Manuals”, to help professionals in diverse fields with respect to specialist
language questions.
As regards administrative texts and forms in Valencian, most of the forms used in government
financial offices in the region are bilingual.
With respect to centralised procurement, the specific administrative clauses of the framework
agreements allow tenderers to submit documentation in either of the two official languages of
the region. Notices of centralised procurement procedures are published in Valencian in the
Official Gazette of the Autonomous Community of Valencia.
Reports and decisions issued by the Valencian Government Executive Procurement Board
are published on the official website in both languages.
Software applications that support the Official Register of Valencian Government Contracts
and contractor profiles are compatible with the Valencian translation of the purpose of the
contract.
The Plan to Promote the Knowledge and Use of Valencian within the regional authority was
approved by the regional Council on 26 November 2010. The fundamental goal of this Plan is
to promote the knowledge and use of Valencian as a medium and vehicle of communication,
integration, cohesion and sign of identity of the citizens of Valencia. It also aims to advance
and strengthen the knowledge and use of Valencian at professional and official levels. A
further objective is to make education in the knowledge of Valencian, and in the use of
Valencian, essential elements and directions of language normalisation within the public
authorities of Valencia. Among the measures addressed in the Plan are to ensure response to
telephone inquiries in Valencian, the use and enhancement of information and communication
technologies to promote official awareness and use of Valencian, the use of both co-official
languages in administrative proceedings, and the use of Valencian in the official documents of
the Government.
Finally, it is notable that at present 77% of public employees within the regional administration
have an accredited knowledge of the Valencian language.
- Local Authorities

78

841. The Committee of Experts again asks the authorities to clarify, in the next
periodical report, the extent to which Valencian is used by the local authorities.
 Survey of local authorities in Valencia
To compile information on this subject, a questionnaire was sent to 542 local authorities in
Valencia, inquiring about issues related to the use of Valencian. Replies were obtained from
114 municipalities, representing 1,981,518 of the 5,129,266 inhabitants of the region at
present (38.63% of the population).
This questionnaire provides data on the use and knowledge of Valencian in the different
municipalities. Regarding the use of the language, there are two main sections: first, on issues
related to spoken language and, second, on those related to written language. In addition,
information was requested on the accreditation of knowledge of Valencian among local
authority staff, and of the existence or otherwise of an agency to promote this language and
related activities within the authority.
The data relating to public service areas show that in 30 (26.32%) cases, this is provided only
in Valencian, in 20 (17.54%) cases, only in Castilian, in 29 (25.44%) cases, usually in
Valencian, in 9 (7.89%) cases, usually in Castilian, and in 26 (22.81%) cases, in either or both
of the two languages. With respect to communication with peers, the language used is
exclusively Valencian in 41 municipalities (35.96%), Castilian in 24 (21.05%), usually
Valencian in 25 (21.93%), usually Castilian in 4 (3.51%) and in either or both of the two
languages in 20 (17.54%).
As regards the use of written language, decrees are published in Valencian in 14
municipalities (12.28%), in Castilian in 69 (60.53%) and bilingually in 31 (27.19%). Special bylaws are proclaimed in Valencian in 31 (27.19%) cases, in Castilian in 37 (32.46%) and
bilingually in 46 (40.35%). For internal notices, Valencian is used in 18 (15.79%) authorities, in
Castilian in 65 (57.02%) and in both languages in 31 (27.19%). External notices are published
in Valencian in 13 municipalities (11.40%), in Castilian in 60 (52.63%) and bilingually in 41
(35.96%).
Of the forms provided, in 11 cases (9.65%) they are written in Valencian, in 36 (31.58%), in
Castilian, and in 67 (58.77%) they are bilingual. The municipal news bulletin is written in
Valencian in 23 municipalities (20.18%), in Castilian in 34 (29.82%), usually in Castilian in 16
(14.04%) and is bilingual in 41 (35.96%). Finally, the language used on the municipal website
is Valencian in 13 cases (11.40%), Castilian in 31 (27.19%) and both Castilian and Valencian
in 70 (61.40%).
In analysing the above data, it should be borne in mind that among the municipalities that
provided these data, 47 have fewer than 1,000 inhabitants, 39 have between 1,000 and
10,000, 24 have between 10,000 and 50,000 and 4 have over 50,000. Among the latter are
the cities of Alicante and Valencia, with 334,678 and 794,228 inhabitants, respectively. The
questionnaire also reflects the above parameters broken down by percentages of population
affected, according to the responses made by the municipalities and their inhabitants. Further
details of these data are available on request.
Regarding the questionnaire data concerning the knowledge of Valencian among municipal
employees, data were obtained from 102 municipalities, with a total of 10,508 employees. Of
these persons, 4,353 (41.39%) are accredited to have some knowledge of Valencian. A total
of 658 people (6.51%) are certified as having the level of language competency equivalent to
A2 under the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages; 1,507 (14.3%) are
accredited as B1; 1,645 (15.64%) as C1; and 516 (4.91%) as C2.
 AVIVA. Agency for the Promotion of Valencian: “In Valencian” Campaigns

79

On 24 April 2009, the AVL, the Valencian Government and over 50 local governments signed
a protocol to coordinate actions for the normalisation of Valencian. 71 local authorities are
currently party to this protocol.
In 2012, to reinforce this initiative, a generic brand, AVIVA (Agency for the Promotion of
Valencian), was created to denote all the local offices, bureaus, services, etc., whose purpose
is to promote the Valencian language. Since 2011, three campaigns have been carried out,
consisting of “street marketing” actions in which each local AVIVA body publicises its activities
through games and hand-outs of promotional materials.
 Bilateral agreements between the AVL and major municipalities in the Autonomous
Community of Valencia
Since 2012, the AVL has entered into bilateral agreements with various municipalities in the
region of Valencia that are significant by reason of their population and their historical and
cultural importance. To date, three such agreements have been signed (with the authorities of
Alzira, Gandía and Vila-real) and another three are in preparation (with Dénia, Vinaròs and
Alcoy). Each agreement stipulates the commitments voluntarily made by each of the parties.
Among other aspects, the local authorities undertake to classify job posts that have a
language requirement, to ensure that all administrative units have staff with official
accreditation of knowledge of Valencian.
Under these agreements, too, the municipalities undertake to provide at least 50% of their
cultural programmes in Valencian. Furthermore, the AVL has created a grant facility for these
municipalities, endowed with €15,000, for cultural projects in Valencian, in areas such as
theatre, poetry recitals, concerts, storytelling and publications.

b) the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or
written applications in these languages;
845. The Committee of Experts … urges the authorities to continue taking measures of
encouragement to increase the use of Valencian.
With respect to this point, Article 1 of the Rules of Procedure of the Valencian Parliament (Les
Corts) states that “the two official languages are Valencian and Castilian”, that “the Deputies
may use either or both languages” and that “the official publications of Les Corts shall be
bilingual”.

f) the use by local authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the
State;
855. The Committee of Experts … strongly urges the Spanish authorities to provide
information on the use of Valencian by local authorities in debates in their assemblies
in their next periodical report.
In this respect, the above-mentioned questionnaire produced the following results for the 114
Valencian municipalities that responded: the spoken language used in full or local assemblies
is Valencian-only in 42 cases (36.86%), Castilian-only in 32 (28.07%), usually Valencian in 21
(18.42%), usually Castilian in 7 (6.14%), and either or both in 12 (10.53%). Records of
proceedings are published in Valencian-only in 44 cases (38.60%), in Castilian-only in 26
(22.81%), usually in Valencian in 22 (19.30%), usually in Castilian in 11 (9.65%) and in either
or both in 11 (9.65%).

80

g) the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official
language(s), of traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or
minority languages.
The Academy of the Valencian Language continues to address the question of establishing
Valencian place names, and encourages municipalities that have not yet done so to adapt
their denominations accordingly, either bilingually or monolingually.
Most municipalities in the Valencian-speaking area have officially adopted as their sole name
the Valencian-language version; nevertheless, a few have opted for a double denomination
(e.g., Alicante/Alacant), and others officially maintain the Castilian denomination. The
municipalities in the Castilian-speaking area are officially denominated in the Castilian
language.
The AVL is continuing to publish catalogues of municipal place-names in Valencian (this work
was initiated by the Valencian Government). These catalogues list local place names in each
of the municipalities in question, and are compiled and edited in collaboration with these
municipalities. To date, 145 such catalogues of local place names have been published.

Paragraph 3
With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other
persons acting on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which
regional or minority languages are used, in accordance with the situation of each
language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
a) to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in the provision of
the service;

Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
4. Ensure the presence of all regional or minority languages in State public services

861. The Committee of Experts asks the authorities to provide information on the use of
Valencian in public services, i.e. the proportion of staff in the public services serving in
Valencia who have an adequate command of Valencian; the language used in written
communications between the public services and the speakers (for example telephone
and electricity bills and the like); which services are provided by private companies
under licence and in this case what linguistic clauses are included in the licence, in the
next periodical report.
The Valencian Government and its Ministries, Departments and agencies all have web portals
and means of electronic communication to ensure the publication of content in Valencian: this
content includes procedures, services, forms, organisational structure and job
announcements. In the portal of the Valencian Government, one of the most important areas
is the “PROP Guide” (http://www.gva.es/va/inicio/atencion_ciudadano/buscadores). There is
also an alert service enabling users to choose the language in which they wish to receive
information.
Online instruction in Valencian is provided through the platform http://saps.gva.es.
The Directorate General for Information Technology, in the exercise of its powers, guarantees
that all the technological resources offered on the portal of the Valencian Government
https://sede.gva.es, which was launched in June 2012, comply with Act 3/2010 of 5 May, on e-

81

Government in the Valencian Community, as regards the use of official languages, foreign
languages and sign languages, and the requirement that the websites owned by entities
addressed by the above Act should allow access in both Valencian and Castilian to their
content and services, including the complete performance of bureaucratic procedures and the
availability of normalised e-documents in both languages.
Moreover, all PROP offices (Valencian Government public information bureaus) attend the
public in either of the two official languages of the Valencian Autonomous Community.
Information is also provided by means of remote-access channels, such as the 012 service
(provided both as a voice channel and as a chat service). In this case, the user chooses the
language in which the information requested is to be supplied. In 2012, information was
requested of the 012 service in the following language percentages: Voice: 35.34% in
Valencian and 64.66% in Castilian; Chat: 15.32% in Valencian and 84.68% in Castilian. The
voice channel received a total of 1,654,053 queries.
An electronic news bulletin is published by the Valencian Government, and subscribers can
stipulate the language in which they wish to receive the information.

Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by
them, the Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
a) translation or interpretation as may be required;

866. The Committee of Experts invites the authorities to comment on this undertaking
with regard to public services in the next periodical report.
The technical staff and linguistic advisers of the public administrations and institutions within
the Autonomous Community perform translation functions, in addition to those related to
education, counselling and language promotion. The translators currently employed in this
capacity are as follows: Valencian Parliament, 14; Academy of the Valencian Language, 14;
Local authorities, 82; Provincial councils, 8; universities, 65.
Some trade unions and civic organisations have full or part-time staff who perform these
linguistic functions. In addition, some companies and self-employed persons are engaged in
translation and language consulting activities, although no official record is kept of these
companies.

b) recruitment and, where necessary, training of the officials and other public
service employees required;
870. …The Committee of Experts urges the Spanish authorities to provide information
on recruitment and training of civil servants and officials in public services and local
authorities in their next periodical report.
As observed above, the Plan to Promote the Knowledge and Use of Valencian includes
language training, both general and specialised (computing, healthcare, legal, etc.) for
employees of the Valencian Government. Among other measures, the Plan addresses the
training activity itself, the role of Valencian in career progress, the universalisation of the SALT
translator, and the online programme “Learning Valencian”.
Information concerning paragraphs 1, 3 and 4 of this Article 10, as regards the Central
Government, is provided in part II.B) of this report on Spain.

82

Article 11 – Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the
territories in which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each
language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent,
have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence
and autonomy of the media:
a)

to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:
i) to ensure the creation of at least one radio station and one television channel
in the regional or minority languages; or
ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one radio station and
one television channel in the regional or minority languages; or
iii) to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer programmes in the
regional or minority languages;

From 1987 to 2012 the Autonomous Community of Valencia had a public broadcasting
company, RTVV S.A. This company was abolished by Act 3/2012, of 20 July, on the Statute
for Valencian Broadcasting, which created the new public company Radiotelevisión
Valenciana SAU. Under this framework, TV broadcasts in Valencian were to be made by the
channels Canal 9 and Nou24, and radio broadcasts by Ràdio 9 and Sí Ràdio. The abovementioned Act stated that the new public broadcaster should preferentially use Valencian in
the provision of audiovisual media services.
However, in the initial implementation of the new public company, an employment regulation
order was made, but subsequently annulled by the High Court of Justice of Valencia on 4
November 2013. The regional government, taking into account the difficult economic situation,
decided to liquidate and abolish the public company Radiotelevisión Valenciana SAU. In
consequence, public broadcasts in Valencian are currently made only by Radio Television
Española (RTVE), in regional disconnections.

b)
i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one radio station in the
regional or minority languages; or
ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;
883. The Committee of Experts urges the authorities to clarify the number of private
radio station(s) broadcasting essentially in Valencian in their next periodical report.
In Valencia, twelve private radio stations currently broadcast local programmes primarily in
Valencian.
In accordance with Valencian legislation in this regard, in November 2011 the Valencian
Government convened the final round of the procedure to award FM radio broadcasting
licences, within which the contract documents specified that the use of Valencian in radio
programming would be a preferential criterion.

83

c)
i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one television channel
in the regional or minority languages.

886. The Committee of Experts again invites the authorities to provide information on
their encouragement and/or facilitation of the creation of a private television channel
broadcasting entirely in Valencian in the next periodical report.
In 2010, the Autonomous Community of Valencia had 28 local television stations broadcasting
in TDT: two entirely in Valencian, five mainly in Valencian, one bilingually, four mainly in
Castilian and four entirely in Castilian. The remaining twelve re-transmitted, in Castilian, the
programmes of the national chain to which they belonged.
The channels that broadcast a significant proportion of their programmes in Valencian were
Televisió de Castelló, Nord, C. 56-TV, Comarcal, Ribera Televisió, Levante TV (50% in
Valencian) and TV Mediterráneo.
In this respect, too, in the competition for the award of licences to provide digital terrestrial
television with local coverage in four areas of the Autonomous Community of Valencia, which
was resolved in February 2011, a clause in the tender documents stated that the company
awarded the licence should devote a certain proportion of the programme time to
broadcasting in Valencian. In addition, the proposed airtime in Valencian was positively
weighted in the adjudication process.

d) to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and
audiovisual works in the regional or minority languages;
The Valencian Institute of Audiovisual Works and Cinematography (IVAC) addresses all
questions related to audiovisual output and the cinema industry in Valencia, and its objectives
include the promotion of audiovisual production in the Valencian language. The IVAC offers
annual grants for the production of feature films, and those made in Valencian are given
preferential treatment. In the most recent grants, offered in 2012, the funding amounted to
€1,400,000. Furthermore, in 2012 and 2013, grant aid was provided for short films and
audiovisual activities promoted by local councils, for dubbing audiovisual productions into
Valencian and for the creation of scripts for feature films. In addition, agreements were
reached with various institutions and organisations for the promotion of audiovisual works in
Valencian.
The AVL also dedicates part of its budget to the area of audiovisual productions in Valencian,
and agreements to this effect were signed in 2011. In 2010 and 2011, the AVL sponsored
programmes to popularise the spoken use of Valencian, and made awards for feature films
made in this language.
e)
i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least
one newspaper in the regional or minority languages; or
ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the publication of newspaper articles in the
regional or minority languages on a regular basis;

889. The Committee of Experts strongly urges the Spanish authorities to take the
necessary measures to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one
newspaper in Valencian.

84

It should first be observed that there is no daily newspaper that is specific to the Autonomous
Community of Valencia, not even in Castilian (in this language, there are only provincial
papers and regional editions of national titles). It is also relevant to note the current difficulties
faced by print media, which face strong competition from other channels such as the internet.
However, the Valencian language is well represented in local and district-wide publications,
as well as those related to festive activities.
The main public funding for the promotion of Valencian in the press is made by the AVL. This
organisation made its first public offer of grant assistance in 2005, which was limited to local,
district or special-subject publications. Subsequently, this funding was gradually expanded:
from 2006, it was opened up to radio activities, and since 2013 it has also been open to the
digital press. These funding offers have always been excellently received, and very significant
sums are set aside by the AVL for this purpose. Although in 2013 the AVL managed the
lowest budget in its entire history, the programme dedicated to the media and to radio was the
single largest public funding offer made by the AVL. The total funds awarded in the period
2010-2013 amounted to €230,000.
Finally, the Autonomous Region awards the annual “Llibrets” prizes for the best publications
in Valencian in the Fallas festival held in the city of Valencia, and in the festivals of the
Magdalena (in the city of Castellón de la Plana) and of Fogueres (in Alicante). In the period
2010-2013, €262,000 was dedicated to these prizes.

Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form
to a regional or minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and
television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language. They further
undertake to ensure that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression
and free circulation of information in the written press in a language used in identical
or similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of the above-mentioned
freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such
formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are
necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial
integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of
health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for preventing
disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the authority and
impartiality of the judiciary.
880. The Committee of Experts…urges the Spanish authorities to find a viable solution
for the question of retransmission in the spirit of the Charter. In this respect it underlines
the necessity for the Autonomous Communities sharing the same or a similar language
to co-operate, for the benefit of the language, respecting the identity of each community.
Catalonia and Valencia are preparing to sign a reciprocity agreement, pursuant to the
provisions of Article 40.4 of Act 7/2010 of 31 March, on Audiovisual Communication, for the
reciprocal reception, in both territories, of the public television signal transmitted by the
respective Autonomous Community broadcasting authorities. The text of the agreement has
been approved by the Valencian Parliament, and is awaiting signature. According to this
agreement, the parties undertake to respect the signs of identity corresponding to each
Autonomous Community.

85

Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to ensure that the interests of the users of regional or minority
languages are represented or taken into account within such bodies as may be
established in accordance with the law with responsibility for guaranteeing the freedom
and pluralism of the media.

The Committee of Experts again invites the authorities to comment on the
creation of the Audiovisual Council of the Community of Valencia in the next periodical
report.
902.

The Valencian Government undertakes to ensure that the interests of Valencian-language
speakers are represented or taken into account within the framework of the structures that are
created in accordance with the law, in order to guarantee the freedom and pluralism of the
media.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries,
cultural centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as
literary work and film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and
the culture industries, including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties
undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used and to the extent that
the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this field:
a) to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority
languages and foster the different means of access to works produced in these
languages
From 2009 to 2012, prizes and awards were convened and granted to promote the regional
language in the following categories: best illustrated book in Valencian; best book published in
Valencian; award for contribution to linguistic normalisation of Valencian; best book of the year
in Valencian.
From 2009 to 2013, grants were awarded to foster publishing in Valencian.
Many of the books reviewed in the journal Lletres Valencianes are published in Valencian.
The website of the Directorate General for Books, Archives and Libraries can be consulted in
both Castilian and Valencian (http://dglb.cult.gva.es/).
The policy of the Valencian Government in this respect is to promote publications in the
regional language. Thus, numerous titles in Valencian were published between 2009 and
2013 by the Publications Unit of the Directorate General for Books, Archives and Libraries.
The Valencian Writing Day is celebrated each year, on 20 November, to commemorate the
publication of Tirant lo Blanch, the novel by Joanot Martorell. In this framework, too, the AVL
sponsors the Writer of the Year awards, to give greater prominence to a Valencian writer very
much of his time; the total value of this award, over the last three years, exceeds €600,000.
During 2010 and 2011, the Writer of the Year activities have included itinerant exhibitions to
the Balearic Islands, Catalonia, Alghero (Sardinia) and diverse towns and villages in the
Autonomous Community of Valencia.

86

Finally, various sponsorships aimed at promoting culture in the Valencian language should be
noted; among others, funding has been provided for the “Books 3.0” project of the Publishers
Association of Valencia, for the journal TEA3 with respect to linguistic normalisation in the
theatre and the performing arts, for the show “Poseu-me les ulleres” presented by the Micalet
Theatre Company, for the “Joaquim Garcia Girona” award and for various literary
conferences.

b) to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced
in regional or minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing,
post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;
c) to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other
languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation
and subtitling activities;
In 2009, the Valencian Institute of Audiovisual Works and Cinematography “Ricardo Muñoz
Suay” announced a funding offer of €175,000 for dubbing films into Valencian; in 2010,
€177,600 was assigned for this purpose, and in 2011, €150,000.

d) to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural
activities of various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the
knowledge and use of regional or minority languages and cultures in the
undertakings which they initiate or for which they provide backing;
In recent years, the Directorate General for Culture has been involved in numerous activities
featuring both Castilian and Valencian, including websites, commemorative videos of cultural
anniversaries, documentation of meetings on the subject of the European heritage, invitations
to cultural events and printed material (leaflets, brochures, billboards, posters, etc.) in
museums in Valencia.
e) to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or
supporting cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command
of the regional or minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of
the rest of the population;
A significant institution in this respect is the Valencian Culture Council, which since 1985 has
counselled and advised the organisations dependent on the Valencian Government on
matters related to Valencian culture. Between 2010 and 2013, it published reports on the
following questions relevant to the Valencian language: on the draft Library and Literacy Act of
the Autonomous Community of Valencia (2010); on the declaration of the Castellón Standards
as an Item of Cultural Interest (2011); on the proposal to create a public reading space, or
readers’ corner (2011); on the Draft Act on the Valencia Broadcasting Corporation (2012); and
on the CulturArts IVAC cinematography/audiovisual institute (2013).

Paragraph 2
In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages
are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or
minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural
activities and facilities in accordance with the preceding paragraph.
919. The Committee of Experts … looks forward to receiving more information from
the authorities on the promotion of cultural activities and facilities outside the
Valencian-speaking areas in the next periodical report.

87

- Cross-border collaboration with the Autonomous Community of Murcia: El Carche district.
Please see the information provided about the use of Valencian, in response to Article 7,
paragraph 1, letter d, questions 177 and 178 by the Committee of Experts.
- Cross-border collaboration with Catalonia: the Ramon Llull Institute and the University of
Barcelona.
Please see the information provided about the use of Valencian, in response to Article 7,
paragraph 1, letter e, question 179 by the Committee of Experts.
- Cross-border collaboration outside our linguistic area: Asturias, Asturias Academy of
Language.
In 2012, the AVL co-edited and co-financed with the Asturias Academy of Language the
translation into the Asturian language of the Valencian text of Tirant lo Blanch by Joanot
Martorell.

Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy
abroad, for regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.
923. … The Committee of Experts asks the authorities to provide more information and
updated examples on this undertaking in their next periodical report.
- Sponsorship of Valencian language and culture courses at the University of Leipzig.
As an example of collaboration between the Autonomous Community of Valencia and
Germany, two courses were initiated in 2011 on “Spanish and Valencian Media” and “The
Languages of Valencia”. In 2012, the AVL extended this collaboration to add another four
courses, on 'Valencian-German translation and text analysis”, “Valencian Territory and Society
Today. Sociolinguistics and language policy”, “Structures and developments in verbal
inflections” and “Currents and authors in mediaeval literature”. In 2013, another four courses
were held, on “Language and the world of dubbing”, “German-Valencian Translation”,
“Language in Television and Journalism” and “Valencian in Specialised Areas”. The ten
courses that have been held have received a total investment of about €16,000.
Article 13 – Economic and social life
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole
country:
a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without
justifiable reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents
relating to economic or social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in
technical documents such as instructions for the use of products or installations;
b) to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of companies and private
documents of any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or minority
languages, at least between users of the same language;
c) to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority
languages in connection with economic or social activities.

88

In the Autonomous Community of Valencia there is no legislation in the area of economic and
social activities that limits the use of Valencian. On the contrary, according to Articles 2, 3, 4, 5
and 17 of the Law on the Use and Teaching of Valencian, no citizen of this Autonomous
Community may be discriminated against for using Valencian in their public and private
relations; moreover, they have the right to conduct all their business, commercial, trade union,
religious, recreational and artistic activities in Valencian.
d) to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by
means other than those specified in the above sub-paragraphs
Article 16 of the Law on the Use and Teaching of Valencian provides that “Public companies
and services and those directly dependent on the Administration must ensure that their
employees who address the public directly have a sufficient knowledge of Valencian to
provide the normal service expected of them”.

Paragraph 2
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the
public authorities are competent, within the territory in which the regional or minority
languages are used, and as far as this is reasonably possible
b) in the economic and social sectors directly under their control (public sector),
to organise activities to promote the use of regional or minority languages;
In recent years, the Valencian Government has collaborated with the Council of Chambers of
Commerce, Industry and Navigation of the Autonomous Community of Valencia (the
organisation responsible for promoting the Valencian economy) in the promotion and
dissemination of the Valencian language. The Council is composed of the Chambers of
Commerce of Alcoy, Alicante, Castellón, Orihuela and Valencia. This collaboration is
materialised as direct assistance to companies, industries and businesses, and through
training activities to facilitate the use of Valencian.

d) to ensure by appropriate means that safety instructions are also drawn up in
regional or minority languages;
936. The Committee of Experts asks the Spanish authorities to submit more specific
information and concrete examples in their next periodical report of other safety
instructions in Valencian in order to be able to reach a conclusion. It also asks the
authorities to provide information on whether such practice has any kind of regulatory
or legislative basis.
Without prejudice to the application of national legislation on the subject (instructions, data,
labelling, etc.), it should be noted that most of the safety instructions expressed in the
Autonomous Community, especially in government offices, are in Valencian.
e) to arrange for information provided by the competent public authorities concerning
the rights of consumers to be made available in regional or minority languages.
In general, 91.7% of public sector enterprises use Valencian, compared with 71% of
companies in the private sector (banking and insurance companies are at the forefront in this
respect). This use includes websites, call centres, catalogues, forms, invoices and receipts.
Article 14 – Transfrontier exchanges
The Parties undertake

89

a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the
States in which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if
necessary to seek to conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster
contacts between the users of the same language in the States concerned in the
fields of culture, education, information, vocational training and permanent
education;
943. … The Committee of Experts encourages the authorities to pursue bilateral
agreements with the countries in which the same or similar languages are spoken.
- Valencian centres abroad.
Support is provided to centres for the purchase of books and records and to organise
Valencian language courses. For economic reasons, since 2012 classroom courses have
been replaced by online courses. In the period 2010-2011, several endowments were made
for the purchase of books and audiovisual materials, and 16 courses were held in five centres
abroad: San Juan (4), Rosario (4), Córdoba (4) and Mendoza (2), in Argentina; and
Montevideo (2), in Uruguay. The total investment made in this respect was €72,000.

90

BASQUE IN THE BASQUE COUNTRY
1.

INTRODUCTION

Data on the number of speakers
59.

The Committee of Experts encourages the Spanish authorities to carry out
research in cooperation with the speakers of regional or minority languages in
order to have accurate updated data concerning the number of users of regional
or minority languages, and their geographic distribution.

The third report from Spain on compliance with the Charter provided the data on the
sociolinguistic situation in the Basque Country between 1991 and 2006 as reflected in what is
known as the Sociolinguistic Map which provides an overview of the position of Basque in the
Basque Country using the Autonomous Community Census and population records and
including a series of language-related questions.
For this report, the Autonomous Community provides the data obtained from the Fifth
Sociolinguistic Survey in 2011. This Survey is performed every five years among those aged
16 or more in the Autonomous Community of the Basque Country, the ‘Foral’ Community of
Navarre and in the French Basque Country, and provides an overview of Basque in those
territories.
The following aspects are analysed in the Sociolinguistic Survey: language proficiency,
transmission of the language, the use of Basque, and attitudes to promoting use of Basque. It
must be remembered that the Sociolinguistic Survey does not consider younger age-groups
(under 16) where, because of the decisive contribution of school, there is a greater
concentration of Basque speakers.
The following are the criteria for defining speaker types in the Autonomous Community:


Bilingual: those who understand and are able to express themselves well in Basque and
Castilian



Passive bilingual: those who understand but have difficulty in expressing themselves in
Basque



Monolingual erdaldun (Castilian speaker): those unable to understand or express
themselves in Basque.

Limited to the sociolinguistic situation of the Autonomous Community of the Basque Country,
the details inferred from that Fifth Sociolinguistic Survey, run in 2011 and referring to the
Basque Autonomous Community as a whole, specifically to the territories of Álava, Vizcaya
and Guipúzcoa and the three capitals, can be summarised as follows:
 Basque society reflects two significant characteristics: a progressively ageing population and
a major increase in immigration in recent years. There are currently more people aged over 65
years (19.5%) than under 20 (17.4%), while immigrants account for 6.5% of the region’s
current population.
 32% of those aged 16 or more in the Autonomous Community are bilingual, 17.2% passive
bilingual and 50.8% Castilian-speaking monolingual. The bilingual population continues to
grow and currently numbers 600,000, up 181,000 on 1991.
 The greatest bilingual percentage is found among the youngest population: 60% of young
people between 16 and 24 are bilingual, more than twice the 1991 figure. However, because
young people represent a small proportion of total population, the overall results do not clearly
reflect the increase in bilingual numbers.
 Of every ten bilingual persons, rather more than six acquired Basque at home, either as the
only language (original Basque speakers) or together with Castilian (bilingual by origin). It is
noted by age groups that among the youngest, the percentage of euskaldun berris (new

91

Basque speakers) is rising. Between 16 and 34, more than half of bilingual persons learned
Basque outside the home, at school or at the euskaltegi (Basque language teaching centre).
 Increasing numbers of people use Basque in the Autonomous Community of the Basque
Country. In the last 20 years, the percentage using Basque as much as or more than Castilian
has risen by 4.5 points to the current figure of 20% of the population. A further 8.9% uses
Basque, but less than Castilian.
 Basque has increased most in areas of formal use. The rise at home has been more
modest, except in parent-child relations and between siblings, where it continues to grow.
 Attitudes favourable to the promotion of Basque have risen in the last 20 years; at present,
62% of the population is in favour, 7 points more than in 1991.
The Fifth Sociolinguistic Survey can be consulted on the website of the Vice-Ministry for
Language Policy at www.euskadi.net/euskara. This details further and explains the above
figures for language proficiency, first language and linguistic development, the use of Basque
(at home, in the immediate community and in the formal realm) and the attitude to promoting
the use of Basque.
Legislative Changes.
The following are the regulations passed in the Autonomous Community during the period
reviewed, contemplating provisions to promote and normalise the use and the presence of
Basque in each of the areas concerned, for some of which the Committee of Experts seeks
improvements (in Justice or the Ertzaintza, the regional police force):
- Act No. 2/2012, of 9 February, amending Act No. 6/2003, the Consumers and Users Statute
(BOPV - Official Basque Country Gazette - No. 35, 17 February 2012), which excludes
application of the penalty regime in the field of consumers and users’ linguistic rights.
- Decree No. 204/2010 of 20 July amending the Decree on consumers and users’ linguistic
rights (BOPV No. 142, 26 July 2010), extending the deadlines for compliance with the
linguistic obligations in this realm.
- Decree No. 174/2010 of 29 June on the Linguistic Normalisation of the Justice Administration
in the Autonomous Community of the Basque Country (BOPV No. 132, 12 July 2010),
adopting measures to normalise use of Basque in the Justice Administration, focused on
personnel transferred from bodies at the service of the Justice Administration.
- Decree No. 76/2012 of 22 May amending the Decree regulating normalisation of Basque in
the Ertzaintza (Basque Country Police Force) (BOPV No. 109, 5 June 2012), demanding a
higher level of proficiency in Basque for that force: Ertzaintza language profile 2.
- Decree No. 297/2010 of 9 November on the recognition of qualifications and certificates
accrediting knowledge of Basque and to match the levels in the Common European
Framework of Reference for Languages (BOPV No. 219 of 15 November 2010), updating the
existing regulation of this matter.
- Decree No. 47/2012 of 3 April on the recognition of official studies in Basque and exemption
of accreditation with language qualifications and certificates in Basque (BOPV No. 74, 16 April
2012), intended to recognise official studies in Basque in line with the levels in the Common
European Framework of Reference for Languages. This exemption applies to selection of
public employees convened in the Basque Country, and in public sector contracting there.
- Decree No. 222/2012 of 16 October creating and regulating the Unified Register of Basque
Qualifications and Certificates (RUTCE) (BOPV No. 232, 30 November 2012). Of an
administrative nature, it offers free official information on people’s level of proficiency in
Basque according to their qualifications and certifications.
- Decree No. 233/2012 of 6 November creating the system to incorporate the target of
normalising use of Basque in drafting general provisions (BOPV No. 239, 12 December 2012)

92

providing for issue of a mandatory prior advisory report on the matter, ruling on whether a
project is in line with the current provisions on linguistic questions.
- A Plan of Action for the Promotion of Basque (ESEP), approved by the Plenum of the
Basque Language Advisory Council (18 July 2012), by the Basque Government Council (24
July 2012) and ratified by the Basque Parliament (September 2013).

2. APPLICATION OF THE CHARTER
Article 7. Objectives and principles
Paragraph 1
In respect of regional or minority languages, within the territories in which such
languages are used and according to the situation of each language, the Parties shall
base their policies, legislation and practice on the following objectives and principles:
a) the recognition of the regional or minority languages as an expression of cultural
wealth;
b) the respect of the geographical area of each regional or minority language in
order to ensure that existing or new administrative divisions do not constitute an
obstacle to the promotion of the regional or minority language in question;
c) the need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in order to
safeguard them;
d) the facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of regional or minority
languages, in speech and writing, in public and private life;
e) the maintenance and development of links, in the fields covered by this Charter,
between groups using a regional or minority language and other groups in the State
employing a language used in identical or similar form, as well as the establishment
of cultural relations with other groups in the State using different languages;
f) the provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of
regional or minority languages at all appropriate stages;
g) the provision of facilities enabling non-speakers of a regional or minority
language living in the area where it is used to learn it if they so desire;
h) the promotion of study and research on regional or minority languages at
universities or equivalent institutions;
i) the promotion of appropriate types of transnational exchanges, in the fields
covered by this Charter, for regional or minority languages used in identical or
similar form in two or more States.
Promoting Basque
The report furnished by the Autonomous Community considers that the language policy
implemented by the Basque Country Administrations is proving decisive in meeting the
objectives referred to in Article 7 of the Charter: recognition of Basque as an expression of
cultural wealth; resolute action to encourage use of Basque, promoting its spoken and written
use in public and private life; provision of suitable forms and resources for teaching and
studying Basque at all appropriate levels; to promote study and research into Basque, etc. A
significance advance is recorded in Basque in the Autonomous Community, seen in
permanent, uninterrupted growth of 0.5 points per annum over the last 30 years, which it
considers places the growth of Basque there as one of the most advanced examples in
Europe.

93

It is felt that certain instruments of language policy planning have been of considerable
importance in the above, such as the 1998 General Plan to Promote Basque, and the process
of reflection and debate known as Euskara 21, whose recommendations were used in
designing that General Plan, ratified by the Basque Parliament in 2013. Euskara 21 foresees
a period of planning from 2012 to 2022 and moreover, in addition to the initial measurement to
be implemented during the Plan’s first year in force (2013), provides for an intermediate
assessment in 2017 and a final evaluation in 2022.
Collaboration with other State territories
91.

The Committee of Experts encourages the government of Navarre to increase its
cooperation with the Basque Autonomous Community to the benefit of Basque,
for example by rebroadcasting Navarre television channels.

In its report, the Autonomous Community of the Basque Country declares its wish to
collaborate in this field with the ‘Foral’ Community of Navarre, and describes the action which
has been taken until now.
On 26 January 2009, a Declaration of Intent was signed by the Culture Councillor in the
Basque Government and the Navarre Government’s Education Councillor, to intensify links
and act jointly on matters of Basque language policy.
On 3 July 2009, the Lendakari, the President of the Basque Government, and the President of
Navarre signed a General Collaboration Protocol to cooperate on matters of common interest
and take steps for the broadcast of ETB 1 and ETB 2 television programmes in the ‘Foral’
Community of Navarre; there has been no progress in the latter.
In implementing Clause Three c) of that General Protocol, which also considers it appropriate
to establish lines of collaboration based on institutional respect, the sociolinguistic reality of
both regions and on the attributions assigned to each in the provisions regulating the matter,
both parties proposed signing a specific collaboration agreement on linguistic questions.
That Specific Collaboration Agreement was concluded on 5 July 2012 between the Basque
Government Culture Councillor and the Education Councillor in the Government of Navarre,
defining nine areas for technical collaboration, such as teaching Basque to adults – evaluation
and accreditation of linguistic skills, translations to and from Castilian and Basque,
terminology, international divulgation of Basque language and culture, etc. Several meetings
of the Joint Parity Commission, contemplated in the Agreement, were held for its
implementation and, in 2013, action was resumed with an 8 May meeting between
representatives of euskarabidea (the Navarre Basque Institute) and the Vice-Ministry for
Language policy, to review the areas of collaboration and reactivate the operational areas
contained in the Agreement.
Mention may on the other hand be made here of the collaboration in 2012 and 2013 between
the Vice-Ministry for Language Policy and the Navarre Foundation Eskara Kultur Elkargoa to
promote actions related to Basque in Navarre, and which received subsidies from the Basque
Government.
Finally, in 2009-2012, encounters arising from the Cooperation Protocol concluded in March
2007 between the Basque Government, the Xunta (Regional Government) of Galicia and the
Generalitat (Regional Government) of Catalonia have continued, to promote and normalise
use of their vernacular languages and which the Balearic Islands Government joined on 27
November 2008. Encounters were held in 2010 in Paris, in 2011 in Santiago de Compostela
and in 2012 in Bilbao.
Collaboration with France
For this collaboration, the framework cooperation agreement entered into on 7 February 2007
was furthered in the Framework Agreement concluded on 31 January 2011 between the
Basque Government and the French Basque Language Authority to collaborate on questions
of language policy between 2011 and 2016, with the signing each year of the associated
annex setting out the action to be taken in the fields defined. Also in 2010, 2011 and 2012, the

94

Basque Government collaborated with that Public Body on a programme designed to
encourage and promote reading in Basque.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to promote, by appropriate measures, mutual understanding
between all the linguistic groups of the country and in particular the inclusion of
respect, understanding and tolerance in relation to regional or minority languages
among the objectives of education and training provided within their countries and
encouragement of the mass media to pursue the same objective.
231.

The authorities have not directly responded to the Committee of Expert’s
recommendation in their third periodical report. The Committee of Experts has
been made aware of some positive campaigns and initiatives at local and
regional level, as well as specific measures at state level from which regional or
minority languages can benefit.

The Programme of Government for the Tenth Legislature (2012-2016) of the Basque
Government elected in November 2012 set out the following objectives under the heading “A
Commitment to Basque and linguistic coexistence”:
1. To promote social growth of Basque: to foster knowledge, transmission and social use
of Basque and bring together the Basque-speaking community.
2. To guarantee full exercise of linguistic rights in all areas of social life.
3. To enrich the lexicon and the capacity for communication, paying particular attention to
the communication needs of new Basque speakers.
4. To bring Basque closer to immigrants as a factor of integration and coexistence.
5. To link Basque to values of modernity, diversity and coexistence, fostering its power to
attract.
6. To facilitate and promote use of Basque as a language of the new communication and
relation systems, developing it as a language proper to the information and
communication technologies.
7. To promote the international projection of Basque and the international management of
multilingualism.
8. To encourage political and social consensus in promoting Basque and multilingualism.
9. To position language policy as a mainstreaming focus of the Government’s action.
With these objectives in mind, the Vice-Ministry for Language Policy in the Department of
Education, Language Policy and Culture has designed its lines of work for the 2012-2016
legislature, which were tabled with the Plenum of the Advisory Council on Basque at a
meeting held on 28 June 2013, summarised as follows:
1. To design, approve and implement the Basque Strategic Agenda for the Tenth
Legislature (2012-2016).
2. To create Basque-language units in all Basque Government departments.
3. To implement the Fifth Plan to normalise use of Basque in the Basque Government for
the period 2012-2017.
4. To propose new lines of work for the Basque Language Advisory Council.
5. To implement and monitor the Plan of Action for the Promotion of Basque (ESEP).
6. To stimulate and strengthen the Interinstitutional Coordinating Commission (HAKOBA).
7. To strengthen Elebide, the Language Rights Guarantee Service.
8. To promote the euskaldunización (Basquisation) of adults.

95

9. To foster work on the design of the Basque-Language System of Indicators.
10. In the field of research, to prioritise studies of family transmission of Basque and of the
linguistic perception, values and attitudes of young people.
11. To implement actions to bring Basque closer to the immigrant population.
12. To promote strategies designed to increase passive bilingualism and raise its profile.
13. To encourage transmission of Basque in the family, particularly between mixed
couples and new Basque speakers.
14. To facilitate development of applications, tools and software in Basque for ICTs,
particularly targeting mobile devices.
15. To enhance the power of attraction and the social standing of Basque, while sending
messages linking balanced bilingualism with the advance of social cohesion.
16. To move forward progressively along the path of full respect for citizens’ language
rights in all spheres (consumers and users, local radio and television, public and health
services, police services, justice…).
17. To reinforce the profile of Basque in the media, promoting the general availability of
Basque, focusing particularly on specific products targeting the young.
18. To foster Basque in the socioeconomic field.
19. To help develop and consolidate the spaces where the use of Basque is preferential.
20. To develop strategies designed to enhance the standing of the use of Basque,
especially among young people.
21. To encourage and structure cooperation with the public powers in the various Basque
territories, and collaboration with bodies dedicated to promoting Basque, fully
respecting the jurisdiction of each and taking account of the Council of Europe’s
recommendations.
22. To foster cooperation with public powers and institutions in other countries in tasks
related to processes to revitalise local languages both in Europe and in the rest of the
world.
23. To adjust calls for aid to the working lines set out here, making effectiveness the
guiding criterion.
24. To put actions in place to increase awareness of the use of Basque.
25. To further work in the current development of the corpus in Basque (terminology, place
names, lexicography …).
Article 8 – Education
40.

The Committee of Experts invites the authorities to take measures so that the
introduction of the compulsory trilingual model does not disproportionately
affect the education in co-official languages, in particular their promotion and
support structure.

518. The Committee of Experts encourages the authorities to ensure that a sufficient
offer of education in Basque is guaranteed in the future in the framework of the trilingual
education model.
Like the Committee of Experts, the Basque Government considers in its report that the
introduction of the trilingual model must not negatively impact the teaching of Basque. It is
thus committed to implanting trilingualism progressively, with advance planning designed to
ensure a certain level of teacher training based on the current reality, always bearing in mind
the aim of guaranteeing in any case the acquisition of “sufficient practical knowledge” of
Basque as provided for in Act No. 10/1982, The Basic Basque-Language Normalisation Act.

96

Although the system of linguistic models A –basically in Castilian– B –bilingual– and D –
Basque– has formed the basis of the Basque education system over the last 30 years, during
the previous legislature the Basque Government introduced the Trilingual Education
Framework (MET) on an experimental basis in about a hundred centres. The theoretical aim
of the MET is for Basque pupils to have obtained adequate linguistic proficiency not just in the
two official languages but also in English on completing their compulsory education.
The Basque Government will assess the results of that Framework and adopt any necessary
measures to better it, in the belief that the education system should set specific objectives
which can be evaluated and are attainable in each language, so that the minimum level to be
reached in the two official languages should in general be the same, with another level in
English and without relinquishing a threshold in a fourth, French. In any event, the system
must not have negative repercussions on the education, the structure of promotion and
furtherance of Basque as indicated by the Committee of Experts.
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such
languages are used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without
prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
a)
i

to guarantee pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or

Please refer to the information facilitated on this point in the third Spanish report.
The following graph shows the evolution of enrolments in pre-school and Pre-School
education during the period examined here, by education models, 2008-2009/2012-2013
Pre-School Education 2008-2009 / 2012-2013

EAE/CAPV (Basque Country Autonomous Community)
Pre-School Education / Haur Hezkuntza
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

A
B
D

2008-2009 2009-2010 2010-2011 2011-2012 2012-2013
6.4
5.6
5.1
5
4.9
A
25
24.4
23.6
22.7
21.6
B
68.4
70
71.1
72.3
73.5
D

b)
i

to guarantee primary education in the regional or minority languages
concerned; or

Please refer to the information facilitated on this point in the third Spanish report.
For the period examined here, as complement to the graph provided on the evolution in
enrolments in 1983/84 – 2007/2008, the following graph for this educational level refers to
pupils with special educational needs (NEES) 2008-2009/2012-2013.

97

Primary Education (NEES) 2008/2009 – 2012/2013
Euskal Autonomia Erkidegoa/ CAPV LHko Hezkuntza
Premia Bereziak dituzten ikasleak/ Primary
Education Pupils with Special Educational Needs
(%)
100
A
50

B
D

0

2008-2009

2009-2010

2010-2011

2011-2012

2012-2013

A

79.2

77.1

76.8

73.7

72.5

B

6.6

7.2

9.7

9.1

11

D

14.2

15.7

13.5

17.1

16.5

The absolute annual figures for this group are fewer than 500 pupils (0.4% of those in Primary
Education). As seen in the previous graph, most NEES pupils continue to learn in model A.
c)
i) to guarantee secondary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
Please refer to the information facilitated on this point in the third Spanish report.
For the period examined here, as complement to the graphs furnished for the period 20032004/2007-2008, the following graphs show educational levels in Compulsory Secondary
Education, University Entrance, and in Compulsory Secondary Education for pupils with
special educational needs (NEES), 2008-2009/ 2012-2013.
Compulsory Secondary Education Pupils 2008/2009 – 2012/2013
Euskal Autonomi Erkidegoa/ CAPV Derrigorrezko Bigarren
Hezkuntzako Ikasleak/ Compulsory Secondary
Education Pupils
Pupils

100

50
0

A
2008-2009

2009-2010

2010-2011

2011-2012

2012-2013

B

A

20.2

17.8

16.1

14.6

13.3

D

B

27.1

28

28

27.6

27.3

D

52.7

54.2

55.9

57.7

59.4

University Entrance Pupils, 2008/2009 – 2012/2013

98

Euskal Autonomia Erkidegoa/ Autonomous Community of the
Basque Country Batxilergo Ikasleak/ University Entrance Pupils
(%) ereduen araberako banaketa/pupil distribution by
models (%)
60
A
B
D

40
20
0
A
B
D

2008-2009 2009-2010 2010-2011 2011-2012 2012-2013
46.9
45.3
44.5
44
41.4
1.4
1.6
1.7
2
1.6
51.7
52.7
53.8
54
56.9
Euskal Autonomia Erkidegoa/ CAPV DBHko Hezkuntza
Premia Bereziak dituzten ikasleak/ ESO pupils with
Special Education Needs (%)
100
A
B

50

D
0

2008-2009

2009-2010

2010-2011

2011-2012

2012-2013

A

71.3

62.5

48.6

47.1

45.7

B

18.5

21.6

31.3

29.9

26.5

D

10.3

15.9

20.2

23.1

27.8

The above graphs show that demand for secondary education in Basque exceeds that in
Castilian, except in ESO (Compulsory Secondary Education) for pupils with special
educational needs where, although model A predominates, the other two rise progressively.
d) i) to guarantee technical and vocational training in the relevant regional or
minority languages;
521.

The Committee of Experts encourages the authorities to continue their efforts to
maintain and increase the availability of technical and vocational training in
Basque.

The availability of technical and vocational training in Basque is less if compared for example
with that at the University of the Basque Country. In the 2012-2013 academic year, the total
working offer (model D) in Basque was 22.3% (13.79% in 2003-2004), up almost 9 points
despite the difficulty of offering a large variety of technical subjects in Basque and of forming
exclusively model D groups. It is a priority objective, in line with OECD recommendations, to
provide sufficient training in Basque to facilitate access to and integration into employment if
the company so requires.
The following graph, of pupils in this training in 2008/2009 – 2012/2013, is added to the graphs
provided in the Third Report for 2003/2004 – 2007/2008.

99

Pupils in Vocational Training Cycles (2008/2009 – 2012/2013)
Euskal Autonomi Erkidegokoa/CAPV Lanbide Heziketako
zikloetako ikasleak/ Pupils in Vocational Training
Cycles (%)
100
A
50

B
D

0

2008-2009

2009-2010

2010-2011

2011-2012

2012-2013

A

76.3

77

76.7

76.8

76.7

B

2.1

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.1

D

21.6

22

22.4

22.4

22.3

Finally, notable as measures destined to promote acquisition of language in all Compulsory
Education cycles have been the activities under way as part of the Ulibarri Programme to
promote the use of Basque inside and outside the classroom and at school (in the last 5
courses, 400 centres have chosen to participate voluntarily in the Programme); those
implemented in developing the Language Reinforcement Programme as part of the Immigrant
Pupil Reception Plan; or those designed to assess and diagnose the results posted by the
education system within the school framework (in the current academic year, 2012/2013, the
results of the Arrue 6 investigation have been presented, incorporating both those for the use
of Basque and for communication proficiency in both official languages).
e)
iii) if, by reason of the role of the State in relation to higher education institutions,
paragraphs i) and ii) cannot be applied, to encourage and/or allow the provision of
university or other forms of higher education in regional or minority languages or
of facilities for the study of these languages as university or higher education
subjects;
It must be recalled that there are three universities in the Basque university system: two are
private (Mondragón and Deusto Universities) plus a single public institution, the University of
the Basque Country/Euskal Herriko Unibertsitatea.
The regulatory references are Act No. 19/1998 of 29 June on University Planning in the
Autonomous Community of the Basque Country dealing with some aspects of importance in
relation to normalisation, and the new Act No. 3/2004 whose provisions retain guarantees to
promote use of Basque at University.
On the basis of that autonomous regulatory framework, the Basque Government supports and
collaborates with the Basque university system via the current 2011-2014 Basque University
System Plan which contains a strategy for the entire system as well as for each of its three
Universities, its objectives including the promotion of Basque in both teaching and research.
The Plan highlights the work done in this field by the three Basque universities to ensure the
availability of teaching in Basque, minimal at the beginning of the eighties but now exceeding
25% of all credits offered by the University of Deusto, 49% of the total offered by University of
the Basque Country/Euskal Herriko Unibertsitatea and 64% of total credits offered by the
University of Mondragón.
At the University of the Basque Country, the main university in the Autonomous Community
and one of the most important in the State, with 45,000 students and some 5,000 teachers,
40% of its students are currently studying in Basque.
The following table shows trends in recent years.

100

Pupils studying in Basque

Total pupils

2007-2008

16,863

43,540

2008-2009

16,883

42,120

2009-2010

17,180

42,046

2010-2011

16,998

41,759

2011-2012

16,705

40,734

As the following table shows, the percentage of pupils completing University Entrance in
Basque will increase even further in the coming years (February 2013 data):
Álava

Vizcaya

Guipúzcoa

Total

2008

43.30

48.25

68.15

54.93

2009

46.16

48.96

72.36

55.82

2010

47.74

52.41

75.06

58.40

2011

47.97

55.36

73.05

58.79

2012

52.66

53.65

75.49

60.60

The University of the Basque Country must thus speed up the process and make more
academic studies available in Basque; students cannot at this time be guaranteed that they
will be able to complete their university studies in Basque in all degree courses, even should
they wish to. Existing data referred to February 2013 show the linguistic offer of university
credits according to field of knowledge, including those which are optional.
In 2013, the University of the Basque Country approved an extension and upgrade of the
2007/08-2011/12 Basque Master Plan to adjust it to the new guidelines set out in the next
Planning Period for the Normalisation of Use of Basque in the Public Administrations (20132017). The main objectives of language policy proposed in that Master Plan were referred to
in the Third Spanish report.
f)
i) to arrange for the provision of adult and continuing education courses which
are taught mainly or wholly in the regional or minority languages;
The HABE (the Institute for Adult Literacy and for Teaching Basque to Adults) has continued
its work during the period under review to promote Basque teaching for adults; the Advisory
Council on Basque has found that of the approximately 300,000 new Basque speakers
attracted over the last three decades, 100,000 came from teaching of adults and adult literacy
and 200,000 from the general education system.
The following are the data on pupils who have completed studies in the network of HABEcertified euskaltegis in previous years; 39,723 in the 2009-2010 academic year; 37,396 in
2010-2011; 35,132 in 2011-2012; and 32,219 in the 2012-2013 academic year.
A certain falloff in the number of euskaltegi pupils can be seen in the last four years, the
clearly positive result of the enormous advance arising from the introduction of the system of
language models into the Basque education system, leading to greater and more generalised
bilingual linguistic capacity among pupils in the compulsory and post-compulsory educational
stages. While the average age of pupils in the euskaltegis in 1994 was 27, in 2000 it was 32,
and 37 in 2013.
The financial resources made available by the HABE to the public and private euskaltegis to
fund their activity have been as follows: €34.7 million in the 2009-2010 academic year; €33.4

101

million in 2010-2011; €31.4 million in 2011-2012; €30 million in 2012-2013; and €30.3 million
in 2013-2014.
This slight reduction in the contributions is in line with trends in enrolments. The total financing
of municipal and private euskaltegis is completed with the funds from the municipalities and
the students themselves.
Despite the economic recession and budget cuts in this phase, the economic modules have
been sustained without cuts for the private euskaltegis; for the 2013/2014 academic year,
HABE has approved its calls while maintaining the aid modules without reductions for those
private euskaltegis, while increasing the contribution to their municipal counterparts.
The HABE also continues to maintain other aid for pupils who pass examinations to accredit
proficiency in Basque called by the Institute during the academic year, amounting in 2010 to
€1,850,000, in 2011 to €1,000,000, none in 2012 (retention of credits and a single
examination) and €700,000 in 2013.
The HABE still defines the HEOC (Basic Curriculum for Teaching Basque to Adults) to be
employed by all the euskaltegis, shifting from four levels, the equivalents of levels B1, B2, C1
and C2 in the European Framework, to define levels A1 and A2 as well in the Basic
Curriculum for Teaching Basque to Adults.
The HABE is also engaged in projects to design teaching materials; it makes self-study, online self-study and combined systems available to certified euskaltegis; it continues with a
permanent training plan targeting euskaltegi teachers; it makes two annual calls for
certification of the levels defined in the curriculum; and is developing the project Euskara
Munduan (Basque in the World) in collaboration with the network of World Basque Centres.
g)
to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and culture
reflected by the regional or minority language;
As explained in the Third Report, the current legislation grants the Autonomous Community
capacity to regulate 45% of all curricular material for teaching the content, procedures and
values of the Basque Dimension of the Curriculum (the DVC – history, geography, literature,
art, …). However, because of the need to improve the focus on this area, the Basque
Government intends to treat this matter as a priority in the coming years, with proposals for
working lines to this end (programming, analysis of other experiences, agreements with the
Ministry of Education and the Navarre Government, teacher and pupil training, etc.)
h) to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement
paragraphs a) to g) accepted by the Party;
As also pointed out in the Third Report of Spain, this aspect is in large measure fulfilled, in line
with the requirements of the Basque Country regulations in the matter. In addition to the
information provided then, pointing to the long road still to be run in both initial and on-going
training (the GARATU programme), reference may now be made to the work being done via
the IRALE Programme (Irakasleen Euskarazko Prestakuntza Zerbitzua) created in 1983, for
teacher-training in Basque. Its current annual offer of senior-level courses imparted outside
normal hours is wide-ranging and varied (basic Summer language training courses and senior
level courses taught outside teaching hours). In addition, its work on preparing digital teaching
materials in Basque must be highlighted. Further information is available on the IRALE
website.
i) to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures
taken and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional
or minority languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which
will be made public;
The information facilitated in this matter in the Third Report from Spain may be reproduced
here.
All the related information is on the Basque Government’s Department of Education,
Language Policy and Culture website: http://www.hezkuntza.ejgv.euskadi.net/r43-2591/es/ under:

102

Education System Statistics

Paragraph 2
With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the
regional or minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number
of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide
teaching in or of the regional or minority language at all the appropriate stages of
education.
The content of the Third Report from Spain is reiterated.
Article 9. Justice
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of
residents using the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified
below, according to the situation of each of these languages and on condition that the
use of the facilities afforded by the present paragraph is not considered by the judge to
hamper the proper administration of justice:
a) in criminal proceedings:
i)

to ensure that the courts shall, at the request of one of the parties, conduct
the proceedings in the regional or minority languages; and/or

ii) to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or minority
language; and/or
iii) to ensure that claims and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not be
considered inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a regional
or minority language; and/or
iv) on request, to draft documents in legal proceedings in such regional or
minority languages, if necessary using interpreters and translations with
no further cost to the persons concerned;
b) in civil proceedings:
i)

to ensure that the courts shall, at the request of one of the parties, conduct
the proceedings in the regional or minority languages; and/or

ii) to allow a litigant whenever having to appear before a court in person to
use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring
additional cost; and/or
iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or
minority languages, if necessary using interpreters and translations;
c) in proceedings before courts with jurisdiction in administrative matters:

103

i)

to ensure that the courts shall, at the request of one of the parties, conduct
the proceedings in the regional or minority languages; and/or

ii) to allow a litigant whenever having to appear before a court in person to
use his or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring
additional cost; and/or
iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or
minority languages, if necessary using interpreters and translations;
d)
To take steps to ensure that application of sub-paragraphs i) and iii) of
paragraphs b) and c) above and any use of interpreters and translations implies no
additional costs for those concerned;

Recommendations of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
9.

To amend the legal framework with a view to making it clear that the criminal, civil
and administrative judicial authorities in the Autonomous Communities will
conduct the proceedings in co-official languages at the request of one party;

10.

To take the necessary legal and practical measures to ensure that a sufficient
proportion of the judicial personnel assigned to the Autonomous Communities
affected by the application of Article 9 of the Charter has a working knowledge of
the relevant languages.

547. The Committee of Experts urges the authorities as follows:
To take the necessary measures to increase the percentage of Basque Country judicial
personnel, at all the levels and in particular among judges and prosecutors, able to use
Basque as working language in the courts.
Reference may be made to the general information not specific to the Autonomous
Community facilitated for this Article 9 of the Charter, and for recommendations 1 and 2 of the
Committee of Ministers in the section of this report on Catalan in Catalonia.
Actions by the Autonomous Community
The Basque Government continues to work to normalise the use and presence of Basque also in
the area of Justice.
As already indicated in the Third Spanish Report, the Basque Government’s Justice
Department offers and provides a translation service for cases where that proves necessary
for judicial procedures in the Basque Country, making it possible to meet the demands of the
relevant paragraphs of Article 9 of the Charter (accused’s right to express themselves in
Basque; the presentation of documents, claims or evidence in Basque; etc.).
In relation to the comments in the Committee of Experts’ report on the creation of the
trebatzaille (assistant for bilingual questions) within the Courts, it is pointed out that the
programme of guidance and training for Justice employees was implemented in 2010 and
2011, suspended in 2012 and resumed in 2013.
Also in the area of training, various types of courses are imparted, paying particular attention
to petitions for personnel for jobs differentiated by language. The number of judicial officials
proficient in Basque has increased in line with the drive to enhance their language training.
There are as yet no profile requirements for members of the judiciary, of the prosecution service
and of the corps of clerks of court. However, under collaboration agreements concluded by the

104

Basque Government with both the Spanish Ministry of Justice and the General Council of the
Judiciary (CGPJ), they may access the training available in the calls for each collective. It is to be
remembered that knowledge of the Community’s official languages is considered positively in
assigning jobs.
Along these lines, work has been done to gather indicators accrediting the language profile of
personnel in the service of the Justice Administration (30% accredit profiles 2, 3 or 4) and of
members of the Public Prosecution Service and Clerks of Court (8% accrediting profiles 3 or
4).
Decree No. 174/2010 of 29 June for the linguistic normalisation of the Justice Administration
in the Autonomous Community has been passed, regulating among other matters the process
for allocating linguistic profiles to posts requiring a level of Basque which is appropriate to the
language proficiency needed for those jobs. This is being done in parallel with the new judicial
office.
The Decree defines five main areas of action:


the classification of certain jobs as differentiated posts



cataloguing of units according to language requirements



language training courses for public servants



programmes for use of Basque in the judicial and prosecutor’s offices and common services



the creation of bilingual teams in all judicial and prosecutor’s offices and common services

In line with on-going improvement, the General Plan for Linguistic Normalisation of the Basque
Autonomous Community’s Justice Administration (2010-2020) was approved, reformulating the
Plan endorsed in 2008. This new General Plan establishes the following objectives:
1. To promote and spread the importance given Basque.
2. To stimulate the use of services in Basque by citizens and by professionals, making such
services increasingly available.
3. To foster the use of Basque by public service personnel at the service of the Justice
Administration.
4. To seek the favourable attitude of judges, prosecutors and clerks of court in normalising
Basque.
5. To enhance lawyers’ awareness and capabilities
Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake:
a) not to reject the validity of legal documents drawn up within the area of the
State for the sole reason that they have been written in a regional or minority
language; or
There is no record of breach of this commitment.
Paragraph 3
The parties undertake to make accessible in the regional or minority languages the
most important national legislative texts and those which refer especially to the
speakers of these languages, unless these texts are already available in a different
form.
Work continued in 2010-2013 on the translation of regulatory texts, in collaboration with the
University of the Basque Country and the University of Deusto (those previously translated are

105

referred to in the Third Report from Spain). The following texts were translated during this
period:


The Reform General Protection of Consumers and Users Act, and other
complementary legislation.



The General Contracting Conditions Act, Act No. 7/1998 of 13 April.



The Trademarks Act, Act No. 17/2001 of 7 December.



The Organic Trade Union Freedom Act, Act No. 11/1985 of 2 August.



Act No. 14/1994 of 1 June regulating Temporary Employment Agencies.



The Reform Social Order Infractions and Sanctions Act.



Act No. 1/2002 of 21 February Coordinating State and Autonomous Community
Competences in the Defence of Competition.



The Unfair Competition Act, Act No. 3/1991 of 10 January.



The Defence of Competition Act, Act No. 15/2007 of 3 July.



The General Advertising Act, Act No. 34/1988 of 11 November.



The Defence of Competition Regulations.



The Business Code and the Bills of Exchange and Cheques Act.



The company legislation.



The Civil and Criminal Codes have been reedited twice, and duly updated.

In 2011, a collaboration Agreement between the Basque Government and the Central
Government began to be implemented to publish legislation in Basque (Official State Gazette
No. 254 of 21 October 2011). From 2011 to 2013, 9 Acts, 36 Legislative Royal Decrees, 1
Non-Legislative Royal Decree, and 8 Organic Acts were published in Basque translation.
Finally, as stated in the report of the Committee of Experts, the Basque Government has a
terminology consulting service, including legal terminology, operating according to the criteria
and decisions resolved on by the Commission for the Normalisation of Documents in Basque.
386. With regard to pre-1998 legislation, the Committee of Experts encourages the
Navarre Government to co-operate with the Basque Country authorities when its
legislation is translated by the Basque authorities.
The Basque Government wishes only to state its willingness to collaborate in this field.
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are
users of regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and
according to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as reasonably
possible:
a)
i) to ensure that the administrative authorities use the regional or minority
languages; or
ii) to ensure that such of their officers as are in contact with the public use
the regional or minority languages in their relations with persons applying to
them in these languages; or

106

iii) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or
written applications and receive a reply in these languages; or
iv) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or
written applications in these languages; or
v) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a
document in these languages
The information relative to Paragraph 1 of this Article of the Charter is provided in point II.B) of
this Spanish report.
Paragraph 2
In respect of the local and regional authorities in whose territory the number of residents
who are users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures
specified below, the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
a) the use of regional or minority languages within the framework of the regional
or local authority;
571.

The Committee of Experts invites the authorities to comment on the language
proficiency of staff of local authorities in the next periodical report.

The specific obligations on use of Basque by the administrative authorities arising under
Basque Act No. 10/1982 of 24 November for the Basic Normalisation of the Use of Basque
are in general complied with by the Autonomous Community Administration and the ‘Foral’
and Municipal Authorities. It can in this sense be said that the administrations are taking
measures to fulfil the current legal requirements, usually in the form of plans to normalise use
of Basque while including measures to train their employees to enable them to do their jobs
also in Basque. Some specific failures do however occur and which are reduced as those
plans are implanted and developed.
Along those lines of compliance, the Basque Government will continue to work to promote
Basque in all public administrations within their jurisdictions and, in dealing with the indications
in the Committee of Experts’ report, various measures have been adopted for use of Basque
in the Ertzaintza (the Basque Police) and in the Basque Health Service (Osakidetza).
In connection with the Police Force, an evaluation report has been draw up highlighting the
advances made in normalising the use of Basque with the passage of Decree No. 76/2012 of
22 May amending Decree No. 30/1998 regulating the process to normalise Basque in the
Ertzaintza. This provision regulates the requirements of linguistic proficiency applicable, at the
highest level, for posts in the Ertzaintza requiring that. In a payroll of 8,033 ertzaintzas,
36.01% have one of the body’s accredited language profiles. Overall, in recent years, the
measures adopted in this matter (regulations, language profiles, language training, etc.) have
put down the bases making it possible to implement the next Plan for use of Basque in the
Ertzainza.
Notable in the area of the Osakidetza, the Basque Health Service, was the passage in 2005 of
its Basque Plan for the period 2005-2011, fulfilling the provision in Decree No. 67/2003 to
normalise the use of Basque in the Service. When that period ended, in 2013 the public body
the Osakidetza-Basque Health Service assessed the extent to which the plan approved had
been fulfilled, noting an advance in normalising the use of Basque since the first assessment
in 2008, and 58.48% compliance with objectives and measures. Particular advances have
been made in the language profiles for jobs and their accreditation, with offers of training
courses targeting the Service’s professionals and employees. The second Plan is being
formulated in the light of that assessment, for publication in the second half of 2013.

107

Most Local Authorities in Vizcaya and in Guipúzcoa have either a Basque service with
personnel for the normalisation of language as well as translators or, particularly in the case of
small bodies, employees to do work related to language normalisation and translation. In
Álava, larger Local Administrations also have such a service, while local bodies in smaller
localities make use of joint services.
According to the Vice-Ministry for Language Policy’s latest report evaluating the 2008-2012
planning period, public employees’ levels of linguistic proficiency continue to rise, enhancing
their capacity to do their work also in Basque, highlighting the fact that the degree of
compliance with the language requisite for posts requiring it stands at 82.47%.
b)

the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or
written applications in these languages;

574. The Committee of Experts invites the authorities to comment on the possibilities for
users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written applications in their
language to local authorities in the next periodical report.
As pointed out in the Third Spanish Report, only in certain cases may difficulties arise in using
the right to communicate verbally in Basque because of an official’s lack of language training.
The authorities are however making public attention an absolute priority, adopting measures
to guarantee citizens’ language rights.
In the Autonomous Administration, 80% of direct public service jobs ensure that it is possible
for the public to address themselves to that Administration in Basque and the use of the right
to communicate in Basque is also guaranteed. The Vice-Ministry for Language Policy has in
any case continued the ELEBIDE service, created in 2006 to guarantee protection of citizens’
linguistic rights, handling complaints, consultations and suggestions in this field, and each
year running a campaign to publicise the Service. Complaints have increased since 2006
(from 212 in 2009 to 298 in 2012), more the result of people’s awareness of their language
rights than from breach of those rights.
Elebide, the service for the protection of language rights, runs a campaign every year to make
its service known, with three aims: firstly to promote social awareness of those rights;
secondly to familiarise society with the service offered, and thirdly to explain how to access it.
c) the publication by regional collectives of their official documents also in the
relevant regional or minority languages;
d) the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in the
relevant regional or minority languages;
In line with the terms of the Third Report from Spain, these measures continue in general to
be complied with.
e) the use by regional collectives of regional or minority languages in debates in
their assemblies, without however excluding use of the official language(s) of
the State;
f) the use by local collectives of regional or minority languages in debates in their
assemblies, without however excluding use of the official language(s) of the
State;
For these points e) and f), please refer to the Third Spanish Report. In addition, there are also
simultaneous translation services.
g) the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official
language(s), of traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or
minority languages;

108

Following reference to the Third Report from Spain, it can be added here that State Act No.
19/2011 of 5 July (Official State Gazette 6-7-2011; No. 160) changed the earlier provincial
demarcations of «Álava/Álava», «Guipúzcoa» and «Vizcaya» to «Araba/Álava», «Gipuzkoa»
and «Bizkaia». Names of provinces may only be changed in national legislation.
Paragraph 3
With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other
persons acting on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which
regional or minority languages are used, in accordance with the situation of each
language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
a) to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in the provision of the
service;
577.

The Committee of Experts encourages the authorities to insert in public
tenders the obligation to use Basque.

The provisions on consumers and users referred to in the Third Spanish Report are restated,
with the addition that these regulations have been amended to guarantee their rights (see the
section on Legislative Changes).
The Autonomous, ‘Foral’ and Municipal Authorities guarantee that personnel with knowledge
of Basque will be hired, that this is obligatory in some cases depending on the sociolinguistic
situation of each place and, elsewhere, is assessed positively.
Regional provisions regulating the incorporation of language conditions in implementing
Autonomous Administration administrative contracts have also been retained, requiring
Clauses to be included concerning the language conditions needed to provide the services it
is wished to contract.
In that connection, the European Commission has asked the Spanish authorities for
information and clarifications concerning a presumed practice of the ‘Foral’ Community of
Guipúzcoa excluding companies from public contract tenders if unable to demonstrate that
their employees or management personnel are satisfactorily proficient in Basque, based on
‘Foral’ Decree No. 4/2009 of 27 January regulating use of official languages in the area of the
‘Foral’ Community of Guipúzcoa for the period 2008-2012 and on the 27 January 2009
Resolution passed by the Council of Deputies on the inclusion of linguistic conditions in
implementing administrative contracts in that ‘Foral’ Community’s area of action. This practice
may prove contrary to Article 45 of Directive 2004/18/EC on coordinating procedures for the
award of public contracts, which sets down seven causes, not including unfamiliarity with a
given language, for excluding economic operators from tender procedures, although the Court
of Justice has accepted that a Member State may establish other causes of exclusion
provided that the principles of equality of treatment and of transparency are observed and
such causes are proportional to the end sought.
The European Commission’s intervention arose when written questions were tabled by
Spanish MEPs in the European Parliament on use of Basque by the Guipúzcoa ‘Foral’
Community.
b) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written
applications and receive a reply in these languages;
As pointed out in previous sections, citizens may submit applications in Basque.
Paragraph 4

109

With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by
them, the Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
a) translation or interpretation as may be required;
Decree No. 48/2012 of 3 April is innovative in dealing with the official translation services,
providing for the transversal translation services of the General Administration of the
Autonomous Community and its Autonomous Bodies to be centralised (the service has 39
translators), allowing professional translation to be used while fostering and encouraging the
bilingual drafting of texts and, in general, the use of Basque as service and working language
in the General Administration and the Autonomous Bodies of the Autonomous Community of
the Basque Country, unifying the criteria in this field. In June 2010, the call was published for
the certification of sworn translators and interpreters.
b) recruitment and, where necessary, training of the officials and other public
service employees required;
The declaration in this respect in the Third Spanish Report is reiterated, adding that the
Basque Government’s Plan for Use of Basque for the Fourth Planning Period (2008-2012)
was the subject of an assessment report in 2013 which detected certain fields (reinforcing
understanding of the language, the shift from understanding to use, heightened awareness
and participation in plans, etc.) which would need to be enhanced for the following planning
period.
In addition, Basque Public Administration Institute programmes to train Local and ‘Foral’
Administration personnel in Basque remain in place, along with personnel in the Autonomous
Community’s General Administration and its other public institutions (the Basque Parliament,
the Ararteko (Ombudsman), the Basque Audit Office, etc.). There were 4,056 pupils in these
courses in 2009/2010, and 3,070 in 2011/2012.
c) compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees
having a knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the
territory in which that language is used;
The content of the Third Spanish Report on this matter is reiterated.
Paragraph 5
The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or
minority languages, at the request of those concerned.
The content of the Third Spanish Report on this matter is reiterated.

Article 11. The Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the
territories in which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each
language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent,
have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence
and autonomy of the media:
The Basque Government declares that it is conscious of the role of the media in normalising
and revitalising a minorised or minority language like Basque.
In addition to the detail given in the Third Spanish Report, in recent years attempts have been
made to maintain or to limit cuts in annual aid to magazines published in Basque (€5.5 million

110

in 2010, €4.8 million in 2013). The 2013 call continues to include the projects subsidised in
previous years for media partially or entirely in Basque (daily press, magazines, radio,
television, etc.).
a)
i) to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission, to
ensure the creation of at least one radio station and one television channel in
the regional or minority languages;
The detail in the Third Report on the public entity Basque Radio Television-EiTBE (and its 4
channels) can be enlarged with the EiTB Internet service, a channel offering news and current
affairs with a balanced mix of Basque and Castilian, and two channels in Basque for children
and young people.
On the matter of television and local sound radio broadcasting in Basque, the data provided
on the matter in the Third Spanish Report may be reproduced.
b)
i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one radio station in the
regional or minority languages;
The information facilitated in the Third Spanish Report on local television and sound radio
broadcasting may be reproduced here, with the novelty of the passage of the 8 November
2011 Decree on audiovisual communication, extending its scope of application to commercial,
community or public media whose territorial range of cover does not reach beyond the Basque
Autonomous Community. This new regulation means that new licences must be awarded by
public tender, and sets out the minimum elements for the bases of such tenders. Article 9 of
the Decree creates a reserve for broadcasts in Basque. At present, 35 radio transmitters are
broadcasting in FM.
c)
i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one television channel in
the regional or minority languages;
The points made in the Third Spanish Report are reiterated.
d)
i) to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and
audiovisual works in the regional or minority languages;
Between 2009 and 2012, aid was granted for audiovisual creation, development and
production (€2,533,420 in 2009, €3,225,000 in 2010, €2,984,866 in 2011 and €1,496,000 in
2012).
Between 2009 and 2011, aid was granted to promote and advertise fiction and animated
feature films (€295,000 in 2009, €250,800 in 2010 and €181,600 in 2011).
Between 2009 and 2012, aid was granted for the creation of scripts (€105,000 in 2009,
€109,800 in 2010, €150,600 in 2011 and €127,400 in 2012).
Between 2009 and 2012, under an Agreement with the associations of independent Basque
Country producers, EITB investment in original version Basque productions was €4,672,661 in
2009, €4,421,133 in 2010, €3,689,063 in 2011 and €3,195,609 in 2012.
Between 2010 and 2012, new aid was granted for movie theatres (€73,530 in 2010, €220,000
in 2011 and €120,000 in 2012).
Annual collaboration with the ONCE (the Spanish National Organisation for the Blind) is ongoing to facilitate access to the works of Basque literature in audio support (512 titles have
already been adapted).
e)
i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one
newspaper in the regional or minority languages;

111

Between 2010 and 2012, the newspaper BERRIA received €4,679,897.76 in aid and the daily
press printed entirely in Basque received €5,863,479.97.
f)
ii) to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual
productions in regional or minority languages;
Calls continued in 2009, 2010, 2011 and 2012 for the programme to fund audiovisual
production (interest-free repayable loans and loans for the financing of contracts), with an
overall annual endowment of €8,235,000, reduced by budgetary restrictions to €7,000,000 in
2012.
g)
i) to support the training of journalists and other media staff using regional or
minority languages;
Journalist training continues to be the target of financing in calls for aid for media in Basque.
Moreover, the University of the Basque Country offers Journalism studies entirely in Basque.
Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form
to a regional or minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and
television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language. They further
undertake to ensure that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and
free circulation of information in the written press in a language used in identical or
similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of the above-mentioned
freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such
formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are
necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity
or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or
morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for preventing disclosure
of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the authority and impartiality of
the judiciary.
The points made in the Third Spanish Report are reiterated.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to ensure that the interests of the users of regional or minority
languages are represented or taken into account within such bodies as may be
established in accordance with the law, to guarantee the freedom and pluralism of the
media.
The foregoing is reiterated.
Article 12 – Cultural activities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries,
cultural centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as
literary work and film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and
the culture industries, including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties
undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used and to the extent that
the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this field:

112

a) to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority
languages and foster the different means of access to works produced in these
languages;
b) to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced
in regional or minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing,
post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;
c) to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other
languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation
and subtitling activities;
d) to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural
activities of various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the
knowledge and use of regional or minority languages and cultures in the
undertakings which they initiate or for which they provide backing;
e) to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or
supporting cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command
of the regional or minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of
the rest of the population;
f) to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given
regional or minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural
activities;
g) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for
collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the
regional or minority languages;
h) if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and
terminological research services, particularly with a view to maintaining and
developing appropriate administrative, commercial, economic, social, technical or
legal terminology in each regional or minority language.
All the information furnished in this respect in the Third Spanish Report may be reiterated
here, highlighting the following among the Autonomous Community’s actions during this
period: subsidies to Etxepare, the Basque Institute, in 2012 for translation of literary works into
Basque (€44,570); Basque translations of literary works in 2010, 2011 and 2012; annual
prizes for the best literary translation into Basque; aid during these years for feature films and
DVDs dubbed in Basque; annual aid to foster use of Basque in the activities of children and
young people; Agreements signed with the Labayru Institute to research and normalise literary
production in Basque; or the on-going activity of the Basque Public Terminology Bank in
designing various dictionaries.
Paragraph 2
In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are
traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority
language justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities
and facilities in accordance with the preceding paragraph.
From 2009 to 2013, teaching continued of apprenticeship courses offered by the BasqueCentres or Euskal Etxeak in collaboration with the HABE (the Institute for Adult Literacy and
for Teaching Basque to Adults) – more than 1,700 pupils – with an annual subsidy of some
€61,000. Basque and Basque culture classes are also continuing at Universities: the
Complutense University of Madrid, Valencia University, the Autonomous University of

113

Barcelona, the University of Barcelona, and the National Distance Education University
(UNED).
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy
abroad, for regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.
The overseas activities of the Basque Institute - Etxepare - have been on-going during this
period, including making Basque known at the main European language fairs (of which there
were 20 in 2012); annual offers of aid for music, the visual arts and audiovisual products at
international fairs, and diffusion of Basque culture; co-production of cultural programmes;
exhibitions and round tables; continuation of the Basque and Basque Culture Lectureship
Programme and Summer Courses at foreign Universities (the Institute has collaboration
agreements with 37 Universities in 15 countries); the inauguration of 3 chairs in Basque
studies at Universities in the United States and Germany, and planning for others in Argentina
and the United Kingdom, or publications for divulging Basque literature and culture.
Article 13. Economic and social life
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole
country:
a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without
justifiable reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating
to economic or social life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical
documents such as instructions for the use of products or installations;
The information furnished in this respect in the Third Spanish Report may be reiterated here,
while highlighting the following: the continuation in 2009-2013 of subsidies to develop Basque
plans in private company work centres and in the Public Administrations; implementation of
the Fourth Plan for the Linguistic Normalisation of the Basque Public Administrations (20082012); the 121 BIKAIN Basque Quality Certificates awarded to companies between 2008 and
2012, and the 46 applications received in the 2013 call.
b) to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of companies and private
documents of any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or minority
languages, at least between users of the same language;
c) to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority
languages in connection with economic or social activities;
The information facilitated in this respect in the Third Spanish Report is reproduced for these
points b) and c).
d) to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by means
other than those specified in the above sub-paragraphs;
The ESEP (the Plan of Action to Promote Basque) continues to be considered the ideal
instrument for this commitment to promotion, in the belief that it offers a number of future
challenges including a greater drive for awareness, to promote Basque in relations with
clients, or an adequate fusion of the education system and business in linguistic terms.

114

Paragraph 2
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the
public authorities are competent, within the territory in which the regional or minority
languages are used, and as far as this is reasonably possible:
a) to include in their financial and banking regulations provisions which allow, by
means of procedures compatible with commercial practice, the use of regional or
minority languages in drawing up payment orders (cheques, drafts, etc.) or other
financial documents or, where appropriate, to ensure the implementation of such
provisions;
The information facilitated in this matter in the Third Spanish Report may be reproduced on
this point.
b) in the economic and social sectors directly under their control (public sector), to
organise activities to promote the use of regional or minority languages;
The Autonomous Community expresses its thanks for the Committee of Experts’
acknowledgement of passage of Decree No. 123/2008 on consumers and users’ language
rights, and of Decree No. 53/2009 regulating the Language Seal of Commitment – Bikain –
and the Certificate of Quality of Linguistic Management. In response to the Committee of
Experts’ known estimate that the scope of Decree No. 123/2008 is limited, affecting just 5% of
companies, it is considered that, notwithstanding the fact that it involves just 5,600 companies
(some 6% of the Community total), given the nature of those companies, the impact on
consumers and users is high and of unquestionable relevance. It must be kept in mind that the
Decree affects both legal entities or persons providing universal services of general interest or
of a similar category, and establishments open to the public for sale of products or provision of
services and which meet requisites such as a payroll of over 250, more than 400 m of public
sales area, more than 15 employees dealing with the public, integration into a set of sales
outlets in one location, or financial and credit institutions providing service to the public.
c) to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and
hostels offer the possibility of receiving and treating in their own language persons
using a regional or minority language who are in need of care on grounds of illhealth, old age or for other reasons;
619. The Committee of Experts invites the authorities to comment on the issue of the
language proficiency amongst staff in the health service in the next periodical report.
Reference may be made here to the information furnished on this point in the Third Spanish
Report. In connection with Osakidetza – the Basque Health Service – mention is made of the
data provided above related to Article 10, Paragraph 2, sub-paragraph a) of the Charter
dealing with the situation and an assessment of the normalisation of the use of Basque in that
Service.
On the other hand, emphasis should be placed on how the call for aid to implement plans for
Basque in private work centres has been extended to companies associated with healthcare;
the award of the BIKAIN certificate to 10 public and private healthcare centres since 2008; or
the drive by the Basque Health Service to increase the use of Basque by users and patients
with sector professionals.
d) to ensure by appropriate means that safety instructions are also drawn up in
regional or minority languages;
622. The Committee of Experts would like to receive concrete examples of
implementation of regulations relevant to this undertaking in the next periodical report.

115

The information provided on this aspect in the Third Spanish Report is reproduced here. It
may however be highlighted that the Basque Consumer Institute – KONTSUMOBIDE –
facilitates all its information in Basque and Castilian (including its website), and that the
Basque Occupational Safety and Health Institute – OSALAN – also publishes its manuals in
Basque.
e) to arrange for information provided by the competent public authorities
concerning the rights of consumers to be made available in regional or minority
languages;
The information facilitated in this respect in the Third Spanish Report may be reproduced
here.
Article 14. Transfrontier exchanges
The Parties undertake:
a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the
States in which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if
necessary to seek to conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster
contacts between the users of the same language in the States concerned in the
fields of culture, education, information, vocational training and permanent
education;
627. The Committee of Experts encourages the authorities to pursue bilateral
agreements with the countries in which the same or similar languages are spoken.
Here, the points made above concerning compliance with Article 7, Paragraph 1, subparagraph e), of the Charter on collaboration with France can be reiterated.
As indicated there, following the framework cooperation agreement on questions of Basque
and language policy, concluded for the years 2007-2010 between the Basque Government
and the French Basque Language Authority, and to ensure its continuation, on 31 January
2012 the parties signed a new framework agreement to collaborate on language policy from
2011 to 2016. This framework agreement is implemented each year in an Annex which, for
2013, was signed on 17 April in Bayonne, programming various collaborative actions in areas
such as “Basquisation” and literacy, broadcast of ETB television in the French Basque
Country, the elaboration of the Fifth Sociolinguistic Survey, and the exchange of information
between the two. Also annually, a collaboration fund was set up with contributions from both
sides and which has held in recent years at €1,600,000. Likewise, this collaboration has been
translated into a programme to foster and promote reading in Basque to which the Basque
Government has destined €117,600 in the last three years.
b) for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or promote cooperation across borders, in particular between regional or local authorities in
whose territory the same language is used in identical or similar form.
The Basque Government encourages action to promote and collaborate in the use of Basque
in those territories where that language is used.

116

BASQUE IN THE ‘FORAL’ COMMUNITY OF NAVARRE
1. INTRODUCTION
Data on the number of speakers
56.… The Committee of Experts encourages the Spanish authorities to carry out
surveys in cooperation with the speakers of regional or minority languages in order to
have accurate updated data concerning the number of users of regional or minority
languages and their geographic distribution.
In the matter of updated reliable data on the number of Basque speakers in the ‘Foral’
Community of Navarre, the 2011/2016 Navarre Statistics Plan, approved in ‘Foral’ Act No.
19/2010 of 23 November and currently being implemented, provided for a new Sociolinguistic
Survey to be made on Basque at the end of 2013, along with a sociolinguistic map of Navarre.
This map, to be based on the census of population and homes in 1991, 2001 and 2011, is
designed to secure indicators of knowledge of Basque among the people of Navarre as their
first language and the language most used at home, and its evolution in Navarre over 20
years. The complexity of this statistical operation is slowing its implementation, so that
completion and publication is forecast to be delayed until 2014.
It must nonetheless be remembered that the Third Spanish Report on compliance with the
Charter (page 42) furnished data obtained from the Navarre Basque Institute (Euskarabidea)
study on “The situation of Basque in the ‘Foral’ Community of Navarre. A Sociolinguistic
Study. 2008”, and which can be summarised as follows:
% population
FAMILIAR
WITH Basque
Basque speaking Zone
Mixed Zone
Non-Basque speaking Zone

57.6
9.9
2.5

% population
whose FIRST
LANGUAGE is
Basque
49.6
3.5
1.4

% population
habitually USING
Basque
36.5
2.6
0.7

Moreover the Specific Collaboration Agreement concluded in July 2012 between the
Government of Navarre and the Basque Government in linguistic affairs includes
sociolinguistics as one of the areas of collaboration, as result of which the Basque
Government transferred the data secured in its 2011 survey to Euskarabidea/the Navarre
Basque Institute.
The results of both surveys are similar and reveal among other findings major sociolinguistic
differences among the Navarre regions, and increased knowledge of Basque among young
people, linked to their having acquired it in the education system, while its acquisition as
family language and rates of habitual use have remained stable. In addition, a rise is seen in
the positive attitude to promoting Basque in the mixed and non-Basque speaking zones whilst
in the Basque-speaking zone a drop is seen in this attitude, of close to 10 points, although the
highest percentages in positive attitude are maintained.
Legislative Changes
The most significant change in the legislation during this time was ‘Foral’ Act No. 2/2010 of 23
of February amending Article 5.1. points a) and b) of the ‘Foral’ Basque Act, Act No. 18/1986
of 15 December, designed to allow application of the mechanism established in Article 5.2 of
that ‘Foral’ Act to review the incorporation of the municipalities of Aranguren, Belascoáin,
Galar and Noáin-Valle de Elorz from the non-Basque speaking zone into the mixed zone. In
implementing this Act, the Aranguren, Belascoáin and Galar Local Corporations resolved to
join the mixed zone. That of Noáin-Valle de Elorz however did not however endorse the
resolution, preferring to remain in the non-Basque speaking zone. The municipalities which

117

decided to enter the mixed zone totalled 10,081 inhabitants, 1.56% of the total population of
Navarre.
The other changes, of lower-rank regulations, are referred to in the information provided below
for each of the Charter articles concerned.
50. The Third Periodic Report gave no details of Euskarabidea/the Navarre Basque
Institute ………… the ‘Foral’ Decree also regulates the Navarre Basque
Council/Euskararen Nafar Kontseilua…….
‘Foral’ Decree No. 183/2007 of 10 September provided for the creation of a new autonomous
body called Euskarabidea/the Navarre Basque Institute to manage the resources assigned to
developing Basque, until then handled by the Directorate-General of Language policy. This
body’s Governing Council consists of a representative of each department from the ‘Foral’
Administration.
The functions assigned to Euskarabidea include study, analysis, evaluation and the issue of
reports on the sociolinguistic and linguistic reality of Basque in Navarre; the implementation of
programmes on the use and profile of Basque, and translation; to promote the presence of
Basque in the social media and communication and information technologies; management of
place-names in the ‘Foral’ Community; management of personnel, technical, material and
financial resources for teaching Basque language to adults; to establish relations with other
regional or minority languages to develop the principles of respect for linguistic diversity
fostered by the European Union, and to promote the presence of Basque in campaigns to
project the ‘Foral’ Community of Navarre overseas.
As pointed out in the Third Report on Spanish compliance with the Charter (page 41), the
Navarre Basque Council/Basqueren Nafar Kontseilua was created in 1996 and is currently
defined (in ‘Foral’ Decree No. 133/2011) as the “body for the participation of Euskarabidea/the
Navarre Basque Institute” and “the body advising and recommending the planning and
promotion of Basque to the Government of Navarre”. Its functions require it to report on all
general plans and regulatory projects related to linguistic normalisation prior to passage, and
to issue an opinion on matters tabled with it by the Government on language planning and
normalisation; furthermore, it has jurisdiction to make recommendations to the Government
related to the use and promotion of Basque. Its 22 members, all experts in the field of Basque,
include representatives of the main Navarre bodies involved in the development of Basque (8
from Euskaltzaindia, the Navarre Federation of Municipalities and Councils, the Navarre
Federation of Ikastolas, etc.): from the Autonomous Administration (5); and from associations
promoting Basque and Basque culture. Persons of acknowledged standing in the field also
form part of the Council (7).

2. APPLICATION OF THE CHARTER
Article 7 – Objectives and principles
The Parties undertake:
Paragraph 1
In respect of regional or minority languages, within the territories in which such
languages are used and according to the situation of each language, the Parties shall
base their policies, legislation and practice on the following objectives and principles:
b) the respect of the geographical area of each regional or minority language in
order to ensure that existing or new administrative divisions do not constitute an
obstacle to the promotion of the regional or minority language in question;

118

The ‘Foral’ Community considers that the great variation in the sociolinguistic reality of the
linguistic zones established in its territory (from 57.6% proficiency in the Basque-speaking
zone to 2.5% in the non-Basque speaking zone) reveals that the decision in Organic Act No.
13/1982 on the Reintegration and Improvement of the ‘Foral’ Regime of Navarre, was right to
make Basque the official language in the Basque-speaking zones of Navarre, and that this
zoning, put in place in that Act, is also in line with the requirements of Article 1.b) of the
Charter (definition of the territory in which a language is spoken).
125. In the previous rounds, the Committee of Experts mentioned the situation of
Basque and Catalan spoken in several regions. The Committee of Experts refers to
paragraph 91 above.
91. The Committee of Experts encourages the Navarrese Government to enhance its
co-operation with the Basque Autonomous Community for the benefit of the Basque
language, for example in the retransmission of television channels in Navarre
The Specific Collaboration Agreement between the Government of Navarre and the Basque
Government (referred to in the section on Basque in the Basque Country, in reply to question
No. 91; vid for further information) signed on 5 July 2012 to promote collaboration by the two
signatory institutions in Basque-related aspects, is an example of a specific operational
document which, entered into with an acknowledgement of each Administration’s jurisdiction,
makes cooperation possible among the bodies with authority in various aspects of the
linguistic affairs of the two Communities’ Administrations. The Agreement defines nine areas
for technical collaboration, detailing specific content and working procedures based on the
reaffirmation that the ‘Foral’ Community of Navarre and the Autonomous Basque Community
are two differentiated political, institutional and administrative entities. These areas include
teaching Basque to adults; evaluation and accreditation of linguistic proficiency; sociolinguistic
research and maps; Basque-Castilian and Castilian-Basque translations; terminology; or the
international divulgation of Basque language and culture.
128. Disappointment over the Euskarabidea budget and the impact of the opinions of
Kontseilua in the Regional Government
- The question of the Euskarabidea budget and activities must be seen in the context of the
prolonged global economic crisis which is forcing Governments to prioritise their intervention
to guarantee essential services provided by administrations to the citizens, i.e. education
services in the case of the Department of Education to which the Navarre Basque
Institute/Euskarabidea is attached.
It is relevant here to consider the budget allocated to sustain bilingual educational models
incorporating Basque, whose annual cost (stable throughout the years supervised) was
quantified as follows in 2011:






Expenditure on personnel and model D operation in public centres: €106,146,902.13,
The cost of Basque in model A: €23,965,993.88 (including a cost overrun of
€360,603.43 from duplication of groups),
Agreements with private model D centres (ikastolas): €19,192,594.86,
Agreements with private model B centres: €906,474.90.

As to the budget assigned to Euskarabidea, and its distribution, it was necessary in the first
place to guarantee payment of the salaries of the permanent personnel engaged in the
functions assigned to the Body. Of these, teaching of Basque to officials from the Navarre
Government and other public administrations in Navarre stands out, both in terms of the
volume of the human resources involved and of its strategic relevance. Personnel expenditure
dropped 21.3% between 2010 and 2012. The remaining financial resources, both those
funding the body’s own programmes and those subsidising the activities of other
organisations, have contracted even more, up to 36.1% in those years. Overall, these financial
provisions have evolved from €3,191,002 in 2010 to a 2012 budget of €2,318,934.

119

These sums do not meet the charges for operating in Basque in the various Departments of
the Administration which offer their services in that language (forms, website duplication,
publicity brochures, signage, etc.) and which are hard to quantify, being absorbed into each
Department’s generic allocations.
Mention must in any event be made of the cost of Castilian/Basque and Basque/Castilian
translation, estimated at €1,164,304 in 2010, down 23.8% in 2012, particularly for translations
commissioned from third parties.
- In meeting user demands, the Navarre institutions are engaged in wide-ranging activity to
defend and better the level of protection of rights (including language rights) and the freedoms
covered by the law and current treaties. Thus citizens may address complaints or claims to
the ‘Foral’ Community’s Administration through any of the channels created for the purposes,
and will be dealt with by that Administration; or, should they prefer, they may express their
complaints through the institutions authorised for this.
The office of the Navarre Ombudsman – Arartekoa – reporting directly to the Navarre
Parliament, tables an annual report in the Chamber on all actions, consultations, proposals to
improve public services, etc., detailing all complaints presented by citizens and notified to the
bodies in the Administration concerned (along with complaints forwarded by the Language
Rights Observatory (Behatokia) a private foundation governed by a trust whose members are
all elected by the Kontseilua). This report is published in the Official Navarre Parliamentary
Gazette and is also made available to the public on the Ombudsman’s website.
The total number of complaints presented in the years of the fourth supervisory cycle was as
follows: 78 in 2010, 69 in 2011, and 64 in 2012. The high number of suggestions accepted by
the public administrations (approximately 50% of the total) is of note. As the file is processed,
suggestions are presented, along with recommendations and reminders of legal obligations
arising from the supervisory work. Or, if applicable, following submissions from the
Administration and examining questions of substance, the Ombudsman informs and advises
citizens who have brought complaints of the reasons why it is considered that no infringement
of constitutional rights is perceived, in the terms of the legal provisions.
In relation to submission of initiatives from social organisations, in addition to the capacity
each has to file them directly with the administration, the main bodies in Navarre involved in
developing Basque, and representatives of cultural associations whose aim is to promote
Basque belong to the Navarre Basque Council/Euskararen Nafar Kontseilua, the advisory and
participative body referred to previously.
For its part, the Navarre Parliament also usually and quite frequently echoes the queries,
complaints or initiatives addressed to the administration in this area, in the form of motions,
propositions, appearances, questions, working sessions and verbal or written consultations. In
2012, thirty-seven parliamentary initiatives were dealt with on language matters.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to promote, by appropriate measures, mutual understanding
between all the linguistic groups of the country and in particular the inclusion of
respect, understanding and tolerance in relation to regional or minority languages
among the objectives of education and training provided within their countries and
encouragement of the mass media to pursue the same objective.
231. The authorities did not respond directly to the Committee of Experts’
recommendation in the third periodic report. The Committee of Experts was informed of
some specific campaigns and initiatives at the local and regional level, and of some
specific measures taken at State level, which might benefit regional or minority
languages.

120

Resolution No. 51/2011 of 19 December of the Managing Director of Euskarabidea/the
Navarre Basque Institute approved this Autonomous Body’s endorsement of the General
Protocol between the General Foundation of the University of Alcalá, the Cervantes Institute,
the Camões Institute, the Administration of the Generalitat (Regional Government) of
Catalonia through its Government Delegation in Madrid, the Education and University
Planning Ministry of the Xunta (Regional Government) of Galicia and the Basque Institute
Etxepare/Euskal Institutua for the development of the Centre for the “IBERIAN AND PREHISPANIC LANGUAGES SPACE”. Once endorsed by all the participants, this Protocol was
published in the Official State Gazette on 17 August 2012.
This Centre was created to pursue the following objectives:
1.
2.

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

To teach and foster the teaching of the languages of Spain and Portugal.
To foster research and divulge knowledge of the sociolinguistic situation of the
languages of Spain and Portugal and those of Latin America and of African and Asian
countries where Spanish and Portuguese are official languages.
To encourage research into contacts between languages, and to investigate and explain
the situation of the American pre-Hispanic and Iberian languages.
To promote studies which further the feeling of respect for the Iberian languages and
awareness of the multilingual nature of the Iberian countries.
To defend language rights as individual and collective human rights.
To contribute to the profile of the Iberian languages in cyberspace.
To create mechanisms for collaboration with other linguistic, cultural and educational
initiatives.
Any other activities in research, education or debate on the Iberian languages in contact,
particularly promoting action in international spheres of research.

Article 8. Education
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such
languages are used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without
prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
a)
i) to guarantee pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or

b)
i) to guarantee primary education in the relevant regional or minority languages
concerned; or
c)
i) to guarantee secondary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
As pointed out in the Third Spanish Report (page 808) there are initially three linguistic models
in education in Navarre: G, where Castilian is the vehicular language and Basque is not
taught; A with Castilian as the vehicular language, and Basque is taught as a subject; and D,
the model for immersion in Basque, with Castilian as a subject.
335. The Committee of Experts asks the Spanish authorities to provide information in
their next periodical report on the number of traditional Basque-medium schools in
which the multilingual model is currently applied.

121

40. The Committee of Experts invites the authorities to take measures so that the
introduction of the compulsory trilingual model does not disproportionately affect the
education in co-official languages, in particular their promotion and support structure.
339. The Committee of Experts … encourages the authorities to ensure that a sufficient
offer of education in Basque is guaranteed in the future.
- There is no mandatory trilingual model in multilingual education in Navarre. The introduction
of trilingual educational experiences such as the Programme of Learning in English has not
eliminated the models which include Basque in education. The structure of these models and
the number of centres affected remains the same.
The current regulation, ‘Foral’ Order No. 110/2011, establishes the bases for teaching foreign
language in centres offering the Programme of Learning in English (PAI). In model D centres,
the foreign language, English, is incorporated in the second year of Pre-School Education with
a five-hour per week schedule, extended to eight hours a week in Primary Education.
Three Model D colleges incorporated the multilingual model (PAI) between 2010 and 2012:
CPEIP (Pre-School and Primary Education College) San Francisco Javier in Elizondo; CPEIP
Sarriguren in Valle de Egüés; and CPEIP Buztintxuri in Pamplona.
There are 29 centres throughout Navarre teaching the PAI (Programme of Learning in
English) and incorporating Basque language as a subject (model A) from first-year pre-school
education (age 3). Pursuant to the ‘Foral’ Order mentioned above, Basque language is taught
for 4 hours a week in the whole Pre-School and Primary Education phase. Foreign language
begins at 3, with 10 hours per week.
In Secondary Education, the Bilingual Sections programme imparts the official curriculum of
one or more subjects using French or English fully or in part as vehicular language, with the
aim of integrating the learning of the language and of the content. Pupils join the programme
in first-year Compulsory Secondary Education (ESO) and remain there until ending that stage,
in fourth-year ESO.
For model D, bilingual Sections have been created in the following High Schools: in the
Basque-speaking zone: Bera (bilingual English and French sections); Doneztebe (bilingual
section in French); and in the mixed zone: Pamplona; Instituto Eunate (bilingual sections in
English and French), and Zizur (bilingual English and French sections).
- In terms of the numbers of students studying the various models, according to the following
tables:


In the Basque-speaking zone (no model G teaching in Castilian), the model D
percentage rises to more than 90% in pre-school and primary education and to more
than 85% in secondary education. Model A has dropped by the same proportion.

Basque-speaking zone
Pre-School and Primary Education
Secondary Education
09-10 10-11 11-12 12-13
09-10 10-11 11-12 12-13
Model A
428
438
414
389
Model A
291
287
287
301
Model D+B
4428 4567 4900 5042
Model D+B
1806 1820 1878 1977
Model G
0
0
0
0
Model G
0
0
0
0
Totals
4856 5005 5314 5431
Totals
2097 2107 2165 2278

122



In the mixed zone (all models available), the D model percentage rises slightly in both
primary and secondary education, while model A falls some 2 percentage points
although remaining above 20% in the pre-school and primary stages.
Mixed zone

Pre-School and Primary Education.
09-10 10-11
11-12
Model A
8370
8281
7934
Model D
10300 10353
10552
Model G
16727 17369
17178
Totals
35397 36003
35664

12-13
7839
10631
17427
35897

Model A
Model D
Model G
Totals

Secondary Education.
09-10 10-11 11-12
2188
2159
2060
4995
5343
5539
12363 13222 13987
19546 20724 21586

12-13
2151
5795
13980
21926

The data on pupil trends show that model D, teaching in Basque, has not been relegated in
parent choice notwithstanding the reservations of some NGOs set out in paragraph 337 of the
Third Report of the Committee of Experts which feared that “teaching of English may influence
parents’ choice to the detriment of model D”.
Centres in the Basque-speaking and mixed zones have continued to ensure sufficient
availability of teaching in Basque and of Basque language to meet popular demand, which
has in general remained stable.
On the other hand, in the matter of the financial resources assigned to this teaching, the
response to question 128 in the Committee of Experts’ report indicated that the essential
resources for it to continue (for personnel, operations and agreements) are priority and remain
sufficient. The budget cut censured in paragraph 337 of that report must be understood as
referred to complementary and extra-curricular activities which, at a time of crisis, do not have
the same priority.
Nonetheless, it has been possible during the period of supervision to continue with
complementary and extra-curricular programmes for language backup specifically targeting
the D and B models of teaching in Basque, or model A with Basque language as a subject.
The following programmes may be mentioned, because they are widespread and represent
good practice in language teaching programmes:




Bersolarismo (sung improvisation) in education – Bertsolaritza: Fifteen hours direct teaching
throughout the course on an understanding and the technique of verse (bertso). It is aimed
at fifth and sixth year Primary Education, and a total of 1,368 pupils participate.
The programme to enhance verbal expression capacities for secondary school pupils Solaskide: this incorporates Basque language conversation assistants for one hour a week
for each group of fourth year ESO and first year Baccalaureate pupils in models D and A, to
reinforce verbal expression activities in general. There were 1,513 participants.
d)
i) to make available technical and vocational training in the relevant regional or
minority languages; or

342. … The Committee of Experts … encourages the authorities to gradually increase
the offer of Basque-medium education in technical and vocational training;
Linguistic models are defined for compulsory education and baccalaureate. No linguistic
model is defined for Vocational Training, but the subject is offered in Basque.
- Vocational training offered in Basque – the Basque-speaking zone.

123

There are three centres in the Basque-speaking zone teaching Vocational Training: the
Altsasu/Alsasua Integrated Polytechnic Centre FP Sakana LH; Lekaroz Elizondo High School,
Lekaroz-Elizondo; and Toki Ona High School, Bera. Pupils from the various language models
are mixed and most teachers are bilingual, so that the vehicular language used is that of the
pupils, Basque or Castilian. One of these schools was designated as an Integrated
Polytechnic Centre in the 2012/2013 academic year, a new category in line with the needs for
technical and vocational training arising from Organic Act No. 5/2002 of 19 June, the
Qualifications and Vocational Training Act.
As seen from the following table, in this zone in 2010, 2011 and 2012, there was a percentage
increase in enrolments in Vocational Training classes imparted in Basque compared with the
previous supervision cycle, thanks to the effort to continue to make it available despite the
reduced number of enrolments, as indicated in previous reports.
Vocational Training
Enrolments in Navarre
Vocational Training
Enrolments in Basquespeaking zone centres

2005-2006

2012-2013

5,995

7,702

152

241

2.54% of the total

3.13% of the total

- Availability of Vocational Training in Basque – the Mixed zone.
Two schools impart Vocational Training in Basque, with the following enrolments for this
course in the cycles teaching in Basque:
The Donapea Integrated Polytechnic Centre
Mid-Grade
Telecommunications Installations
Administrative Management

Senior Grade
Administration and Finances

st

1
No demand
21

nd

2
No demand
14

1
12

st

2
10

nd

st

2
19

The Adaptación Social High School
Senior Grade
Pre-School Education

1
20

nd

f)
i) to arrange for the provision of adult and continuing education courses which
are taught mainly or wholly in the regional or minority languages; or
There has been a major drive to regulate teaching of Basque to adults, with aid allocations in
2010, 2011 and 2012. On accrediting understanding of the language, ‘Foral’ Decree No.
42/2011 of 16 May has established the curriculum for teaching Basque language to adults for
the ‘Foral’ Community, in line with the proficiency levels in the Common European Framework
of Reference for Languages.
g) to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture
which is reflected by the regional or minority language;

351. The Committee of Experts received complaints from representatives of the
speakers that the teaching of history and culture reflected by Basque was not
adequately taught at schools and that a number of textbooks on the subject were not

124

approved by the authorities. It invites the Navarre authorities to comment on these
complaints in their next periodical report

Teaching of history and of culture, the expression of Basque in Navarre, continues to be
guaranteed by ‘Foral’ Decrees establishing the teaching curricula in both primary and
secondary education and taught to all pupils in Navarre, whether or not Basque speakers.
As to whether these subjects are “adequately taught”, Navarre believes from the information
provided that this appears to allude to the content prescribed in the curriculum. It must be kept
in mind that while there may be different views of the history of the ‘Foral’ Community of
Navarre (and its future as a differentiated Autonomous Community), it is the role of the
democratically elected Navarre Government and its Education Department to design official
teaching curricula, and for these official curricula to be tabled, debated and reported to the
Navarre School Council, the representative body involving all sectors of the Navarre School
Community (including all linguistic models, networks and professional associations, parents
and pupils). The stance of the great majority of this Council has been to endorse the ‘Foral’
Decrees containing the current official curricula.
The question of the approval of certain manuals by the authorities is also clarified in the
information furnished by Navarre, that regulating text-book control and curricular subjectmatter is a basic State provision, currently contained in Additional Provision Four of the
Organic Education Act (the LOE) according to which the Navarre education administration
may neither approve nor ban manuals, for the following reasons:
- approval is assigned to each educational centre in exercise of its educational
independence (Additional Provision 4, paragraph 1),
- such approval by each centre requires no prior clearance from the education authorities
(Additional Provision 4, paragraph 2) and
- control assigned to that Administration (of the ‘Foral’ Community of Navarre) is purely a
posteriori, supervising books and materials as part of the ordinary procedure for inspection of
all components of the teaching and learning process (Additional Provision 4, paragraph 3).
The information provided by Navarre concludes on this question that, if what is intended with
the comment on complaints is that, consequent upon the Inspection of certain books, in the
terms of that paragraph 3 of Additional Provision 4 of the Education Act, several ‘Foral’ Orders
were issued declaring that some books in Basque were not in line with the curriculum
approved by the Navarre ‘Foral’ Community Administration, that was not because of or related
to the fact that they were in Basque but because of that failure to adjust to the current
curriculum in a variety of subjects (none of them Basque language) as expressly required by
paragraph 2 of Additional Provision 4. These ‘Foral’ Orders were expressly ratified by the
Senior Court of Justice in dismissing suit for judicial review brought by one of the publishers
whose books were ruled to be contrary to the Navarre curriculum.
h) to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement
those of paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;
355. … The Committee of Experts again asks the authorities to provide the requested
information on Basque teacher training in the next periodical report.
1.- Teaching Basque language to teachers on active service who wish for that.
The Navarre education system currently has sufficient numbers of teachers proficient in
Basque to meet the demand for classes, and new generations of teachers are entering the
system with integral training in the Basque language, so that the numbers of teachers who
modify their language profile by recycling represent a minimal proportion.

125

The Administration continues to respond to the wish for training of teachers interested in
learning Basque, making teaching available at all levels and also in new categories (selflearning for example). This learning is not however linked to licence for employment as it is
not necessary to alter the language profile of the post taken by the teacher. Training is a right,
but the employment licence paid (recycling) for study is not. It is a very costly administrative
mechanism targeting an end, in this case more than sufficiently attained. There were 117
teachers involved in this training in the 2009-2010 academic year; 109 in 2010-1011; 128 in
2011-2012; and 134 in 2012-2013.
2.- Initial teacher training.
Initial training of pre-school and primary education teachers who use Basque is guaranteed at
this time by university studies taught in Navarre and adjacent regions:
- Navarre Public University offers two qualifications entirely in Basque: Pre-School
Education Teaching and Primary Education Teaching.
- That Public University teaches a 50-credit Basque Studies Diploma on its Pamplona
campus.
- There are universities in other areas with qualifications for teacher-training in Basque
(e.g. the three Basque Country Public University centres in Bilbao, San Sebastián and Vitoria;
Deusto University’s Bilbao and San Sebastián centres; and the Mondragón University centre
in Eskoriatza). In addition, L’Université de Pau et des pays de l´Adour has a course of some
1,200 hours’ education in Basque studies on its Bayonne campus.
For Secondary teachers, there is both at Navarre Public University and other universities a
comprehensive range of degrees which can be studied fully or partly in Basque. And it is also
possible to complete university studies in Castilian or another language and obtain the EGA
(Basque proficiency certificate) or some other equivalent. The Navarre Government has three
Official Language Schools (in Pamplona, Tudela and Eoidna – a distance centre), a Public
Euskaltegi (Basque language teaching centre) in Huarte, and a Navarre Basque
Institute/Euskarabidea centre for training public servants and adults.
3.- On-going training
The Department of Education establishes an annual General Training Plan which includes a
proposal for specific training targeting teachers working in the Basque language. Basque
language training is integrated into courses for grammatical updating and correct Basque
usage, translation courses applied to teaching, dialectology courses, Basque language and
literature courses and courses on audiovisual technologies and other teaching resources. All
are taught in Basque at the Centre of Resources for the Teaching of Basque/EIBZ run by the
Education Department. 1,028 teachers participated in these on-going training activities in
2009-2010, 661 in 2010-2011 and 715 in 2011-2012.
Moreover, Basque language teachers may take part in general scientific-didactic updating
activities at Teacher Support Centres/Irakasleentzako Laguntza Zentroak.
i) to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring measures
taken and the progress in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or
minority languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which
will be made public.
357. The Spanish authorities have not provided requested information on the
monitoring by the Navarre School Council. … Non-governmental organisations alerted
the Committee of Experts to the fact that the Navarre School Council does not deal with
the quality of teaching and the progress achieved in Basque-medium education.
358. The Committee of Experts invites the authorities to comment on the supervisory
boards and reports in the next periodical report.

126

To explain the specific work referring to teaching in Basque as part of the School Council’s
general tasks, the following four essential aspects must be kept in mind:
1.- Educational Community Representation.
Article 4 of ‘Foral’ Act No. 12/1997 of 4 November regulating the Navarre School Council,
amended by Act No. 19/2012 of 4 of December, establishes the composition of the Navarre
School Council, guaranteeing the effective involvement of all sectors representing the various
language models, types of centre, educational levels, political and social representation and,
of course, the important presence of families as a key component of education:
- Teachers and administrative and services employees are represented by two unions
broadly implanted among model D workers (teaching in Basque).
- One of the posts representing parents is assigned to the model D Apymas Federation
Sortzen.
- One of the three representatives of the boards of private centres in Navarre is the Navarre
Ikastolas Federation, private centres teaching model D.
- Representation of the directors of public and state-subsidised private schools is agreed
upon by the various associations, so that those representing model D centres are also
present.
- The Managing Director of Euskarabidea/the Navarre Basque Institute is a member of the
Council, representing the Education Authorities.
In addition to the foregoing, the remaining Council members are appointed by social sectors,
pupils associations, the Equality Council, universities, and the handicapped persons
committee, to include people from all Navarre’s social and therefore linguistic spheres.
2.- Legislative control.
Article 27 of the Constitution guarantees the effective right of all sectors concerned to
participate in general educational programming, their involvement strengthened by
participation in the Autonomous School Councils, articulating, organising and encouraging that
participation. This makes the Navarre School Council the ‘Foral’ Community’s senior body for
the control, monitoring and inclusion of the educational community for non-university teaching,
and it must necessarily be consulted on the following matters, among others:
a) draft ‘Foral’ legislation, and general draft executive education regulations which
must be approved by the Government of Navarre.
e) general provisions on the design and introduction of language models.
In compliance with these functions, according to the Council’s Annual Report, in the
2011/2012 academic year 23 opinions were debated and referred to the Education
Department, affecting various aspects and levels of the Navarre education system.
Thus the procedure for drafting provisions on education ensures monitoring and that all those
involved participate effectively in the process, and for all regulations, including those related to
teaching of or in Basque.
3.- Data and the monitoring of teaching in Basque.
One of the specific functions of the Navarre School Council is to draft an Annual Report on the
region’s education system (henceforth the INSE). This is a public report which is filed with the
Navarre Parliamentary Education Commission and delivered to all those engaged in
education,
and
it
is
available
on
the
School
Council’s
website
http://consejoescolar.educacion.Navarre.es/index.php/es/reports/inse.html, the.
Accordingly, and because teaching in Basque accounts in education in Navarre (model D) for
about 30% of pupils studying in public centres or in state-subsidised private schools, the

127

specific data on the monitoring and development of the model are prepared, debated and
published every year.
As an example, the four following areas may be cited among those referring to teaching in
Basque and which regularly form part of the reports, the latest INSE being for the 2011/2012
academic year: teacher-training in Basque; programmes for linguistic reinforcement and
complementary and extra-curricular activities in Basque; schooling results (pupil trends in
each language model and educational stage over the last 5 years); the results of progression
in the education system; and an evaluation of trends in linguistic proficiency.
4.- The presence of Basque in Navarre School Council activities.
Under the School Council’s regulations, its normal activities shall be in Basque. The same
applies to possible intervention at sessions in Basque and in publicising the Council’s
activities on the official website where all the information is publicly and clearly available in
both languages; http://consejoescolar.educacion.Navarre.es/
In conclusion, given its representative reach, its mandatory consultancy role, the exhaustive
nature of its annual reports and the use of Basque in its functions, it is considered that, based
on the information furnished for this Fourth Spanish Report by the Navarre ‘Foral’ Community,
the Navarre School Council’s effective involvement in teaching quality and progress in
teaching in Basque should not be questioned.
Article 9. Justice
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, in respect of judicial districts in which the number of residents
using the regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below,
according to the situation of each of these languages and on condition that the use of
the facilities afforded by the present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper
the proper administration of justice:
a

in criminal proceedings:
i)

to provide that the courts, at the request of one of the parties, shall
conduct the proceedings in the regional or minority languages; and/or

ii) to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or minority
language; and/or
iii) to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not be
considered inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a regional
or minority language; and/or
iv) to produce, on request, documents connected with legal proceedings in
the relevant regional or minority language, if necessary by the use of
interpreters and translations involving no extra expense for the persons
concerned;
b

in civil proceedings:
i)

to provide that the courts, at the request of one of the parties, shall
conduct the proceedings in the regional or minority languages; and/or

ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he
or she may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby
incurring additional expense; and/or

128

iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or
minority languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and
translations;
c

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
i)

to provide that the courts, at the request of one of the parties, shall
conduct the proceedings in the regional or minority languages; and/or

ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he
or she may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby
incurring additional expense; and/or
iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or
minority languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and
translations;

Recommendations of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
11.

To amend the legal framework with a view to making it clear that the criminal, civil
and administrative judicial authorities in the Autonomous Communities will
conduct the proceedings in the co-official languages at the request of one party,

12. To take the necessary legal and practical measures to ensure that a sufficient
proportion of the judicial personnel assigned to the Autonomous Communities
affected by the application of Article 9 of the Charter has a working knowledge of
the relevant languages.
380. … It seems to the Committee of Experts that there are not only legal but also
practical and attitudinal obstacles that hamper the use of Basque in court proceedings.
The Committee of Experts urges the relevant authorities to take measures within their
competence to encourage and facilitate the use of Basque in courts.

381.
The Committee of Experts urges the Spanish authorities:
- to take the necessary measures to increase the proportion of judicial staff in
Navarre, at all levels and particularly among judges and prosecutors, who are able
to use Basque as a working language in courts;
- to develop adequate training schemes for judicial staff as well as for lawyers.
Reference may be made to the general information not specific to the Autonomous
Community, furnished for this Article 9 of the Charter and for recommendations 1 and 2 of the
Committee of Ministers in the section of this report on Catalan in Catalonia.

Actions by the Autonomous Community.
As already pointed out in the Third Spanish Report on compliance with the Charter (page
850), the Navarre Government has contracted a translation and interpretation service to assist
judicial bodies. The demand for this translation and interpretation service has grown
constantly in recent years.
In the matter of the increased percentage of Basque speakers in the Justice Administration in
Navarre, ‘Foral’ Decree No. 55/2009 of 15 June regulating assessment of proficiency in

129

Basque among the organic staff of the ‘Foral’ Community of Navarre’s Administration and
autonomous bodies, allows assessment of proficiency in Basque to account as a minimum, in
all jobs in the Basque-speaking zone, for 6 per cent of the total score allocated to the rest of
the scale of qualities, provided that proficiency in that language was not declared mandatory
in the organic workforce. In the mixed zone, where nearly 80% of Administration jobs are
concentrated, the minimum valuation is 3%.
‘Foral’ Order No. 985/2009 of 28 December of the Minister for the Regional Presidency,
Justice and the Interior, establishing the rules for managing temporary personnel filling
positions at the service of the Navarre Justice Administration approved a Scale of Merits, with
a maximum score of 22 points for all items, assigning the following evaluation to proficiency in
Basque: in the mixed zone, proficiency in Basque may obtain a maximum score of 2.10 points
and, in the Basque-speaking zone, a maximum of 2.20 points.
Likewise, under this provision, “in filling posts for which proficiency in Basque is a requisite
according to the job lists, the call will favour candidates who accredit that they hold EGA
qualification or another official qualification equivalent to level C1 of the Common European
Framework of Reference for Languages. Proficiency in Basque may also be evidenced by
passing the specific tests convened for the purposes by the Navarre Public Administration
Institute”.
On the other hand, for calls to fill vacancies in competitive transfers of officials in the Corps
and Scales of Procedural and Administrative Management, Procedural and Administrative
Processing and Justice Administration Judicial Assistant, under ‘Foral’ Decree No. 55/2009 of
15 June and Resolution No. 210/2010 of 13 September, in the Basque-speaking and mixed
zone verbal and written proficiency in Basque allows up to twelve points, for these purposes
only, depending on the level of proficiency accredited in the following terms:
1.– Level 3 Certificate or equivalent qualification: four points.
2.– Level 4 Certificate or equivalent qualification: eight points.
3.– Level 5 Certificate or equivalent qualification: twelve points.
As a whole, this provision will help to raise the percentage of Justice Administration personnel
in Navarre able to use Basque as working language in the courts.
On the Committee of Experts’ recommendation concerning the establishment of training
programmes targeting Justice Administration personnel in Navarre and lawyers, the Navarre
Government offers courses to learn Basque and to improve the capacity to use Basque at
work. The training offer is coordinated between Euskarabidea and the National Public
Administration Institute (INAP).
Moreover, all Justice Administration personnel in Navarre may make use of the BasqueCastilian Terminological Dictionary free of charge on the associated intranet, and obtain an
immediate translation at an email address.
Finally, it is emphasised that the INFOREG application has been installed in all Magistrate’s
Courts in Navarre to register and certify births, marriages and deaths. At this time, applicants
may choose the language in which they wish to receive the certificate – Castilian or Basque –
in 267 Magistrate’s Courts.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or minority languages the most
important national statutory texts and those relating particularly to users of these
languages, unless they are otherwise provided
386. With regard to pre-1998 legislation, the Committee of Experts encourages the
Navarrese Government to co-operate with the Basque Country Authorities when its
legislation is translated by the Basque authorities.

130

The Navarre Official Gazette Service introduced the Corpus of ‘Foral’ regulation known as the
LEXNAVARRE euskaraz in Basque, which contains all the provisions promulgated in Navarre
and is permanently updated.
On the other hand, the Specific Collaboration Agreement on language matters concluded in
July 2012 between the Navarre and Basque Governments and referred to in the answer to
question 91 in the Third Committee of Experts Report includes in its fields of action BasqueCastilian and Castilian-Basque translations of Spanish and foreign legal provisions, including
European Union Treaties and Directives, and the creation and maintenance of a public bank
of translation memories.
Article 10- Administrative authorities and public services
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are
users of regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and
according to the situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as reasonably
possible:

a)
i) to ensure that the administrative authorities use the regional or minority
languages; or
393. … The Committee of Experts is of the view that the authorities should take a
proactive attitude and adopt a structured policy in order to ensure that the
administrative authorities use Basque on a more regular and systematic basis.
The information relative to Paragraph 1 this article of the Charter is provided in point II.B) of
this report from Spain.

Paragraph 2
In respect of the local and regional authorities in whose territory the number of residents
who are users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the measures
specified below, the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
a) the use of regional or minority languages within the framework of the regional
or local authority;
b) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or
written applications in these languages;
Paragraph 3
With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other
persons acting on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which
regional or minority languages are used, in accordance with the situation of each
language and as far as this is reasonably possible:
a) to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in the provision of
the service; or"
422. The Committee of Experts invites the authorities to comment on the use of Basque
by public services, especially with regard to recruitment, service provisions, customer
services, web pages and correspondence in the next periodical report

131

The questions raised in the report in connection with this article refer fundamentally to the
availability of services provided by regional authorities in Basque and the possibility for users
to communicate with the administration in this language. In particular, that availability and
those possibilities are questioned when central administration services located in the mixed
zone contact Basque-speaking citizens residing in the Basque-speaking zone, to whom the
commitments made in ratifying the Charter apply.
It must be remembered that 9.7% of the total population of Navarre resides in the Basquespeaking zone, where Basque is a co-official language; of that figure, 57.6% of those
residents, familiar with Basque, may be potential users of those services in that language.
However, the possibility for these citizens to access central services in Basque implies that
they are available to the entire general public.
The Navarre Government considers that the right of those citizens to receive administration
services in Basque and to communicate with that administration in Basque has to be
reconciled with the right of a majority of citizens, non-Basque-speakers, to access a
reasonable number of the jobs offered for the provision of these services, addressed to an
overall population of which a considerable majority does not use Basque in their relations with
the administration. This reconciliation of different rights must also take account of criteria
concerning the efficiency and quality of the services provided.
For an overview of the action taken by the regional authorities in this field, and given that the
services provided by local bodies were already assessed positively in previous reports, this
section furnishes information on the availability of central services in Basque, distributed into
the following thematic blocks:
1.- Verbal and written applications in Basque.
All applications in Basque for certification of entries in registers, and forms, communications
and notifications filed in the General Registers, Information and Public Attention Services or in
the citizen service mailboxes are dealt with. Enquiries, complaints, claims, etc. are answered
in the language in which they are received. Should the Administrative Department to which
they are addressed be unable to respond directly and a text must be translated, it is referred
to the Translation Section.
Verbal petitions filed in Basque in the Administration’s Central Information and Public
Attention Services or in customer service by telephone are dealt with by arranging for
personnel to be present in posts where proficiency in Basque is mandatory, assigned to
registration services and direct customer service units. According to data gathered, average
requests for attention by telephone in Basque in the Administration’s central services account
for 1.06% of all calls received. Requests for bilingual personal attention represent 2.31% of
the total.
The 2,142 posts classified as requiring proficiency in Basque amount to 8.28% of the total
organic staff of the regional Administration. This is classified as a rateable quality for a further
388.
In the Educational Service, 31% of total public centre teaching staff meet the requisite for
Basque; likewise, 20.97% of administrative and services personnel also accredit proficiency in
Basque.
Specifically in the Basque-speaking zone, the following are the total numbers of positions in
the ‘Foral’ Community Administration:
- Excluding teaching personnel, there are in all 459 posts, of which proficiency in Basque is
mandatory in 80 (17%) and a rateable quality for the other 379. For teaching personnel, there
are 713 jobs, and for 572 of them it is mandatory.

132

- Combining all the Navarre Government posts in the Basque-speaking zone gives a total of
1,172, for which proficiency in Basque is compulsory in 652 (55%).
In addition to these positions and so not including those for which Basque is a requisite for the
organic payroll, with the application of ‘Foral’ Decree No. 55/2009, proficiency in Basque has
been acknowledged as a quality in 45 calls for competitive transfer and in 18 for admission, in
turn 1,001 and 322 jobs (1,323 in all). These 63 calls were in the area of the Navarre Health
Service-Osasunbidea and in calls from the Department of the Regional Presidency for all
divisions except teaching staff.
It must be emphasised that, in addition to the posts where proficiency is mandatory and those
for which knowledge of Basque is treated as a rateable quality, leave is often granted during
working hours to attend courses organised and funded by the Navarre Government for
officials with a high level of proficiency in Basque to enhance or maintain their level and
enable them to operate in that language. Every year, more than 1,000 employees take part in
these Basque training courses.
2.- Outdoor and indoor signage is bilingual:
The indoor and outdoor signage at all town councils and local bodies in the mixed zone with
Basque Service (virtually all) is bilingual. The same is true of their street and road signs
(indicator posters and for addresses, location and information).
All Navarre Government divisions located in the Basque-speaking zone have outdoor and
indoor signage in the two languages, and the signage of some in the mixed zone is also in
both languages.
3.- Commonly-used forms are available in Castilian, in Basque or in bilingual form :
Forms and notices available to all citizens both on the Web and in person must be in Castilian
and in Basque and bilingual where possible. Copies and certificates of data held in the
Departments’ registers are in Castilian or bilingual, as requested by the person concerned, for
which two accreditation models are available.
All forms provided to the public by local bodies in the Basque-speaking zone and those in the
mixed zone with Municipal Service in Basque are issued in Castilian and in Basque or both.
4.- Service, campaign and publications brochures.
All were in general issued in bilingual format in 2010, 2011 and 2012.

5.- The profile of Basque on the Navarre Government website:
Services offered to citizens which can be dealt with in Basque on the website
“www.Navarre.es” have increased during these years: 37 in 2010; 78 in 2011; and 86 in 2012.
A summary of traffic at sites in Basque at the Navarre Government’s institutional portal shows
311,874 hits in 2010, 361,542 in 2011 and 262,449 in 2012.
Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by
them, the Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
a) translation or interpretation as may be required;

133

425. The Committee of Experts invites the authorities to comment on this issue with
regard to paragraphs 2 and 3 in the next periodic report.
1.- The Official Navarre Gazette Service was introduced in Basque and is permanently
updated, comprising the Corpus of ‘Foral’ provisions known as the LEXNAVARRE euskaraz,
available at the Navarre Government Portal. In 2010, 159 official gazettes published were
translated, 256 in 2011 and 253 in 2012.
2.- The Euskarabidea translation unit translated 3,470 pages in 2010, 4,143 in 2011 and 6,096
in 2012.
3.- The Parliament of Navarre
The Navarre Parliament has a Basque Translation Unit and an Interpretation Service with five
translators-interpreters, integrated into the Press, Publications and Protocol Service.
At sessions of the Navarre Parliamentary Plenum and Commissions, members of the
Chamber may speak in Castilian or in Basque. A simultaneous Interpretation Service
translates speeches in Basque into Castilian. Following the sessions, the translators translate
the transcription of speeches in Basque into Castilian, and they are published with reference
calls on the last pages of the Journal of Sessions.
The start or Home Page on the Navarre Parliament’s official website is entirely in Basque, as
is the complete site map.
In connection with official Navarre Parliament documents and signage, all parliamentary
initiatives which must be published in the Chamber’s Official Gazette are translated into
Basque. All resolutions passed by the Chair, the Board of Spokespersons, the Plenum and
the Commissions are translated into Castilian and Basque when affecting Basque-speakingzone entities or bodies. Indoor signage and stationery are bilingual.

4.- Local bodies
The Official Navarre Gazette Summary incorporates a section entitled “Navarre Local
Authorities” for publication of provisions and announcements, ordered by locality, in both
Castilian and in Basque.
The municipal ordinances and organic payrolls of the various localities on the Navarre
Government website appear in Castilian and Basque. Local authority translation services
mean that Basque can be used as working language in municipal plenums and commissions.
Euskarabidea offers local authorities a Translation Support Programme using technical
resources and translation memories (generic and specific).
b) recruitment and, where necessary, training of the officials and other public
service employees required;
428. … The Committee of Experts … asks the Navarrese authorities to provide
information regarding the practical effect of ‘Foral’ Decree 55/2009 in the next periodical
report.
Training in Basque of Public Administration staff in Navarre in 2010-2011-2012 is included in
the Annual Plan drawn up by the Navarre Public Administration Institute, coordinated between
Euskarabidea and the INAP, organised and funded by the Navarre Government, and where
paid leave is available to personnel to attend. It is worth noting that every year more than
1,000 employees participate in Basque training courses. There are three calls each year to
apply for courses; 1,017 pupils took part in 2010, 1,098 in 2011 and 1,120 in 2012.

134

In reply to the request for the Navarre authorities to report on the practical effect of ‘Foral’
Decree No. 55/2009, the details offered in response to the questions raised in Paragraphs 2
and 3 of this Article may be summarised:
For the training of local officials, a subsidy was granted in 2011 to the local authorities
signatories to the Cooperation Agreement with the Navarre Government to normalise the use
of Basque at the municipal level, and funding was approved for the annual language
normalisation programmes for 2011 resulting from application of that Agreement. In 2012,
pursuant to ‘Foral’ Decree No. 25/2012 of 23 May regulating aid to use and foster Basque in
the municipalities, the call was approved to subsidise aid to use and promote Basque at that
level in 2012.
Article 11 – The Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the
territories where those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each
language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent,
have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence
and autonomy of the media:
a) to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission;
i) to ensure the creation of at least one radio station and one television channel
in the regional or minority languages;
440.
The Committee of Experts urges the authorities to ensure the availability of at least one
radio station and one television channel in Basque, if necessary in co-operation with the
Basque Country.
The basic assumption is that this question is intended to ensure that the Navarre Government
guarantee the existence of media with Basque content. The questionnaire delivered refers to
this matter in question 91 (rebroadcast of Basque Country public television channels in
Navarre), which considers that this is attained with the broadcast of Basque public television
there. This question 440 introduces the nuance “if necessary” in referring to cooperation with
the Basque Government. The Navarre Government believes that a distinction must be made
between broadcast in Basque and broadcast of Basque Country public channels in Navarre.
In 2012 and 2013, within the scope of its jurisdiction, Navarre adopted a number of initiatives
to guarantee the continuing use of Basque in audiovisual media in the Basque-speaking and
mixed zones and which cover the entire region:
- Approval of the new regulation of the audiovisual sector, ‘Foral’ Decree No. 5/2012 of
Audiovisual Communication Services, for the first time at the regulatory level requiring
broadcast of content in Basque as one of the six rateable requisites for all licences which must
be granted by the ‘Foral’ Administration.
- The radio and television licence offers convened in 2012 fostered a new plural range of
media committed to broadcast in Basque: two new 100% Basque radio broadcasters in
Baztan and Bera; five new radio broadcasters (the Abian Komunikazioa group) with 75%
Basque broadcast in five Basque-speaking localities; and four more with at least 50% of
broadcasts in Basque, belonging to the Zeroa Multimedia group and the Pausu Media
Association. The two new regional television channels proposed as licence-holders will also
broadcast in Basque as will all the local television broadcasters proposed for the mixed zone
(three channels in Pamplona) and the 12 licensed radio broadcasters in that mixed zone

135

(Estella, Isaba, Ochagavía and Pamplona). This policy, of Basque in the media in Navarre, is
implemented in accordance with current linguistic and audiovisual provisions and pursuant to
the principle of voluntary use of Basque in companies and associations encouraging and
promoting new media.
- Offers of public aid to promote audiovisual content on television in Navarre in 2012
for the first time required subsidy recipients to guarantee programming in Basque (at least one
weekly broadcast). As a result of this tender, of the two television broadcasters which received
aid, Canal 6 Navarra included daily news programming in Basque while Popular Televisión’s
content was non-news and weekly. In 2013, because just one regional television station was
in operation (Navarra Televisión), the bases for the direct subsidy granted to this operator
required it to offer two programmes of its own per week in Basque, and which can be received
throughout the ‘Foral’ Community.
In addition, Euskarabidea and Navarre Television signed an Agreement (the Euskarabidea
Managing Director’s Resolution No. 34/2012 of 13 November) to regulate cooperation
between the two bodies on Basque translation of some of the channel’s programming content.
Finally, it must be indicated that the territorial centre of Spanish Radio and Television in
Navarre, covering the entire ‘Foral’ Community, offers a summary of the main news in Basque
at the end of its daily regional news bulletin.
b)
i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one radio station in the
regional or minority languages;
443. … The Committee of Experts encourages the authorities to take a more positive
attitude towards facilitating the activity of the sole radio station in Navarre that offers
programmes fully in Basque for the whole community of Basque speakers in Navarre.
444. …The Committee of Experts invites the authorities to reconsider their decision on
granting a license for “Euskalerria Irratia”.
Compliance with this commitment is explained fundamentally in the information facilitated in
response to the questions raised in sub-paragraph a) of Paragraph 1 in this Article 11 of the
Charter.
There are currently five municipal radio stations in Navarre authorised to broadcast, which
they do entirely in Basque, Aralar Irratia (Lekunberri), Irati Irratia (Valle de Aezkoa), Beleixe
Irratia (Etxarri Aranatz), Karrape Irratia (Leitza) and Xorroxin Irratia (Baztan). These
broadcasters received aid from Euskarabidea totalling €92,270.92 in 2010 and €84,951.84 in
2011.
The information received by the Committee of Experts on Euskalerria Irratia, a company
broadcasting in the mixed zone where Basque is not an official language and referred to in
paragraphs 443 and 444, was not correct.
There is no provision in the Spanish regulations for the private sector to receive radio
broadcast licences to cover an entire province or Autonomous Community; rather, the
licences authorised are of local and district scope. On the other hand, those provisions do
allow these local and district operators to link in order to broadcast in a single community or in
several, so that private operators may provide regional or national cover. There is no radio
station chain in Navarre programming entirely in Basque. Nor is any such operator operating
beyond the legal standards anywhere in the region.
Specifically on question 444 concerning the licence granted to the radio broadcaster
mentioned, the ‘Foral’ Community of Navarre considers that the Committee of Experts must
be informed of the content of the letter sent in November 2012 by the Second Vice-President

136

and Culture Councillor of the Government of Navarre to the Secretariat of the European
Charter of Minority or Regional Languages and to the European Multilingualism
Commissioner. That letter explains essentially that, according to the regional provisions
referred to above, bids for radio licences adjusted to Spanish sector and European standards
must be granted freely and competitively; it is against the law to assign them directly. The
‘Foral’ Community thus asks for the question/invitation on this matter to be eliminated as it is
not in line with regional, Spanish and European norms.

c)
i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one television channel in
the regional or minority languages;
449. …The Committee of Experts encourages the authorities to increase their support
for private television broadcasting in Basque in order to adequately cover the entire zone
where most Basque speakers live.
Compliance with this commitment is basically set out in the information furnished in response
to the questions raised in Paragraph 1 sub-paragraph a) of this Article 10 of the Charter.
The only private television channel with an autonomous television licence for the ‘Foral’
Community during the period of supervision (2010-2012) was Navarra TV which, in line with
the bases of the Agreement in place for public aid received to promote its own audiovisual
contents, broadcasts two weekly programmes in Basque. Moreover, as recorded in reply to
question 440, two new regional television operators were proposed as new licence holders in
July 2013; like the three awarded local television licences in Pamplona, they offer part of their
programming in Basque.
d) to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and
audiovisual works in the regional or minority languages;
452. The Committee of Experts … encourages the authorities to report on any further
recent audio and audiovisual production in Basque in the next periodical report.
A Navarre Government Institute (the INAAC – Navarre Audiovisual Arts and Film Institute) is
entrusted with promoting and divulging culture through the audiovisual arts which, in addition
to supporting audiovisual production in Basque, publicises all its activities in that language.
The INAAC Foundation has collaborated financially on various films, whether shot entirely in
Basque, for parts of the script, or for their Basque version or subtitling, three of these in 2009,
eleven in 2010, five in 2011 and four in 2012.
On the other hand, to provide material backup for media operating in Basque, Euskarabidea
has created a Website – Albistegunea – with audio, video and written content for media which
may be interested in incorporating it into their programming. Euskarabidea has acquired
material, to be placed on that Website, from the following media using Basque: Ttipi-ttapa
(€18,584.2) Xaloa Telebista (€49,000), Xorroxin Irratia (€11,950) and Bierrik Fundazioa
(€6,250).
e)
i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one
newspaper in the regional or minority languages; or
454. The Committee of Experts encourages the Navarre authorities to pursue further the
matter of a support scheme for a newspaper in Basque.
In the announcements of aid to the media for use of Basque, the written press media received
a total of €127,729.08 in 2010 and €103,784.52 in 2011. On the other hand, the municipalities
continue publishing the magazine Zer Berri? to raise public awareness of Basque. This

137

magazine is subsidised by the Navarre Government, receiving €21,400 in 2010, €17,200 in
2011 and €12,473 in 2012.
g to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using regional or
minority languages.
463. The Committee of Experts … asks the authorities to report upon further application
in the next periodical report. The Committee of Experts also invites the authorities to
provide information on whether these grants can be used to study journalism in Basque
at the University of the Basque Country.
University studies in journalism and audiovisual communication and professional studies in
image and lighting, photography, sound, audiovisual production, scripts and dubbing are
available in the same conditions and receive the same aid as other specialisations in
vocational training or university degrees.
The Cooperation Agreement between Euskarabidea/Navarre Basque Institute, the Navarre
University Communication School and the Empresa-Universidad de Navarra Foundation to
promote university training in media in Basque does not aim to replace those studies but
rather to complement student training, providing grants for practical work in communication
companies which use Basque or in media offering information in Basque.
During the period analysed, grants were given for practical work on DEIA (Vizcaya), 28
Kanala (Guipúzcoa), Xaloa Telebista (Nafarroa), the OINEZ’12 San Fermin Ikastola
Communication Campaign, and Radio 98.3 Irratia.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to ensure that the interests of the users of regional or minority
languages are represented or taken into account within such bodies as may be
established in accordance with the law with responsibility for guaranteeing the freedom
and pluralism of the media.

465. The Committee of Experts notes with disappointment that for the third time no
concrete information in this respect is provided. … It urges the authorities to provide the
pertinent information in the next periodical report.
The ‘Foral’ Parliament eliminated the two existing structures, the Navarre Audiovisual Council
(with jurisdiction over private audiovisual operators) and the RTVE Advisory Council in
Navarre (specific to Spanish Radio and Television) in October 2011. The former was phased
out because of cuts in public expenditure, the latter because the national provision which
created it (Act No. 4/1980 of 10 January, the Radio and Television Statute) was repealed by a
subsequent State provision (the State Radio and Television Act, Act No. 17/2006 of 5 June)
which did not require the Autonomous Communities to retain those consultancy structures.
The new ‘Foral’ Audiovisual Communication Services Decree, No. 5/2012, guarantees
mandatory evaluation of content in Basque for any new audiovisual licence to be granted in
the ‘Foral’ Community.
Article 12- Cultural services and activities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries,
cultural centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as
literary work and film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and
the culture industries, including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties

138

undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used and to the extent that
the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this field:
b) to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced
in regional or minority languages by aiding and developing translation,
dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;
c) to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other
languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, postsynchronisation and subtitling activities;
468. The Committee of Experts … urges the authorities to provide more specific
information on aid to the translation, dubbing and/or subtitling from and into Basque
within the approved budget of Euskarabidea in the next periodical report.
e) to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or
supporting cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full
command of the regional or minority language concerned, as well as of the
language(s) of the rest of the population;
473. …The Committee of Experts … asks for information on the practical effects of
Decree 55/2009 in the next periodical report.
On the matter of the impact of the application of ‘Foral’ Decree No. 55/2009, we refer to the
response to this same question, as for number 428, offered on Article 10 of the Charter.
INAAC: referring to aid for translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and/or subtitling, the
information offered on Paragraph 1, sub-paragraph d) of Article 11 of the Charter on the
commitment to promote and/or facilitate production and distribution of audio and audiovisual
works in regional or minority languages provides details of financial collaboration by the
Navarre Government’s INAAC Foundation with various films. That body’s Basque-related
functions were dealt with in that point of the report. Its website is in Castilian and Basque.
The Navarre Film Library: Its website is in Basque and Castilian, the monthly programme
brochure has been published bilingually and is now included on the website. When a film in
Basque is programmed, it is reviewed in that language in the brochure.
The Punto de Vista (Point of View) Festival: the Festival’s website is bilingual and all its
contents can be consulted in Castilian and in Basque. In addition, the 2010 and 2011
catalogues were bilingual, as were all the Newsletters. Several films projected during these
years were Basque original versions with Castilian subtitles.
Announcements for aid from the Directorate-General of Culture–Príncipe de Viana Institution:
Mention may be made of many calls for this aid: promoting creation; the development of
artistic products and artistic and cultural enterprises; support for the growth of a stable,
innovative and competitive creative and culture sector; and backing for cultural actions in
municipalities, etc. In all these, close attention is paid to the commitment to the regional
language in terms of publicity and access to the call. All are published in Basque in the Official
Navarre Gazette, as are the application forms and those for the description of the project, so
that all the documentation can be submitted in Basque. Moreover, some invitations address
the commitment to the regional language according to the announcement rating, and the
communication plan of the bodies subsidised (posters, leaflets, etc.) is usually in Basque as
well as in Castilian.
All the information on the artistic programmes organised by the Directorate-General of
Culture–Príncipe de Viana Institution is published on the website in Castilian and Basque. The
posters and programmes are prepared in Basque for artistic programmes presented in part in
the Basque-speaking and/or mixed zone. In 2013, 1,300 posters and 11,500 programmes

139

were published in Basque. These data refer to three programmes, and can be extrapolated to
other years.
‘Foral’ Administration Museums: the three museums’ website is trilingual (Castilian, Basque
and English). All the Navarre Museum’s materials and activities are bilingual (the handbill, the
prehistory brochure, teaching material, family activities, school workshops, suggestions and
complaint forms, etc.). The Carlism Museum offers activities such as guided visits, teaching
workshops, texts for the permanent exhibition etc. in Basque.
Libraries: among the Library Service’s activities in Basque, the following may be noted:
access to and consultation of the Library Catalogue; video-tutorial for access to the
Catalogue; the public libraries website (of the 39 public libraries with a website housed in the
Spanish Ministry of Culture’s server – “bibliotecaspublicas.es” – 9 have a Basque version);
activities to foster and promote reading; promotional material prepared by the Service;
suggestion, consultation and complaints (SCR) forms; official forms; acquisition of documents;
newsletters and brochures with information on the Library; and the Navarre Film Library, etc.).
Article 13 – Economic and social life
Paragraph 2
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the
public authorities are competent, within the territory in which the regional or minority
languages are used, and as far as this is reasonably possible:
c) to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and
hostels offer the possibility of receiving and treating in their own language
persons using a regional or minority language who are in need of care on
grounds of ill-health, old age or for other reasons;
505. … … The Committee of Experts would like to know whether the 2010 rulings of the
Pamplona Court, the Court of Administrative Disputes of the High Court of Justice in
Navarre concerning Osasunbide, the public health service, created a precedent for the
relevant job announcement in the health sector to include the requirement of the
knowledge of Basque.
Consequent upon the Supreme Court Ruling of 1 April 2011 and the resulting need to adapt
the general provisions concerned to that decision, the SNS-O (Servicio Navarro de SaludOsasunbide) urged amendment to ‘Foral’ Decree No. 347/1993 of 22 November regulating
entry to and providing for jobs in that Public Health Service. Accordingly, pursuant to ‘Foral’
Decree No. 35/2013 of 29 May, Articles 6 and 21 of the previous regulation were amended to
assess proficiency in Basque as provided for in general for the Administration of the ‘Foral’
Community of Navarre, according to the percentages established for that.
As a result of the application of ‘Foral’ Decree No. 55/2009 to Osasunbidea, the most recent
calls for admission and transfer have acknowledged proficiency in Basque as a quality.
In the Basque-speaking zone, there are nine Primary Healthcare Teams with a total of 148
jobs, of which 35% (52) require knowledge of Basque while the remaining 96 assess it merely
as a quality.
On the other hand, within the reach of the North Navarre Sub-Directorate, the Primary
Healthcare Directorate assigns part of its annual budget to substituting staff attending Basque
proficiency training. Specifically, the recent cost of substitutions for training courses in Basque
was €46,208 in 2011 and €28,708 in 2012.

140

506. The Committee of Experts urges the authorities to ensure the use of Basque in
social care facilities.
The four retirement homes in the Basque-speaking zone do not belong to the Government of
Navarre but are rather in municipal hands or belong to foundations who decide on the
payrolls, hiring requirements and the operation of these homes.
One bilingual person in the Navarre Government’s division of services for the elderly deals
with these centres, and the EISOL services contract (Social-Vocational Integration Teams)
guarantees attention in Basque in the Basque-speaking zone (4 professionals are Basquespeakers).
In the five centres managed by the Navarre Government’s Social Policy Department and
located in the mixed zone, healthcare can be provided in Basque.
The Autonomous Body the Navarre Sport and Youth Institute
There are various centres and offices attached to this body, with bilingual staff able to operate
in Basque: hotels, its own sports centres, youth, central offices, the Centre for Technology in
Sport, the Sport Studies, Research and Medicine Centre (CEIMD), the Youth Hostel Centre,
or the Centre for Resources for Training and Youth Refuge Centre.
Centres/services for minors and the family:
At centres for minors and services managed by Sin Fronteras (Without Borders), DIANOVA,
Nuevo Futuro (New Future), the Ilundain Foundation, Pauma, and Berriztu, a large part of the
direct staff speaks Basque.
Euskarabidea has begun monitoring measures to foster use of Basque in collective bargaining
agreements. Those in public entities provide resources enabling employees who so wish to
acquire a language profile which is in line with their job or with a post further up, establishing
conditions similar to those for public servants for access to courses to learn Basque.
Collective bargaining agreements in private companies or in specific professional sectors,
affecting about 5,162 employees, provide among other aspects for financial aid for those
studying Basque, compensation with time either to study or to attend official examinations,
and a commitment to draft those agreements, staff notices and the information published on
the noticeboard, posters, signage, etc. in Basque and in Castilian.
Article 14 – Transfrontier exchanges
The Parties undertake:
a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with
the States in which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if
necessary to seek to conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster
contacts between the users of the same language in the States concerned in the
fields of culture, education, information, vocational training and permanent
education;
516. … The Committee of Experts encourages the authorities to pursue bilateral
agreements with the countries in which the same languages are spoken
The following may be referred to as examples of this collaboration:

141

- Transfrontier collaboration has continued in recent years in the field of Senior Education
through the AEN university network (Aquitania, Euskadi, Navarre), bringing together seven
universities on both sides of the Pyrenees, 21 entities, 201,000 students, and 19 campuses.
- Collaboration has also continued in R+D through the Interreg IV Programme, in the
Transfrontier Programme (Interreg a) Spain, France, Andorra, through the Pyrenees Working
Community, in the transnational Programme (the Sudoe and Atlantic Arc Programmes) and in
the Interregional, Interreg c.
- The signing in May 2006 of a Collaboration Agreement between the Cultural Service of the
Embassy of France in Spain and the Navarre Government’s Education Department has made
it possible to implement educational and language programmes for school centres in the
management area of the Bordeaux Academy and the ‘Foral’ Community of Navarre.
- As part of the collaboration defined in the Addendum to the Framework Transfrontier
Cooperation Agreement concluded on 8 March 2011 in Pau by the Navarre Government and
the General Council of the Atlantic Pyrenees, a Secondary Pupils Exchange Programme was
organised between centres in France and Navarre (the Irissarry Programme).
- The “Two Navarres” seminar is an annual cultural event which has been held since 2005,
alternately in French Navarre and Spanish Navarre, to share knowledge, experiences and
projects among cultural institutions and bodies in the two regions. It is promoted by the
Navarre Government along with the main municipalities in Lower Navarre and cultural entities
like the Association of Friends of Old Navarre based in Saint Jean Pied de Port, the Lower
Navarre capital. In 2012, the celebration was hosted by the Lower Navarre municipality of La
Bastide Clairence. In previous years, it took place in the French localities of Saint Jean Pied
de Port, Saint Palais and Baigorri, and their Spanish counterparts of Roncesvalles, Pamplona,
Valcarlos and Ujué. In 2013, it was held in Olite.

142

THE OCCITAN LANGUAGE, NAMED ARANESE IN THE ARAN
VALLEY
1. INTRODUCTION
Data on the number of speakers
56. The Committee of Experts encourages the Spanish authorities to carry out surveys
in cooperation with the speakers of regional or minority languages in order to have
accurate updated data concerning the number of users of regional or minority
languages and their geographic distribution.
It should firstly be noted that most of the geographic area of the Occitan language is located in
France (the southern third) although it is also spoken in Italy (in the regions of Piamonte and
Liguria and in an enclave in Calabria) and in Monaco. There is no reliable statistical data for
the exact number of speakers of the language as a whole.
As regards the number of Aranese speakers in the Aran Valley (633.6 Km2 and 10,056
inhabitants), the area where the language enjoys the greatest recognition and legal status as
well as the highest usage and social and institutional prestige, the most recent official figures
come from the survey conducted in 2008 and are amply covered in the Third Report on Spain.
The data from the survey currently being conducted will be available in 2014.
Legislative changes
In 2010, the Catalonian Parliament approved the Occitan (Aranese in Aran) Act 35/2010, of 1
October. This implements Article 6 of the Statute of Autonomy of Catalonia of 2006.
As regards the provisions of the Statute of Autonomy of 1979, which referred to “Aranese” as
an object of teaching and deserving of special respect and protection, the 2006 Statute
recognised Occitan, named Aranese in Aran, as an official language in Catalonia. It referred to
a subsequent legal framework, created by Act 35/2010, which reinforced this linguistic
identification of Aranese as part of the Occitan language and explicitly established mandates
for safeguarding and promoting linguistic unity or collaborating with the other Occitan
territories and institutions (Articles 1, 2, 4 and 24).
The above Act 35/2010, stipulates the use of Occitan in the various areas of the
administration. It provides guidance on its linguistic correction, promotes its use in the media,
underpins relations with the various territories where Occitan is spoken, implements it as the
Aran Valley’s native language, frames the teaching of Occitan within formal education,
regulates the authority to issue certificates, implements it as an official language in Catalonia,
promotes its use in cultural activities and its presence in libraries and cultural centres and
encourages its use in socio-economic activities. The Act also contains other provisions
relating to onomastics, anthroponymy and the use of Occitan in the media and its promotion,
dissemination and external projection.
Articles 2.3, 5.4, 5.7 and 6.5 of Act 35/2010 describing Aranese as the preferred language of
the public authorities have been challenged on constitutional grounds. This followed similar
provisions declared unconstitutional in the Constitutional Court Ruling (STC 31/2010) on the
Statute of Autonomy of Catalonia of 2006. The Constitutional Court has suspended these
contested precepts pending a resolution.
With regard to local authorities, the municipalities in the geographic area concerned have
continued to adopt their own linguistic regulations in the period under review in order to
encourage the use of Occitan-Aranese.

143

Organisational aspects
In accordance with the existing legal framework, the competences on Occitan and its
normalisation and dissemination are exclusively exercised by the General Council of Aran in
its own territory. In the rest of Catalonia, and with regard to external projection and
cooperation with other Occitan territories, these competences are shared between the
Catalonian Government and the General Council of Aran.
2. APPLICATION OF THE CHARTER

Article 7 – Objectives and principles
Paragraph 1
In respect of regional or minority languages, within the territories in which such
languages are used and according to the situation of each language, the Parties shall
base their policies, legislation and practice on the following objectives and principles:
a)
the recognition of regional and minority languages as an expression of
cultural wealth;
Reference should be made to the adoption of the above Occitan (Aranese in Aran) Act
35/2010, of 1 October.

b) the respect of the geographical area of each regional and minority language,
in order to ensure that already existing or new administrative divisions do not
constitute any obstacle to the promotion of the regional or minority language in
question;
The above Act 35/2010 clearly specifies in its preamble that the Aranese dialect is an integral
part of the Occitan language. It provides for explicit mandates that promote the unity of the
Occitan language (Article 4) and, in collaboration with entities pertaining to the Occitan
linguistic area as a whole (Article 24), for a possible request to the Spanish Government to
sign international treaties which promote and project this language internationally.
f) the provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of
regional or minority languages at all appropriate stages;
The General Council of Aran runs courses in Aranese Occitan in Lleida and Barcelona. These
take place annually and have the collaboration of the University of Lleida and the Catalonian
Government, with the latter subsidising Occitan courses that are run by the Circle of OccitanCatalan Twinning (Cercle d’Afrairament Occitano-Catalan, CAOC), which is located in
Barcelona.

h) the promotion of study and research on regional or minority languages at
universities or equivalent institutions;

The Department of Occitan Studies was created at the University of Lleida in 2005 and
provides teaching and research in the Occitan language. Since the 2008-09 academic year,
the University has offered a Degree Course in Catalan and Occitan Studies, which is unique in
Spain in enabling access to a higher qualification in Catalan and Occitan philology.

144

The City of Lleida hosts numerous cultural initiatives related to Occitan while the Autonomous
University of Barcelona is the home of the Occitan Archive (Arxiu Occità) that holds a series of
lectures on Occitan language, literature and culture every May.
The 15th Congress of the International Association of Occitan Studies, run by the University of
Lleida, is scheduled to take place on its campus in June 2014. The event has the support of
the Catalonian Government following an agreement in 2013.
The Catalonian Summer University runs an introductory course in Occitan language and
literature every August in Prada de Conflent.

Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to promote, by appropriate measures, mutual understanding
between all the linguistic groups of the country and in particular the inclusion of
respect, understanding and tolerance in relation to regional or minority languages
among the objectives of education and training provided within their countries and
encouragement of the mass media to pursue the same objective.
231. The authorities have not directly responded to the Committee of Experts’
recommendation in their third periodical report. The Committee of Experts has been
made aware of some positive campaigns and initiatives at local or regional level, as
well as specific measures at state level from which regional or minority languages can
benefit.
Since October 2009, Catalan public television has broadcast a daily news programme in
Aranese, “Meddia aranés”, for Catalonia as a whole.
Since 2008, the Catalonian Government has held an annual Occitan film festival that visits
localities in Catalonia and some in the Occitan geographic area in France and Italy.
The Barcelona Televisió (BTV) public channel provides Barcelona and its neighbouring
municipalities with a 5-minute weekly news broadcast, Inf’ Òc, in the Occitan language as part of
the Info Idiomas programme.
Paragraph 4
In determining their policy with regard to regional or minority languages, the Parties
undertake to take into consideration the needs and wishes expressed by the groups
which use such languages. They are encouraged to establish bodies, if necessary, for
the purpose of advising the authorities on all matters pertaining to regional or minority
languages.
In 2012, the Catalonian Government created two Councils of particular linguistic importance:
the Social Council on Catalan Sign Language and the Occitan-Aranese Linguistic Policy
Council.
The Occitan-Aranese Linguistic Policy Council was created to comply with the relevant
provisions of the Statute of Autonomy of Catalonia (Article 6.5) and the Occitan (Aranese in
Aran) Act 35/2010. It is responsible for promoting action for appropriate, adequate financing of
Aranese Occitan linguistic policies, for coordinating the Catalonian Government and the
General Council of Aran in this area and for monitoring and assessing all agreements
adopted.

145

In 2012, there were initiatives to protect and promote Occitan language and culture, including
the new programme for promoting the implementation of the Occitan (Aranese in Aran) Act,
which builds on the policies of the Catalonian Government in this area.
In July 2012, a Framework Collaboration Agreement was signed by the Catalonian
Government and the Rodés Municipal Council, located in the French region of Midi-Pyrenées,
for organising activities to promote the Occitan language.

Article 8 - Education
Paragraph 1
With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such
languages are used, according to the situation of each of these languages, and without
prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s) of the State:
a)
i) to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority
languages;
1070. … The Committee of Experts encourages the Spanish authorities to provide
more detailed information and data about the extent to which Aranese is taught at preschool level in practice in their next periodical report.
The Aranese Government is responsible for education in the Aran Valley, in accordance with
Article 20.3 of Act 16/1990, of 13 July, on the Special Status of the Aran Valley.
The educational programmes of the three existing pre-schools continue to lack systematic
teaching of Aranese, or classes in Aranese. Although a command of Aranese by employees at
these establishments may be considered a bonus, it is not mandatory.
b)
i) to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
c)
i) to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority
languages; or
It should be noted that in Decree 101/2010, of 3 August, on the organisation of teaching in the
first cycle of primary education, to which this report refers in the section on the Catalan
language in Catalonia, all references to Catalan as the native language for instruction in
Catalonia were extended to Occitan in the case of Aran schools.
1078. The Committee of Experts invites the authorities to provide information with regard
to the use of Aranese in secondary education in their next periodical report.
In secondary education in the Aran Valley, teachers must have a command of Aranese to
obtain a job. There are two hours of Aranese classes a week, while the initial courses in
natural sciences are in the language too. Some teachers use Aranese in some written
communications as well as in oral communications although this is largely of a symbolic
nature as the majority of school administrators or teachers do not use the language. The
working language is usually either Catalan or Castilian. In the Baccalaureate (16-18 years),
the presence and use of Aranese as a working or teaching language is scarce or occasional.
d)
i) to make available technical and vocational education in the relevant
regional or minority languages;

146

1081. The Committee of Experts invites the authorities to provide information with regard
to the use of Aranese in technical and vocational teaching in their next periodical report.
Decree 284/2011, of 1 March, which regulates vocational training in Catalonia, has linguistic
provisions.

e)
i) To make available university and other higher education in regional or
minority languages;
This point reiterates the university-related actions indicated above for Article 7, paragraph 1,
letter h.
f)
i) To arrange for the provision of adult and continuing education courses
which are taught mainly or wholly in the regional or minority languages
1087. … The Committee of Experts encourages the Spanish authorities to report on
compliance with this undertaking in their next periodical report.
Supported financially by the Catalonian Government, the General Council of Aran continues to
organise yearly courses in which Aranese is present at different levels. These are held in the
Aran Valley and in Barcelona, Lleida, and Esterri d’Àneu, with an average annual attendance
of over 200 students. The Council also runs them for immigrants.
In a Resolution of 10 May 2013, the Catalonian Government updated the language
curriculum, which included Occitan, for the observance of adult training centres.
g)
To make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture
which is reflected by the regional or minority language;
The history and culture of the Aran Valley appears in primary education in the Aran Valley.
Events and talks are held at all schools to commemorate specific occasions.
In the rest of Catalonia, Occitan language and literature in general, as well as Aranese history
and culture in particular, are generally absent from the educational system. However, the
Catalonian Government is working to remedy this situation by making it a possible option in
secondary education.
h) To provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to
implement those of paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;
1093. The Committee of Experts invites the Spanish authorities to submit comments on
the practical implementation of this undertaking, including whether there is a sufficient
number of trained teachers for each educational level and whether there is a continuous
training plan, in their next periodical report.
The General Council of Aran runs a permanent training plan for teachers. However, teachers
who take up some placements sometimes lack the knowledge required.
i) To set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the
measures taken and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching
of regional or minority languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their
findings, which will be made public.

147

1095. … The Committee of Experts encourages the authorities to provide specific
information on monitoring reports in their next periodical reports.
Monitoring is undertaken by the education inspectorate. However, there are no specific
reports that monitor and develop the establishment and development of Aranese Occitan
teaching.
Paragraph 2
With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the
regional or minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the
number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow, encourage or
provide teaching in or of the regional or minority language at all the appropriate stages
of education.

1097. The Committee of Experts encourages the Spanish authorities to provide
information on any other kinds of teaching of Aranese outside the Aran Valley in their
next periodical report
The information provided above for Article 7, paragraph 1, letter h is applicable here.

Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
Paragraph 2

In respect of the local and regional authorities on whose territory the number of
residents who are users of regional or minority languages is such as to justify the
measures specified below, the Parties undertake to allow and/or encourage:
a) the use of regional or minority languages within the framework of the regional
or local authority;
1118. The Committee of Experts… requires more specific information on the actual use
of the Aranese language within regional authorities and the current area of legislation
in order to be in a position to draw a conclusion on this undertaking. It encourages the
Spanish authorities to provide such information in the next periodical report.
Occitan usage in the Catalonian administration is growing. Moreover, since 2010 the Catalonian
Parliament has translated all the legal texts adopted by the chamber in accordance with Article
7.1 of the Occitan Act 35/2010. It should be noted that, in conformity with this Article, the Aranese
Occitan versions of Acts of Parliament are official in nature, and therefore are not mere
documentary translations. In response to the political and institutional importance of Aranese, 24
legal texts of the Catalonian Parliament between October 2010 and September 2013 possess a
mandatory version in the language as well as a variety of non-legal texts (resolutions or motions).
b) the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or
written applications in these languages
1120. The Committee of Experts asks the authorities to provide information on the
practical implementation of this undertaking in their next periodical report.
Aranese is normally used for administrative documents in the Aran Valley, in local authorities
and in the General Council of Aran.

148

Furthermore, since 2012 the administration of the Catalonian Government has translated and
published the most important items of information on its websites in Aranese, together with its
principal e-administration forms. The website of the Virtual Citizen Care Office (Burèu Virtuau
de Tramit) has been available in its Aranese Occitan version since 2013.
e) the use by regional authorities of regional or minority languages in debates in
their assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of
the State;
1127. The Committee of Experts asks the authorities to comment on the use of Aranese
in Catalan parliamentary debates in their next periodical report.
No limitation is placed on the oral use of Aranese in the Catalonian Parliament, with its
presence in debates and speeches depending on the use that members of the chamber wish
to make of it. In the present term (2012-16), the member for Val d’Aran has employed
Aranese Occitan on various occasions. The deputy president of the Catalonian Government
has also used it in plenary sessions for matters related to the Aran Valley.
g) the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official
language(s), of traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or minority
languages.
1132. … The Committee of Experts … asks the authorities to provide information on
the implementation of the provisions of Article 18 of the Catalonia Act 1/1998, of 7
January, in their next periodical report.
Occitan or Aranese place-names are the sole official and correct monolingual form in the Aran
Valley. Some place-names remain in Catalan and Castilian.
Paragraph 4
With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by
them, the Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
a)

translation or interpretation as may be required;

1138. The Committee of Experts invites the authorities to comment on the practical
implementation of this undertaking in their next periodical report.
The Catalonian Government employs a person to carry out translations into Aranese Occitan,
both from Catalan and Castilian.
The General Council of Aran carries out the translations that are requested of it when these are
not too long. For lengthy documents, it provides linguistic and business references for the
service.
b)
recruitment and, where necessary, training of the officials and other public
service employees required;"
1140. …The Committee of Experts… asks the authorities to provide more detailed
information on the number of staff trained and the availability of civil servants with
sufficient knowledge of Aranese in their next periodical report
As the administration of the Catalonian Government has been downsizing since 2010, it is
currently impossible to incorporate staff who are specialised or have been trained in Aranese
Occitan, or Occitan in general.

149

As was previously stated, the General Council of Aran annually organises four levels of Aranese
courses that, although open to the general public, are principally aimed at Catalonian public
administration employees. Most enrollees for these courses work in the Catalan administration.
Supported by the Catalonian Government, the courses take place in offices it provides.
With regard to the Aran Valley administration, the General Council of Aran has enough staff to
satisfy its linguistic needs.
c)
compliance as far as possible with requests from public service employees
having a knowledge of a regional or minority language to be appointed in the
territory in which that language is used.
A command of the local language is a requisite for working in the Aran Valley. As regards the
staff who serve the Catalonian Government administration and who have a possible placement in
the Aran Valley, such as those in the Mossos d’Esquadra police force, a command of Aranese is
a great advantage that is taken into account.
1141. …The Committee of Experts… encourages the authorities to provide it with the
relevant information with regard to the four fields concerned (branches of State
administration in Catalonia, administration of the Autonomous Community, General
Council of Aran and local authorities, and public services) in their next periodical
report.
In the view of the Catalonian Government, there are differing sensitivities as regards the use of
Aranese among the various Public Administrations.

Article 11 – Media
Paragraph 1
The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within
the territories in which those languages are spoken, according to the situation of
each language, to the extent that the public authorities, directly or indirectly, are
competent, have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the principle of
the independence and autonomy of the media:
a)

to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:

i) to ensure the creation of at least one radio station and one television channel
in the regional or minority languages; or
1148. …The Committee of Experts encourages the Spanish authorities to continue
their support towards public broadcasting in Aranese.
b)
i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one radio station in the
regional or minority languages;
c)
i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one television channel
in the regional or minority languages;
1152. The Committee of Experts… encourages the Spanish authorities to provide
concrete information on any existing radio and television channels in Aranese and on
the facilitation of the creation of radio and television stations in their next periodical
report.
There is neither a radio station nor a television channel in Aranese.

150

Television channels in Catalonia broadcast a total of 67 hours in Aranese in 2011 and 52 hours
in 2012, primarily news. Catalunya Ràdio stations broadcast daily news in Aranese to the Aran
Valley.
As stated, Barcelona Television broadcast a 5-minute news programme in the city from 2009 to
2012. Lleida TV (a private channel) broadcasts in Aranese for 20 minutes a day to the province
of Lleida as a whole.
d) to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and
audiovisual works in the regional or minority languages;
1155. … The Committee of Experts encourages the Spanish authorities to provide
information on the measures adopted to promote the production and dissemination of
audio and audiovisual works in Aranese in their next periodical report.
There is a scarcity of audiovisual works in Aranese apart from the occasional creation on the
internet (YouTube) or public information videos promoted by the General Council of Aran.
e)
i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one
newspaper in the regional or minority languages; or
1158. … The Committee of Experts encourages the Spanish authorities to facilitate the
creation of a newspaper in Aranese
There are no newspapers in Aranese in print format, only announcements in certain
newspapers. The free online newspaper “Jornalet” has been available since 2012 and is
currently the only newspaper in the entire Occitan territory. It is supported by the General
Council of Aran and the Catalonian Government.
f)
ii) to broaden existing measures for financial assistance to audiovisual
productions in regional or minority languages;
1160. … The Committee of Experts urges the authorities to provide examples of
audiovisual productions in Aranese to have benefited from public funding in their next
periodical report.
The Catalonian Government annually calls for funding proposals from the media in Catalan or
Aranese or for communications projects for incorporating Catalan or Aranese into programmes or
sections. Divided into nine specific categories (periodical publications, digital media, radio and
television stations, DTT, journalism etc.), this funding totalled €51.2 million between 2009 and
2012. Financial support has also been provided for the dissemination of traditional and popular
Aranese songs, music and dances.
g) to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using regional or
minority languages."
1161. … The Committee of Experts urges the Spanish authorities to provide
information on the training of journalists using Aranese in their next periodical report.
At present, there is no specific media training in Aranese Occitan.

Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a

151

regional or minority language, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language…
In November 2010, the General Council of Aran and the Catalonian Government signed an
agreement to create an audiovisual platform in the Occitan language in the Aran Valley.

Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 1
With regard to cultural activities and facilities – especially libraries, video libraries,
cultural centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary
work and film production, vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the
culture industries, including inter alia the use of new technologies – the Parties
undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used and to the extent that the
public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this field:
a) to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority
languages and foster the different means of access to works produced in these
languages;
1167. … The Committee of Experts urges the authorities to provide information on the
application of the chosen undertakings under Article 12 in their next periodical report.
Characterised by the introduction of digitalisation throughout the book chain, changes in the
sector continued in 2010. From 2010 to 2013, aid for production and promotion was
maintained to ensure the competitiveness of Catalan-language books and promote both
books in Aranese and reading itself.
The Council has maintained literary competitions at all levels and funding for books in Aranese in
schools and libraries. Various literary works, including some pertaining to universal literature,
have been translated into Aranese. In April 2013, the public library in Vielha opened the Occitan
Aran Cultural Space (Espaci Culturau Aran Occitània).
b) to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in
regional or minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, postsynchronisation and subtitling activities;
1169. The Committee of Experts encourages the Spanish authorities to provide
examples of works in Aranese subtitled into other languages, and about any translation
and subtitling activities relevant to this undertaking, in their next periodical report.
The Occitan film festival, organised since 2008 by the Department of Culture, has subtitled its
productions in Catalan since 2011 in order to publicise the event throughout Catalonia.

c) to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other
languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation
and subtitling activities;
As stated in the previous section, the Occitan film festival has been held since 2008. Over this
time, it has become consolidated and has been extended to various parts of Catalan and
Occitan-speaking territory (8 localities in 2010 and 19 in 2013, in Catalonia, Italy and France).

g) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for
collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the

152

regional or minority languages;

The Catalan Decree 116/2012, which refers to those Catalan or Occitan books not produced in
Catalonia, establishes that “Publishers and failing this, or when appropriate, producers, printers,
stampers or engravers who produce materials in Catalan or Occitan in any State territory other
than Catalonia, must provide the Library of Catalonia with a copy.”
h)
if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and
terminological research services, particularly with a view to maintaining and
developing appropriate administrative, commercial, economic, social, technical or
legal terminology in each regional or minority language.
1171. … The Committee of Experts urges the Spanish authorities to provide information
on the application of the chosen undertakings under Article 12 in their next periodical
report.
To comply with the provisions of the Occitan (Aranese in Aran) Act, provision is currently being
made for the creation of the Institute of Aranese Studies. This will be in the form of an Academy
whose aims will include terminological research. Moreover, the General Council of Aran carries
out translations using terminology selected through the application of linguistic protocols. The
Catalonian Government also promotes new technological vocabulary disseminated through the
Catalan Terminology Centre, TERMCAT.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy
abroad, for regional or minority languages and the cultures they reflect.
1173. … The Committee of Experts urges the Spanish authorities to provide information
on the application of the chosen undertakings under Article 12 in their next periodical
report.
Concerts and theatrical performances relating to Aranese language and culture have been
held beyond the Aran Valley in Catalonia and abroad.

Article 13 – Economic and social life
Paragraph 1
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole
country:
b)

to prohibit the insertion in internal regulations of companies and private
documents of any clauses excluding or restricting the use of regional or
minority languages, at least between users of the same language;

c)

to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or
minority languages in connection with economic or social activities;

d)

to facilitate and/or encourage the use of regional or minority languages by
means other than those specified in the above sub-paragraphs.

153

1777. The Committee of Experts is not in a position to conclude on Article 13.1.d) and
urges the Spanish authorities to submit information in this respect in their next
periodical report.
It should be underlined that Article 26 of the Occitan (Aranese in Aran) Act 35/2010, of 1 October,
provides for measures on the promotion of Aranese in the socioeconomic sphere, among which
are those that must be implemented by the Catalonian Government, the General Council of Aran,
local entities or public authorities. These measures relate to the promotion and ensuring of the
normal use of Aranese in all sectors and activities of social and economic life in Aran; to the
ensuring of the right of individuals, consumers and users to use Aranese in the economic and
social activities in Aran; to the use of Aranese in the provision of social services (hospitals, elderly
care homes, hostels etc.); or to the signage of establishments and entities of various types.
There is also provision for these measures to also include the entering into of agreements, the
provision of subsidies, grants, tax relief, awards or the inclusion of linguistic clauses in the
provision of subsidies and grants to companies or entities located in Aran.
Paragraph 2
With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, in so far as the
public authorities are competent, within the territory in which the regional or minority
languages are used, and as far as this is reasonably possible:
a) in the economic and social sectors directly under their control (public
sector), to organise activities to promote the use of regional or minority
languages;"
b) to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and
hostels offer the possibility of receiving and treating in their own language
persons using a regional or minority language who are in need of care on
grounds of ill-health, old age or for other reasons;"
c) to ensure by appropriate means that safety instructions are also drawn up in
regional or minority languages;

Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe

5. Ensure that regional or minority languages are present in the provision of
healthcare services.

1178. No information with regard to the application of these undertakings has been

provided in the third periodical report. The Committee of Experts asks the authorities to
comment on the application of these undertakings in the next periodical report.

It is necessary to refer to paragraph 1, letter d) of Article 13 of the Charter, and to Question
1,777 of the Committee of Experts, which refers to the provisions of Article 26 of the above
Catalan Act 35/2010 of 1 October. Accordingly, the signage of Aran Hospital is in Aranese and
printed matter in the language is habitually used there.
e) to arrange for information provided by the competent public authorities
concerning the rights of consumers to be made available in regional or minority
languages.

154

1181. The Committee of Experts… and encourages the Spanish authorities to submit
some specific examples of the implementation of this undertaking in their next
periodical report.
Reference should again be made to Article 26 of the above Catalan Act 35/2010 on the
linguistic obligations as regards the rights of consumers and users.

Article 14 – Transfrontier exchanges
Paragraph 1
The parties undertake:
a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the
States in which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if
necessary to seek to conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster contacts
between the users of the same language in the States concerned in the fields of
culture, education, information, vocational training and permanent education;
1183. The Committee of Experts invites the authorities to provide information on this
undertaking in the next periodical report.
The Catalonian Government has signed a variety of agreements with French entities and
administrations for disseminating Occitan cinema.

b) For the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or promote cooperation across borders, in particular between regional or local authorities in
whose territory the same language is used in identical or similar form.
1187. The Committee of Experts… awaits with interest information about the activities
carried out in the above collaboration framework (agreements between the Regional
Ministry of Education of the Catalonian Government and the rectors of Academies in
the south of France which aim to promote school exchanges, the Charter of
interregional and transfrontier cooperation for the development of Occitan adopted by
the French region of Aquitaine].
The General Council of Aran has an ongoing relationship with social and administrative
structures in the French and Italian Occitan regions. This is aimed at adult training and the
pursuit of cultural activities.
The Catalonian Government, within its series of contacts with associative and administrative
entities, signed a framework collaboration agreement on Occitan language and culture with
the French town of Rodés in 2012. In addition, it has institutional contacts in this field with the
regional administrations of Aquitaine, Midi-Pyrinées and Languedoc-Roussillon.
The accession of the Catalonian Government to the Charter of Interregional Cooperation for
the Occitan Language is under study. In addition, there is preparation of collaboration
agreements with representative and umbrella Occitan cultural bodies, such as The Permanent
Congress of the Occitan Language (Lo Congrés Permanent de la Lenga Occitana) and
Occitan Convergence (Convergéncia Occitana).

155

B)

CO-OFFICIAL LANGUAGES
ADMINISTRATION

IN

THE

GENERAL

STATE

Recommendations of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
1. Ensure that regional or minority languages are present in public services.
2. Study the recruitment, career and training plans of the staff of State
Administration offices in order to ensure that a sufficient proportion of staff
assigned to the Autonomous Communities possess a working knowledge of the
relevant languages.

1. INTRODUCTION
The Official Languages Council is an interdepartmental collegiate body, attached to the State
Secretariat for Public Administrations (Ministry for Finances and Public Administrations) and
created by Royal Decree 905/2007 of 6 January. It is generally responsible for the
development, analysis, promotion and technical coordination in the General State
Administration of the use of the official languages of the Autonomous Communities. In the
report period (2010-2013), the Council met on 6 July 2010 after studying the evaluation report
requested by the Council from the Official Languages Office in the General State
Administration at the previous meeting (23 June 2009). The evaluation report submitted to the
Council provided conclusions on the situation and proposed recommendations for adoption
when appropriate by this Council and subsequent transfer to the Ministries. The Council noted
successive advances and significant improvements in all areas of the General State
Administration as regards the application of regulations on co-official languages. Significant
progress and improvements took place specifically in the following areas:


The linguistic proficiency of employees in the General State Administration, with an
overall improvement in all major state services in those Autonomous Communities with
a co-official language. The work on training undertaken by the National Institute of
Public Administration (INAP) is notable.



Printed matter, templates, posters, signs and signage, with the use of bilingual forms
having become generalised since 2009.



Ministry webpages and websites, with a considerable increase in the presence of coofficial languages in them.



Specific areas, like those of the Directorate General of Traffic, the State Tax
Administration Agency, the Social Security and the above INAP, which have displayed
notable good practice in this matter over recent years.

It is also notable that the Council meetings studied the status of citizen complaints and claims
in this area and found a major reduction in their number over recent years, with the Official
Languages Office receiving none in 2012.
Despite this positive overall assessment of the level of compliance with state legislation in the
area of co-official languages in the General State Administration, the Languages Council
adopted a set of recommendations at the above meeting of 6 July 2010. These included the
following: the improvement of the overall situation in this area, with an increased focus on
sectors such as staff proficiency in the outreach services of the General State Administration;

156

the completion of the process of translation into co-official languages as regards printed
matter, standard forms, templates, posters, signs and signage; and the completion of the full
accessibility and provision of content and services in co-official languages on websites and in
e-administration in general.
The Languages Council has yet to hold any meetings. This is due to the economic crisis that
has affected Spain during the report period and which has required a large proportion of the
Government’s policies to be focused on fiscal consolidation in order to comply with European
Union requirements. However, this has not prevented the Languages Office from working as
is customary. This work has involved analysing and monitoring of compliance with the
requirements stemming from the existence of various official languages and recognising them
in the work of Ministries and of those public bodies dependent or linked to them.
The information provided by the different Ministerial Departments for the report period and
inserted into the framework implementing the Charter is given below.

2. APPLICATION OF THE CHARTER
Article 10
Paragraph 1
Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of
regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the
situation of each language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
b) to make available widely used administrative texts and forms for the population in
the regional or minority languages or in bilingual versions
c) to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in a regional or minority
language.
In the monitoring period for this report, all the bodies of the General State Administration
generally maintained, and often increased, the number of documents in co-official languages
with respect to the previous report period.
The following are notable examples:


Within the Ministry for Employment and Social Security, the National Social Security
Institute, the Marine Social Institute, and the General Social Security Treasury provide
translations into the co-official languages of all their printed matter, templates and
forms. These are accessed through their corresponding website. These bodies also
conducted information campaigns in these co-official languages over this period.



Within the Ministry for Health, Social Services and Equality, the information, prevention
and awareness campaigns on gender violence carried out in co-official languages; all
the information (posters, information pamphlets, etc.) in these languages referring to
Organic Act 3/2007, of 22 March, for effective gender equality; and all the surveys
conducted in these languages by the Spanish Observatory of Drugs and Drug
Addiction. Most of the Ministry’s institutional campaigns were also conducted in coofficial languages over this period.



Within the Ministry for Finances and Public Administrations, Government offices and
branch offices in territories with a co-official language generally provide bilingual forms
through their websites. In addition, almost all signs and signage in buildings are
bilingual.

157



During the electoral processes (local and national elections) in the 2010-2013 period,
the Ministry of the Interior provided bilingual forms for citizens in a similar proportion to
the previous period (around 40%) while all polling stations signs were bilingual too. A
large proportion of institutional material was presented in a bilingual form while fully
bilingual institutional campaigns were conducted on the radio and television. In
addition, the progress made in the way the Civil Guard conducts its activities, with
numerous examples of bilingual documents being introduced: forms, complaints and
suggestions books, requests for firearms licences and cards, messages used by
telephone switchboards, signs and signage of offices, etc.



Within the Ministry of Development, almost 100% of the forms and printed matter
together with information signs and signage of bodies such as State Ports or Spanish
Airports and Air Navigation (AENA) are bilingual.

Paragraph 3
With regard to public services provided by the administrative authorities or other persons acting
on their behalf, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which regional or minority languages
are used, in accordance with the situation of each language and as far as this is reasonably
possible:

a) to ensure that the regional or minority languages are used in the provision of the service;
or
b) to allow users of regional or minority languages to submit a request and receive a reply
in these languages; or
As regards these requirements, the levels of use of co-official languages in the public services
provided by bodies of the General State Administration were maintained, and often increased,
with respect to the previous report period.
The following are examples of this progress:


Within the Ministry of Development, the Administrator of Rail Infrastructure (ADIF)
extended the use of co-official languages in all information panels on screens and
monitors and public address systems. For trains beginning or ending their journeys in
those Autonomous Communities with an official language, RENFE Operadora
introduced announcements to travellers in those languages too.



Within the Ministry for Health, Social Services and Equality, services of major
importance are fully provided in co-official languages. These include the free hotline for
information and advice on gender violence (016) or the helpline for protection of
victims of gender violence (ATENPRO), which is on offer 24 hours a day, 365 days a
year.



Within the Ministry of the Interior, attempts to encourage citizen interaction and
document exchange in the Civil Guard, in the appropriate cases, to be conducted in
the corresponding co-official language, either directly by officers who have a command
of them or through hired translators.



Within the Ministry for Finances and Public Administrations, it is now practically
guaranteed that attention in Government offices and branch offices will be provided in
the respective co-official languages in those territories with a co-official language.

Paragraph 4

158

With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the
Parties undertake to take one or more of the following measures:
a) translation or interpretation as may be required;
Despite the economic crisis Spain has experienced over this period, it is notable that the level
of translation into co-official languages has been maintained, with an increase in some of the
websites of the public entities of the General State Administration.
The following are examples of the efforts made in the period under study:


Within the Ministry for Employment and Social Security, 72% of the website content of
the General Social Security Treasury was translated into co-official languages in 2010
and around 96% in 2013. Moreover, the State Public Employment Service translated
all employment contract templates into co-official languages at the start of 2013 and
provided translations in these languages of most static information on unemployment
benefits on its website.



Within the Ministry of Development, the website content of Spanish Airports and Air
Navigation (AENA) is available in all the co-official languages. Moreover, it has been
possible to buy tickets and obtain train service information in co-official languages from
the Spanish National Railway Network (RENFE) since 2009.



Within the Ministry of the Interior, a considerable proportion of electoral information
and material, referred to above, is presented in co-official languages through the
corresponding websites designed by the Ministry of the Interior. Equally important is
the use of co-official languages on the Government Office for Gender Violence
website. Similarly, the Civil Guard website can now translate all the menus y
submenus up to the fourth navigation level into co-official languages. Furthermore, the
Directorate General of Police is working on a computer application for receiving and
processing reports of crimes in co-official languages.



Within the Ministry for Finances and Public Administrations, 99% of the website
content of the State Secretariat for Budgets and Expenditure and of the General State
Comptroller is translated into co-official languages. Moreover, the web portal of the
State Secretariat of Public Administration is available in co-official languages and
currently has over 200 pages translated into these languages.

Finally, it is notable that the corresponding websites of all the Ministerial Departments were
put into operation over the period together with those of many of the bodies attached or
dependent on them. This has allowed these websites to provide services and access to the
development of numerous procedures in co-official languages.
b) recruitment and, where necessary, training of the officials and other public service
employees required;
The levels of the previous period have been maintained, and often increased, as regards the
proficiency in co-official languages of officials employed in the services of the General State
Administration in those Autonomous Communities with a co-official language.
Overall, this proficiency is now advantageous to gain access to these positions. This is always
the case for jobs that involve dealing with the public.
Moreover, most public workers whose work involves dealing with the public at the local level
of the State Administration are bilingual. In many cases, this results from their mother tongue
being the co-official language and, in others, from their having acquired subsequent skills
through training courses.

159

Training in co-official languages in most of the bodies of the General State Administration has
helped considerably to maintain and increase the skills referred to above. This work is
continuing, either through the bodies of the General State Administration themselves or with
the collaboration of the National Institute of Public Administration (INAP) or of the
Administration of the Autonomous Community involved. We would highlight in this period the
training courses run by the National Social Security Institute (INSS), the Administrator of Rail
Infrastructure (ADIF), the General Social Security Treasury (TGSS), the Government Offices
involved and the Tax Agency, the latter through face-to-face, online or distance courses with
the collaboration of the National Distance University (UNED). The co-official language courses
that form part of the continuous training programmes of trade union organisations have also
helped in this process.

160

III.

NON-OFFICIAL REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES

ASTURIAN IN ASTURIAS
1.

INTRODUCTION

Reference is also made to Galician-Asturian in this part of the report.
Data on the number of speakers
56. … The Committee of Experts encourages the Spanish authorities to carry

out surveys in cooperation with the speakers of regional or minority
languages in order to have accurate updated data concerning the number of
users of regional or minority languages and their geographic distribution.
… The Committee of Experts urged the Spanish authorities to provide updated
official data on the number of Asturian speakers in their next periodical report.
57.

The Regional Ministry of Education, Culture and Sport of the Governing Council of the
Principality of Asturias has been responsible for linguistic policy since June 2012.
Castilian is the only official language in Asturias. The Asturian language is a “traditional
language of Asturias” (as stated by Act 1/1998 of 23 March, on the Use and Promotion of
Bable/Asturian). The territory where Asturian is spoken comprises most of the Autonomous
Community, excepting the westernmost area, west of the River Navia, where GalicianAsturian is spoken. According to various sociolinguistic surveys, some 250,000 people speak
Asturian (that is, a quarter of the population), a minority although a significant one. In any
case, it should be understood that this Romance language is easily understood by most of the
Asturian population, whether they are speakers or not, In addition, it may be easily diluted with
Spanish due to the linguistic closeness between the two systems. The “purest” Asturian is
best preserved in rural areas, among older people and in the most traditional environments.

2. APPLICATION OF THE CHARTER
Article 7 – Objectives and principles
Paragraph 1
In respect of regional or minority languages, within the territories in which such
languages are used and according to the situation of each language, the Parties shall
base their policies, legislation and practice on the following objectives and principles:
a) the recognition of the regional or minority languages as an expression of
cultural wealth;"
119 …The Committee of Experts encouraged the authorities to consider in
collaboration with the Asturian-speakers the possibilities of improving the
current level of protection provided by the Statute of Autonomy.
b) the respect of the geographical area of each regional or minority language in order to
ensure that existing or new administrative divisions do not constitute an obstacle to the
promotion of the regional or minority language in question;"

161

c) the need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in order to
safeguard them;
Governmental action in the field of social normalisation is aimed at mainstreaming. This starts
from the rich culture formed in Asturian and Galician-Asturian, builds on the social groups and
private initiatives to use these languages, and collaborates so that this use becomes a reality
for society. The total budget allocated to the Directorate General of Linguistic Policy in the
2010-2012 period was €7,847,452 (€3,058,482 in 2010, €2,810,569 in 2011 and €1,978,401
in 2012).
The aim is for Asturian and Galician-Asturian to keep increasing its presence in Radio
Television of the Principality of Asturias (RTPA), private broadcasters, the print media,
festivals and cultural activities, both of civil society and institutions.
In the administrative field, since the adoption in 1998 of the Act on Use and Promotion, any
citizen may address the Administration in Asturian or Galician-Asturian. This legal status is
unique for any non-official language. As regards place-names, the formalisation process for
traditional forms undertaken by the Asturian Government has now taken place in 50 of the 78
Asturian municipalities, with another 15 in the process of doing so.
In addition, the Municipal Offices for Linguistic Normalisation Services are spreading and
becoming consolidated. At present, 18 municipalities are served by these Offices with regard
to Asturian (among them, a substantial part of the most populated ones in the centre of
Asturias). With regard to Galician-Asturian, 16 councils are covered by these services.
In the 2010-2012 period, notable progress towards full parity was made in the use of Asturian
in the institutional portal of the Government of the Principality of Asturias (with the Ministry of
the Presidency giving its firm commitment to comply with this). In addition, Asturian appears in
sectoral portals administered by the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sport. The following
action in the report period may be highlighted:


The presence of a sub-portal in Asturian on the www.asturias.es portal with static
information on a variety of topics (agriculture and forests; crafts and trade; social
affairs; consumption; industry and energy, employment etc.) and the daily
incorporation of news generated by governmental activity: open calls, courses, press
releases, etc.



The translation and uploading of the Service and Procedure Catalogue, making
available the Asturian-language version of the service records related to public open
calls.



The presence of the bibliographical catalogue of the Asturian Language Academy in
the Digital Library of the Principality of Asturias.



The use of the Asturian and Galician-Asturian languages in the «Educastur» portal, for
information about educational activities relating to the Asturian language.



The bilingual publication of some resolutions in the Official Gazette of the Principality
of Asturias: open calls for funding proposals or awarding of grants and literary prizes;
rules for participation in cultural programmes run by the Government of the Principality,
etc.



The
management
of
the
websites,
www.premiumeyorcantar.es, (both entirely in Asturian).



The use of Asturian on the website www.agendaculturalasturias.es.

www.politicallinguistica.org,

162

There is also bilingual signage in some of the most emblematic administrative buildings
(General Council of the Principality, High Court of Justice of Asturias etc.). The official
logotype of the Principality of Asturias is used in its Asturian and Galician-Asturian versions in
signs, publicity campaigns and publications as required.
d) the facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of regional or minority languages, in
speech and writing, in public and private life;
The Asturian language and Galician-Asturian are part of the Asturian population’s cultural and
experiential reality. Despite there being no specific regulations applicable to this aspect
beyond the provisions of the Statute of Autonomy and the Act on Use and Promotion, the
commercial, economic and social relations in which Asturian citizens participate take place
without any linguistic obstacles or disputes.
With the aim of consolidating the linguistic respect and tolerance that exists among Asturian
citizens in the economic and social life of Asturias, the Government of the Principality of
Asturias implements a set of measures intended to expand and facilitate the opportunities for
the social use of Asturian and Galician-Asturian, ensuring they are protected and promoted as
collective heritage. Thus, the 2010-2012 period witnessed a variety of awareness campaigns
on the use of the Asturian language in the commercial sector: shop sign templates, posters
and brochures advertising Asturian products, etc.
Through the annual open call for funding proposals from local bodies (local authorities and
Associations of Municipalities), the 2010-2012 period saw financial support provided for the
implementation of numerous projects promoting Asturian or Galician-Asturian in the economic
and social sectors. Moreover, there was support over this period for numerous projects
promoting Asturian and Galician-Asturian in these sectors through the annual open call for
funding proposals for grants for non-profit associations and entities. Support was also
provided over this period through grants for the promotion of Asturian and Galician-Asturian in
highly varied activities undertaken by private companies (online sales catalogues, labelling in
Asturian, advertisements in the press, brochures with offers and price discounts, etc.).
f) The provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of
regional or minority languages at all appropriate stages;
197. The Committee of Experts encourages the authorities to increase the offer of
Asturian education, especially at secondary schools, through creating more
favourable conditions for pupils and teachers.
There are currently over 20,000 students of Asturian; in Primary Education, Asturian is taught
in over 94% of state schools and, of these, 54% of pupils choose to study the subject.
Furthermore, all school curriculums, from Primary to Baccalaureate, have incorporated
Asturian. From Primary to Baccalaureate, the Asturian Government has provided an
academic, normalised solution to Asturian. To complete the educational range, the Asturian
University, also for the first time in the region’s history, incorporates regulated studies in
Asturian: a minor in Philology, a major in teacher training and a specialty in the Master’s
Degree in secondary, baccalaureate and vocational teacher training.
As well as the training of teachers, since 2003 the University of Oviedo has had a specific
Research Group (el Seminariu de Filoloxía Asturiana) devoted to studies in Asturian
Philology.
The Government of the Principality of Asturias works to guarantee the right to be taught in the
Asturian language and, in its geographical area, Galician-Asturian, under the most appropriate
conditions. To comply with this aim, the Regional Ministry of Education, Culture and Sport has
annually an average total staff of 250 teachers (180 on Primary Education and 75 in
Secondary).

163

Moreover, the work of the Government of the Principality in the educational field has been
reflected as follows:


Since the entry into force of the Organic Education Act (LOE), Asturian Language
curriculums have been adapted for the various educational stages in which Asturian
Language is provided.
It should be noted that the Thirty-Eighth Additional Provision of the new Education Act
(LOMCE) introduces the obligation to offer the subject of Asturian Language at each
educational stage, as it contains, together with Castilian and the co-official languages,
those languages that enjoy legal protection.



There has been action to publicise and promote enrolment in the subjects of Asturian
Language and Galician-Asturian, both in Primary and Secondary education.



The offer of Asturian Language and Galician-Asturian has been ensured at all levels
and educational groups, although study of it remains voluntary:
- Primary Education: Offered in all state and private-concerted schools in the
Principality of Asturias and taught in 90% of public schools and 20 concerted ones.
- Secondary Education: Offered in all schools in the Principality of Asturias and taught
in 89% of state schools and in 9 concerted schools.
- Baccalaureate: Offered in all the schools in the Principality of Asturias and taught in
32% of state schools.
- Adult Education: Since the publication of the LOE curriculum, it has been obligatory
to offer it in all colleges as an optional subject.



Compliance with minimum student ratios in the teaching of Asturian and GalicianAsturian has been guaranteed in accordance with the dictates and decisions of the
Regional Ministry of Education, Culture and Sport.



There has been cooperation with the initiatives of the University or its centres,
favouring social normalisation and research into the indigenous language.



Within the Regional Teacher Training Plan, training courses, seminars and workshops
are offered to Asturian Language teachers. In addition, the Adolfo Posada Asturian
Public Administration Institute permanently offers Asturian courses for which all
teachers may enrol.

At every level and stage in Primary and Secondary education in the Principality of Asturias,
Asturian Language or Galician-Asturian, according to the school’s geographical location, is an
obligatory subject for the school and a voluntary one for pupils.
In Primary Education, Asturian Language is voluntary, with pupils able to choose an
alternative in the form of study classes. The latter must not involve any teaching of curricular
content. In Secondary Education, the subject is optional. Pupils must choose one of several
subjects (Asturian Language, French, etc.).
In Primary Education, in the 2010-11 school year, 226 (93.7%) of 241 schools offered Asturian
Language and 17,385 (56%) out of 31,050 pupils chose the subject. In the 2011-2012 school
year, 226 (91.8%) schools continued to offer Asturian Language out of a total of 246, and the
number of pupils fell to 17,235 (53.9%) out of a total of 31,968. In the 2012-2013 school year,
the number of schools offering Asturian Language rose to 230 (94.2%) out of 244, with 17,168
(54.2%) pupils taking the subject out of a total of 32,541.
In Secondary Education, in the 2010-2011 school year, 75 (86.2%) schools out of a total of 87
provided Asturian Language for 3,445 (17.3%) pupils out of 19,985. In the 2011-2012 school

164

year, the number and percentage of schools remained the same and the number and
percentage of Asturian Language pupils fell to 15.8% (3,174 out of 20,010). In the 2012-2013
school year, the number and percentage (88.5%) of schools (77 out of 87) offering Asturian
Language rose, but the number (2,908 out of 20,257) and percentage (14.3%) of pupils fell.
The University of Oviedo plays a key role in training Asturian Language teachers at all
educational centres and levels. In 2008, as stated above, a minor in Asturian Language was
created in the curriculums of the Philology Faculty and a major in the curriculums of the
Teacher Training College.
Within the Faculty of Teacher Training and Education, two courses in Asturian Studies are
available: the Teacher’s Degree in Primary Education and the University Master’s Degree in
Teacher Training for Obligatory Secondary Education, Baccalaureate and Vocational Training.
The Training Certificate in Bable/Asturian and Galician-Asturian is a requisite for teaching
these subjects. This is regulated in the Resolution of 26 April 2001. Currently, the Master’s
Degree enables teachers to impart the Asturian Language in Secondary Education while the
Major in Asturian Language enables them to teach it in Primary Education.
Moreover, as part of the Regional Teacher Training Plan, the Regional Ministry of Education,
Culture and Sport collaborates with the Asturian Language Academy in offering teacher
training courses.
As part of the Regional Teacher Training Plan too, the Regional Ministry of Education designs
a specific programme providing Asturian Language teachers with courses, seminars, working
groups, and day events etc. These are aimed at continuous training for teachers of the subject
in the various stages of the educational system.
202. The Committee of Experts welcomes this information about teaching in
Asturian and encourages the authorities to develop adequate textbooks
In order to collaborate with teachers as they go about their work, the Regional Ministry of
Education, Culture and Sport promotes the formation of working groups to create teaching
support material. Periodically, batches of reading books, dictionaries, magazines etc. are
distributed to create a resource of bibliographic material in Asturian or Galician-Asturian in all
schools, helping the library to become integrated.
g) the provision of facilities enabling non-speakers of a regional or minority language
living in the area where it is used to learn it if they so desire;
h) the promotion of studies and research into regional or minority languages in
universities or in equivalent institutions;
Since 2003, the University of Oviedo has had a specific research group devoted to studying
Asturian Philology: the Asturian Philology Seminar (Seminariu de Filoloxía Asturiana) (SFA).
The Asturian Philology Review (Revista de Filoloxía Asturiana) is the scientific periodical of
the Asturian Philology Seminar. Published annually since 2001, it is funded through its own
subscriptions and occasional assistance from the University of Oviedo and the Principality of
Asturias.
The Asturian Philology Seminar has worked since its creation in linguistic, literary and
sociolinguistic fields. In the 2010-2012 period, it has created diverse research projects and
activities: an automatic translator, the Asturian Observatory of Neology and Terminology,
congresses, reviews, etc.

165

i) The promotion of appropriate types of transnational exchanges, in the fields covered
by this Charter, for regional or minority languages used in identical or similar form in
two or more States.
The status of Asturians who live outside Asturias is legally recognised by the Cultural Heritage
Act of Asturias and the Asturian Centres dotted around the world. The Asturian Government
and the Council of Asturian Communities are involved in maintaining cultural and linguistic
contact with Asturians in the world, improving connections between the Asturian diaspora and
the land of their birth through activities such as those programmed over the 2010-2012 period.
These include the regular dispatch of bibliographic material, Asturian Arts Day Overseas (Día
de les Lletres Asturianes nel Esterior), the First Distance Learning Course in the Asturian
Language for Asturian communities abroad, etc.

Paragraph 2
The Parties undertake to eliminate, if they have not yet done so, any unjustified distinction,
exclusion, restriction or preference relating to the use of a regional or minority language and
intended to discourage or endanger the maintenance or development of it. The adoption of
special measures in favour of regional or minority languages aimed at promoting equality
between the users of these languages and the rest of the population or which take due
account of their specific conditions is not considered to be an act of discrimination against the
users of more widely-used languages.
In accordance with Decree 98/2002, of 18 July, which sets out the procedure for recovering
and establishing Asturian place-names and always upon the request of the local authority,
there has been work on the formalising of the place-names of its population centres. In the
2010-2012 period, the place names of the following municipalities were adopted: Teverga,
Ribadesella, Taramundi, San Martín de Oscos, Santa Eulalia de Oscos, Villanueva de Oscos,
Quirós, Avilés, Ponga and Illas. To date, the place-names of 50 of the 78 Asturian
municipalities have been formalised. A further 15 are in different phases of the process.
With the aim of training specialists to administer this area, in 2010 a course was held on “The
recovery of traditional place-names”. The Linguistic Policy Office also launched an information
campaign with the motto “¿D’ónde yes?” (Where are you from?”), with its version “¿Tu d’únde
es?” for the municipalities where Galician-Asturian is spoken (maps, brochures etc.), in
collaboration with municipal corporations in all those local authorities whose official placename was adopted between 2005 and 2011.
A start has been made on the signage of the new official place-names on roads and
motorways under the responsibility of the Autonomous Community, together with the roads
and paths which are under municipal responsibility, the latter with grants from the Regional
Ministry of Education, Culture and Sport.
Likewise, local authorities have progressively adapted the signage of their roads and paths to
new official place-names. They have received financial assistance from the Regional Ministry
of Education, Culture and Sport, which as part of its annual open-call for proposals finances
numerous place-name signage projects at the request of municipalities.
Finally, there are other examples of actions and measures in favour of Asturian. These
include: the presentation in 2012 of the Map of the Principality of Asturias, which featured the
traditional place-names adopted; the commencement in 2012 of the creation of Geographic
Nomenclature of the Official Place-Names of the Principality of Asturias (this may be
consulted on the Principality’s website); the collaboration of the Principality with the Ministry of
Public Works in the state campaign promoting place-names (in 2010 the Ministry published
the informative brochure “The importance of geographic names and the need for their
normalised use”, including its version in Asturian); or advice and management for the possible

166

request for a change of first name and surnames to adopt the corresponding patronymic in
Asturian or Galician-Asturian.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to promote, by appropriate measures, mutual understanding
between all the linguistic groups of the country and in particular the inclusion of
respect, understanding and tolerance in relation to regional or minority languages
among the objectives of education and training provided within their countries and
encouragement of the mass media to pursue the same objective."
231. The authorities have not directly responded to the Committee of Experts’
recommendation in their third periodical report. The Committee of Experts
has been made aware of some specific campaigns and initiatives at local or
regional level, as well as specific measures at state level from which regional
or minority languages can benefit.
The Government of the Principality of Asturias carries out action directed at the promotion and
use of Asturian and Galician-Asturian in educational establishments. This involves the design
and development of activities for these establishments, which must be teaching one of these
languages to take part.
With the dual aim of supporting the work of teachers and bringing cultural creation in the
Asturian and Galician-Asturian language closer to young people, the School Educational
Agenda (Axenda Didáctica Escolar) is held each year. This offers a wide programme of
cultural activities to educational centres (monologues, meetings with authors, concerts, storytelling sessions etc.). In the 2010/2011 school year, €110,000 was spent on 156 performances
in which 201 schools participated, while in the 2011/2012 school year, €100,000 was devoted
to 102 performances in which 122 schools participated.
Every year, educational materials comprising reading books, dictionaries, reference books,
complete works and monographs of different authors etc. are sent to schools where Asturian
Language is being taught for the first time or those where their number of pupils has grown.
Moreover, as part of the annual events of Asturian Arts Week, the Regional Ministry of
Education, Culture and Sport designs and runs educational activities aimed at disseminating
Asturian literature at school. These are intended for all pupils who take Asturian Language at
Primary and Secondary Schools (annual literary drawing contest, dispatch of teaching
material, institutional events at schools etc.).
To publicise and encourage enrolment for Asturian Language, in both Primary and Secondary
education, a variety of actions have been performed, mostly through the Regional Ministry of
Education website, Educastur.
During the 2010-2012 period, and in accordance with the provisions of various organic
Decrees (Decree 123/2008, of 27 November; Decree 74/2012, of 14 June; and Decree
169/2011, of 19 August) the Autonomous Administration was assisted by the Directorate
General for Linguistic Policy, The latter was responsible for “the planning, implementation,
coordination with other administrations, monitoring and assessment of the programmes
required to develop a linguistic policy that ensures and normalises the use of Bable/Asturian
socially, together with its protection, promotion and dissemination”. The Linguistic Policy
Service is attached to the Directorate General for Linguistic Policy.
As regards Local Administration, various local authorities or Associations of Municipalities
have been making use in recent years of Linguistic Normalisation Services or Offices (SNL).
By the end of 2012, the work of these Services covered 34 Asturian municipalities. In total, the
Services distributed over the entire Asturian territory attend to 659,270 people, considerably
more than half the Asturian population.

167

For over twenty years, the Adolfo Posada Asturian Public Administration Institute has provided
a full programme for Asturian Language for the officials of the Administration of the Principality
of Asturias. From 2010 to 2012, courses in Asturian were held in the areas of teletraining and
self-training through a platform to which the public employees of the Principality of Asturias
have access.
Together with the general courses for which enrolment is permanently open, the Directorate
General for Linguistic Policy organised training activities each year from 2010 to 2012 in which
technical staff from the Principality and various local authorities and Associations of
Municipalities took part. These were the «Recovery of traditional place-names» course in
2010, the Working Group on Administrative Language in 2011, and the «Nomenclature of
official Asturian place-names: the characteristics and procedure for entering data» course in
2012.
In addition, the Administration of the Principality of Asturias gives preference to a command of
the Asturian language when employing staff. In the case of specific positions, this is a
requisite (e.g. philologists of the Directorate General for Linguistic Policy, teachers).
Moreover, grants to local corporations for the social normalisation of Asturian, and in its area,
Galician-Asturian, regularly enable Asturian Language courses to be provided for local
authority employees as well as for the public.
The staff in charge of Linguistic Normalisation Services or Offices in various local authorities
and Associations of Municipalities must demonstrate they have a formal command of the
Asturian Language.
In the Principality of Asturias, the Linguistic Policy Service of the Directorate General for
Linguistic Policy performs the functions of an official translation body, provided for in Act
1/1998, of 23 March, on the use and promotion of Bable/Asturian. It also carries out duties
relating to the translation, interpretation or terminology of Galician-Asturian. At present, it
translates an average of 300 pages a month into Asturian or Galician-Asturian.
Following two years of joint work by the University of Oviedo and the Government of the
Principality of Asturias, “Eslema”, the automatic translator of texts into Asturian from Castilian
and vice versa, was placed at the disposal of the public in 2010.
233. On the other hand, there is still a lack of tolerance from some regional and local
authorities and society at large with regard to the regional or minority languages that
are not co-official or are spoken in fringe or remote areas. This lack of recognition
harms the protection of these languages. The Committee of Experts stresses the
necessity, within some Autonomous Communities, to promote tolerance regarding the
linguistic minorities and regarding the multilingual basis of these communities,
especially by the respective regional authorities.
236. The Committee of Experts shares the concerns of the speakers and urges the
authorities to ensure a continued support for the promotion and use of regional or
minority languages in accordance with the word and spirit of the Charter.
The following are among the numerous examples of the work of the Administration of the
Principality of Asturias in favour of a policy that supports and encourages the Asturian
language and/or Galician-Asturian:


Grants to local authorities for the implementation and operation of Linguistic Normalisation
Services at municipal level. In 2010, grants for normalisation services were €261,000; in
2011, they were €234,900 and in 2012, €216,900. These were distributed among 10 local
authorities, 3 Associations of Municipalities and the Navia Historic Park Foundation.

168



Support for the use of the Asturian language or Galician-Asturian by the public bodies of
autonomous and local institutions at public occasions or events of special importance.



Use of the Asturian language and Galician-Asturian in signage, programmes of activities
and radio spots to publicise Asturias Day (8 September).



Assistance for citizens to submit documents in Asturian or Galician-Asturian through their
possible translation by the Linguistic Policy Service, created in 2011.



Official translation of relevant regulatory Asturian texts: Statute of Autonomy, Act 1/1998
on the use and promotion of Bable or Asturian, Decrees on place-names, etc.



Broadcasting of institutional advertising in Asturian or Galician-Asturian in the print or
digital media, radio or other formats. The sums devoted to this were almost €150,000 in
2010, over €123,000 in 2011, and over €65,000 in 2012.



Promotion of the use of the Asturian language for specific programmes of Radiotelevision
of the Principality of Asturias (programme production, broadcast of outside works in
Asturian, programme transmissions, etc.).



Awarding of grants to the media for the social normalisation of Asturian: to news, radio,
television or internet companies etc. 2010, 2011 and 2012 saw €415,000, €373,499 and
€127,759 distributed among 54, 50 and 36 Asturian language projects respectively, as well
as 4 Galician-Asturian projects in each of these years.



Funding and subsidising of radio programming in Asturian: 48 examples, including cultural,
musical, informative programmes and sporting broadcasts as well as those for young people
or children.



Financial assistance and grants for television programmes in Asturian or Galician-Asturian:
12 examples in the three reference years (informative, cultural, documentary etc.).



Annual grants for press articles in the Asturian language or Galician-Asturian: 84 examples
over the period.





Training of journalists: “Falar y más Falar” (Talk and more talk) course in 2010, etc.
Annual grants for the promotion of Asturian and Galician-Asturian books. In 2010, €190.000
was devoted to 70 works in Asturian and 3 in Galician-Asturian; in 2011, €171,000 for 61
works in Asturian and 3 in Galician-Asturian; and in 2012, €84,800 for 33 works in Asturian
and 3 in Galician-Asturian.



Promotion of the use of the Asturian language in specific programmes of Radiotelevision
of the Principality of Asturias (programme production, broadcast of outside works in
Asturian, programme broadcasts, etc.).



Grants for the normalisation of the social use of the Asturian language and GalicianAsturian, provided by local authorities (Municipalities) and Associations of Municipalities.
In 2010, the sum for grants was €185,000 for 158 projects in the Asturian language and 20 in
Galician-Asturian; in 2011, it was €166,500 for 141 works in Asturian and 24 in GalicianAsturian, and in 2012, €76,700 for 78 works in Asturian and 13 in Galician-Asturian.



Annual grants to associations and non-profit bodies for the promotion of Asturian and
Galician-Asturian.



Grants for studies undertaken in Asturian or Asturian-Galician.



Financial assistance to private companies for the promotion of Asturian and GalicianAsturian music.

169



Grants for filmmaking and video activities in Asturias or Galician-Asturian.



Grants for news, radio and internet companies to cover expenditure incurred in the
production of programmes in Asturian or Galician-Asturian. In 2010, 54 projects in Asturian
and 4 in Galician-Asturian received a total sum of €415,000; in 2011, 50 projects in
Asturian and 4 in Galician-Asturian received a total of €373,499; and in 2012, 36 projects
in Asturian and 4 in Galician received a total of €127,759.



Annual announcement of literary and research prizes that aim to lend prestige to the
Asturian language or for literary works in Asturian.



Co-publishing with publishing companies of Asturian-language books.



Grants for the acquisition by libraries of books published in Asturian or Galician-Asturian.



Promotion of the presence of book, record and film production in Asturian at fairs held
annually in Asturias.



Annual holding of Asturian Arts Week (Selmana de les Lletres Asturianes): institutional
public reading of texts in Asturian or Galician-Asturian (politicians, scholars, Asturian
personalities, etc.); publication of educational books and material; talks, celebratory
tributes; theatrical performances; poetry recitals, etc.



Holding of Asturian Book Day (Día del Libru Asturianu) in collaboration with bookshops,
record shops etc.



Holding in 2010 of the third edition of the Asturian Science Day (Día de les Ciencies
Asturianes). This coincides with 10 November when World Science Day for Peace and
Development, established by UNESCO, is celebrated internationally.



Annual open-call for proposals for the Prize for the Best Song in Asturian or GalicianAsturian.



Publication in 2011 of “Álbum de canciones” (Song Album), a vocal composition in the
Asturian language.



Tribute concert in June 2011 in the Principe Felipe Auditorium in Oviedo in celebration of
the Seliquin/Xentiquina children’s choir, with the participation of 12 Asturian musical
groups, with songs interpreted in Asturian.



Holding in the 2010-2012 period of the School Educational Agenda, with the aim of
bringing Asturian literature, theatre and music closer to a younger audience through
present-day Asturian writers, actors and musicians (in educational establishments). This
saw grants of around €20,000 awarded over these years.



Translation of 11 works (anthologies, novels, poems etc.) in the 2010-2012 period.



Financial support for subtitling and simultaneous translation of Asturian language films
shown at the International Film Festival of Gijón/Xixón. A sum of €4,222 was devoted to
this in the 2010-2012 period.



Sponsoring and subsidising of activities and events organised by cultural bodies: Asturias
Day; Asturian Arts Week; Book Day; activities promoting El Camino de Santiago etc.



Undertaking of Asturian, Galician-Asturian, Castilian, or bilingual cultural activities at
community, Spanish or international level: a tour of professional theatre tour, amateur
theatre, exhibitions etc.

170

Paragraph 4
In determining their policy with regard to regional or minority languages, the Parties
shall take into consideration the needs and wishes expressed by the groups which use
such languages. They are encouraged to establish bodies, if necessary, for the
purpose of advising the authorities on all matters pertaining to regional or minority
languages.
247. As for all other Part II languages, the Committee of Experts has not been made
aware of any particular body or bodies representing the interests of the speakers and
advising the authorities in language matters.
The Asturian Language Academy is an institution pertaining to the Principality of Asturias
that was created in 1980 by Decree 33/1980, of 15 December, of the Regional Council of
Asturias. Among the aims provided for in its Statutes are the following: providing guidance and
rules for the written and formal cultivation of the Asturian language and its linguistic variations;
stimulating the use, teaching and dissemination of Asturian and its different modalities;
establishing the criterion of authority in matters regarding regulations, updating and correct
use of the Asturian language; safeguarding the linguistic rights of the Asturians; and
promoting and safeguarding the Galician-Asturian linguistic variant.
To fulfil these aims, the Asturian Language Academy has created a regulatory Dictionary,
Orthography and Grammar. It has also published a History of Asturian Literature as well as
carrying out editorial work resulting in over 500 titles.

LANGUAGES AND LINGUISTIC MODALITIES NATIVE TO ARAGON
1. INTRODUCTION
Legislative changes
The Third Report on Spain referred to the Statute of Autonomy of Aragon, which was
approved by Organic Act 5/2007, of 20 April. Article 7 of the Act contains the statutory legal
framework for the legal protection of the languages and linguistic modalities native to Aragon
and provides for an Act of the Aragonese Parliament to establish the areas that predominantly
use these languages and modalities. It should be noted that at no time does the new Statute
of Autonomy recognise Catalan as a language that is native to Aragon.
Aragon now has a legal framework to protect its native languages and linguistic modalities.
This is constituted by the Act of the Aragonese Parliament 3/2013, of 9 May, on the use,
protection and promotion of the languages and linguistic modalities native to Aragon. This Act
was adopted to implement Article 7 of the existing Statute of Autonomy of Aragon, which
forms part of the Spanish constitutional bloc.
The Aragonese Act 3/2013 recognises Aragon’s linguistic plurality and guarantees the use by
the Aragonese of Aragonese languages and their linguistic modalities as a historical, cultural
legacy to be conserved. This is stated in the preamble of the Act: “The languages and
linguistic modalities native to Aragon constitute one of the most outstanding expressions of
Aragonese cultural and historical heritage and a social value of respect, coexistence and
understanding”. This accords both with what is stated to this regard by the Statute of
Autonomy of Aragon itself and with the measures for the promotion of regional languages
recommended in the European Charter for Regional and Minority Languages (Articles 8-14).

171

This new regulatory Act on Aragon’s linguistic heritage states at its start (Article 2) that
“Together with Castilian, Aragon has native, original and historic Aragonese languages and
their linguistic modalities that are predominantly used in the northern and eastern areas of the
Autonomous Community”. It then goes on to underline the huge wealth and variety of linguistic
modality that must be preserved and dignified, taking into account the daily usage in the areas
where they are predominantly used. These areas of Aragon, as established in Article 5 of the
new Act, are as follows:
a) An area where there is predominant historical use of the Aragonese language and
which pertains to the Pyrenean and Pre-Pyrenean areas of the Autonomous
Community, together with its linguistic modalities.
b) An area where there is predominant historical use of the Aragonese language and
which pertains to the eastern area of the Autonomous Community, together with its
linguistic modalities.
After referring to the above regulatory linguistic regime in force in Aragon, it is important to
note here the desire of the Aragonese Government to honour, observe and safeguard
compliance with the Charter’s mandates and recommendations and as such comply with the
maintenance and development of Europe’s cultural traditions and wealth. All this is in strict
adherence to the provisions of the Statute of Autonomy and therefore with respect for the
Charter’s spirit and the rights of users of Aragonese languages and their linguistic modalities.

Data on the number of speakers
The Committee of Experts encourages the Spanish authorities to carry out
surveys in cooperation with the speakers of regional or minority languages in order to
have accurate updated data concerning the number of users of regional or minority
languages and their geographic distribution.
57.

The updating of the census on the speakers of regional or minority languages in Aragon and
their geographical distribution is a necessary task and one that is particularly sensitive for the
Aragonese Government.

2. APPLICATION OF THE CHARTER
Article 7 – Objectives and principles
Paragraph 1
In respect of regional or minority languages, within the territories in which such
languages are used and according to the situation of each language, the Parties shall
base their policies, legislation and practice on the following objectives and principles:
a) the recognition of the regional or minority languages as an expression of
cultural wealth.
In view of the information received about projects to modify the Law on
Languages in Aragon, the Committee of Experts urges the authorities to maintain at
least the level of protection currently planned for Aragonese and Catalan.
118.

As stated above, the existing Statute of Autonomy of Aragon of 2007 does not recognise
Catalan as a native language of Aragón at any time.

172

In accordance with this Statute, which forms part of the Spanish constitutional bloc, the above
Act 3/2013, of 9 May, on the use, protection and promotion of the languages and linguistic
modalities native to Aragon, approved by the Aragonese Parliament, establishes in Article 2,
as noted above, that: “Together with Castilian, Aragon has native, original and historic
Aragonese languages and their linguistic modalities that are predominantly used in the
northern and eastern areas of the Autonomous Community”.
The Aragonese Government, as required in Chapter 1 of this new Act 3/2013, guarantees a
level of protection of the Aragonese languages with their linguistic modalities as a historical
cultural legacy to be conserved; all this in accordance with the preamble of the Act. Protection
is aimed particularly at maintaining native linguistic modalities that historically have lived on in
their areas of usage.
c) the need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in
order to safeguard them;
135. … The Committee of Experts asks the authorities to provide information on the
development of the language policy with regard to Aragonese and Catalan in Aragon in
the next periodical report.
The Aragonese Government adopts protective measures for Aragonese languages and their
linguistic modalities in the same sectors as previously and to which reference was made in
Part III of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. These sectors are
education, justice, administrative authorities and public services, the media, cultural activities
and services, economic and social life and trans-frontier business. The measures include:
- The facilitating of voluntary learning of Aragonese languages and their modalities native to
the eastern area and in the Pyrenean and Pre-Pyrenean area in the localities that request it.
The Aragonese Act 3/2013 (Article 12) recognises the right to receive the teaching of the
languages and linguistic modalities native in the areas of predominant historical use, through
appropriate provision in educational establishments.
- The awarding of literary prizes aimed at stimulating creation in the languages native to
Aragon. These have been merged into a single competition with the name of Arnal CaveroGuillem Nicolau, according to Decree 221/2013, of 19 February, of the Aragonese
Government, which regulates prizes for literary creation and the Aragonese publishing sector.
- The issuing of publications in the same collection, Literaturas de Aragón (Literature from
Aragon), to provide Aragonese languages with an active presence.
- The ensuring of the conservation of the assets of Aragonese linguistic heritage and the
dissemination of Aragonese languages and its modalities in accordance with Articles 9-11 of
Act 3/2013.
- Compliance with Chapter VI of Act 3/2013, on the use of these languages and modalities in
Aragonese institutions and administrations (the Aragonese Parliament, Aragonese justice
system, local entities, place-names etc.).

d) the facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of regional or minority
languages, in speech and writing, in public and private life;
154. …The Committee of Experts asks the authorities to take efforts to find a
consensus on orthography and on the development of Aragonese in public life,
especially in the field of education. It asks them to report on developments in this
respect in the next periodical report.

173

The Aragonese Language Academy, created by Act 3/2013 (Article 7), is tasked with the
imminent establishing of the orthographic rules for the correct use of languages and linguistic
modalities native to Aragon (Article 7.2 a).

f) the provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of
regional or minority languages at all appropriate stages;"
190. As regards Catalan, the Committee of Experts welcomed the measures taken by
the authorities to develop bilingual education in Catalan-speaking areas in Aragon. It
expressed the hope that such education would also be developed at secondary level
and looked forward to receiving complementary information in the next periodical
report on the outcomes of a pilot project and on the implementation of the Agreement
with the Autonomous Community of Catalonia.
h)
the promotion of study and research on regional or minority languages at
universities or equivalent institutions;
217. Article 15 of the Law on Languages in Aragon provides for the establishment of
Aragonese language academies. It creates the Aragonese Language Academy and
the Catalan Language Academy as official institutions that constitute the linguistic
authority over Aragonese and Catalan in Aragon respectively. During the on-thespot visit, the Committee of Experts was informed that these bodies have not yet
been developed.
In line with the provisions of the Statute of Autonomy of Aragon, the Aragonese Government,
wishes to state and reiterate that this Statute, adopted by the Spanish Parliament by means of
the Organic Act on the Statute of Autonomy of Aragon, and modified by Organic Act 5/2007,
of 20 April, does not at any time recognise Catalan as a language native to Aragon.
In accordance with the above Statute of Autonomy, which forms part of the Spanish
constitutional bloc, the Act of the Aragonese Parliament 3/2013, of 9 May, on the use,
protection and promotion of the languages and modalities of Aragon, therefore establishes in
Article 2 the following:
“Together with Castilian, Aragón has native, original and historic Aragonese languages and
their linguistic modalities that are predominantly used in the northern and eastern areas of the
Autonomous Community.”
Moreover, Act 3/2013 creates in Article 7 the Aragonese Language Academy as the official
scientific institution in the field of the languages and linguistic modalities native to Aragon. The
Academy is expected to be constituted soon.
Below is a verbatim transcription of Chapter III of Act 3/2013, as regards the Aragonese
Language Academy:
“Article 7. The Aragonese Language Academy.
1. The Aragonese Language Academy is created as the official scientific institution in the field
of native languages and linguistic modalities.
2. The Aragonese Language Academy has the task of:
a) Establishing the rules on the correct use of the languages and linguistic modalities native to
Aragon.

174

b) Advising the public authorities and institutions on matters relating to the proper use of
native languages and linguistic modalities and how to advance them in society.

3. The Aragonese Language Academy will be composed of people of recognised prestige in
the field of philology, literature and linguistics, preferably doctors. Preference will be given to
native speakers with extensive experience in the practice and promotion of the linguistic and
literary values of the Aragonese community, and in which the languages and linguistic
modalities native to Aragon are represented.
4. The Aragonese Government will approve the statutes of the Aragonese Language
Academy by which its composition, organisation and operation will be established”.
“Article 8. Linguistic rules of the languages and linguistic modalities native to Aragon.
When public bodies use the languages and linguistic modalities native to Aragon, in
accordance with the provisions of this Act, they must obey the linguistic rules established by
the Aragonese Language Academy.”

Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to promote, by appropriate measures, mutual understanding
between all the linguistic groups of the country and in particular the inclusion of
respect, understanding and tolerance in relation to regional or minority languages
among the objectives of education and training provided within their countries and
encouragement of the mass media to pursue the same objective.
231. The authorities have not directly responded to the Committee of Experts’
recommendation in their third periodical report. The Committee of Experts has been
made aware of some specific campaigns and initiatives at local or regional level, as
well as specific measures at state level from which regional or minority languages can
benefit.

233. On the other hand, there is still a lack of tolerance from some regional and local
authorities and society at large with regard to the regional or minority languages that
are not co-official or are spoken in fringe or remote areas. This lack of recognition
harms the protection of these languages. The Committee of Experts stresses the
necessity, within some Autonomous Communities, to promote tolerance regarding the
linguistic minorities and regarding the multilingual basis of these communities,
especially by the respective regional authorities.

236. The Committee of Experts shares the concerns of the speakers and urges the
authorities to ensure a continued support for the promotion and use of regional or
minority languages in accordance with the word and spirit of the Charter.
With regard to the above, it should be underlined that Article 16 of the above Aragonese Act
3/2013, which concerns citizen relations with the Public Administration, provides for and
guarantees the public use of native languages and their modalities by stating:
“The right is recognised of all citizens to express themselves orally and in writing, in addition
to Castilian, in the languages and linguistic modalities native to Aragon in the respective areas
where they are predominantly used, in accordance with the provisions of this law”.
Paragraph 4

175

In determining their policy with regard to regional or minority languages, the Parties
shall take into consideration the needs and wishes expressed by the groups which use
such languages. They are encouraged to establish bodies, if necessary, for the
purpose of advising the authorities on all matters pertaining to regional or minority
languages.
247. As for all other Part II languages, the Committee of Experts has not been made
aware of any particular body or bodies representing the interests of the speakers
and advising the authorities in language matters.
Although there is no provision for the creation of any specific body of this type, this will be
assessed when budgetary availability permits.

TAMAZIGHT IN MELILLA
1.

INTRODUCTION

22. With respect to the presence of Tamazight in Melilla, the Committee of Experts …
encourages the authorities to acknowledge its presence as a regional or minority
language and continue its support, in cooperation with the speakers.
In 2013, the Government of the Autonomous City of Melilla promoted a Social Pact for
Interculturality. Point 14 of the operative provisions of this PSI states that: “Accepting the
repeated observations and recommendations of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of
Europe, with regard to the application in Melilla of the European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages, the Assembly recognises Tamazight as a traditional language that forms
part of the common immaterial cultural heritage of all the people of Melilla. The obligatory
protection and safeguarding of Tamazight must not be in detriment to the official Castilian
language nor to the need and obligation to learn it”.
56. … The Committee of Experts encourages the Spanish authorities to carry out
research in cooperation with the speakers of regional or minority languages in order to
have accurate updated data about the number of users of regional or minority
languages and their geographic distribution.
Nowadays, only partial data is available on the number and distribution of Imazighen
speakers. The Institute of Cultures, which is attached to the Ministry of the Presidency and
City Security, has subsidised 11 research projects that must be completed by December
2014. Their conclusions will provide accurate information that brings us closer to a reliable
map of speakers of the Tamazight language. While it would be ideal to create a census of
speakers, this task requires material and human resources that the City’s own resources
could not allow to be taken on alone.

2. APPLICATION OF THE CHARTER
Article 7 – Objectives and principles
Paragraph 1
In respect of regional or minority languages, within the territories in which such
languages are used and according to the situation of each language, the Parties shall
base their policies, legislation and practice on the following objectives and principles:

176

a) the recognition of the regional or minority languages as an expression of
cultural wealth.
The two most widely-spoken languages in Melilla are Castilian and Tamazight. The former is
the sole official language recognised by Organic Act 2/1995, of 13 March, on the Statute of
Autonomy for Melilla. While not expressly mentioning Tamazight, this text protects its use and
conservation of the language as inferred from section h) of Article 5.2, that establishes as “a
basic aim” of the City’s institutions “the promotion and stimulation of the values of
understanding, respect and appreciation of the cultural y linguistic plurality of Melilla’s
population”.
The above Social Pact for Interculturality, as well as seeking the practical application of the
Charter’s principles and objectives with regard to Tamazight, also refers to Haketia.
Undertaking No. 16 of this Pact declares: “the City will promote the study, research and
conservation of the Haketia language, a linguistic modality closely linked to the cultural wealth
of Melilla’s Jewish community”.
The Explanatory Memorandum of the Social Pact for Interculturality justifies the study and
preservation of Haketia in the following terms:
“Haketia is a cultural treasure because of the history that accompanies it and its linguistic
singularity. Closely linked to the cultural wealth of Melilla’s Jewish community, it is a singular
example of how fruitful the mixture and interrelation of cultures may be in generating new
expressions with a personality of their own from the flows and influences of disparate sources.
A linguistic modality (or dialect) derived from Judeo-Castilian, or Ladino, the language of
Sephardic Jews expelled from the Iberian Peninsula in 1492, Haketia was underpinned by the
Castilian of the 15th century (Castizo), but seasoned with numerous Hebraisms and Arabisms.
Following the decree to expel them, the Sephardim who settled in the north-west of Africa
started to add new Arabisms and Berber expressions and phrases to Ladino. This process
was not removed from the fact that those Jews who had already been established in the
Maghreb since the 2nd century habitually spoke, according to their location, Arabic or
Tamazight and reserved Hebrew for religious ceremonies. The hybridation of all these
idiomatic flows gave rise to Haketia, a language that in essence is transmitted orally and one
which refuses to disappear”.
g) the provision of facilities enabling non-speakers of a regional or minority language living
in the area where it is used to learn it if they so desire;
In line with the requirements of Article 7.1.g) of the Charter, The Social Pact for InterCulturality expressly states that “the City will take the necessary measures to ensure that any
Melilla citizen who so wishes may learn the Tamazight language”. The City, through the
Institute of Cultures, has for the past decade held a Permanent Seminar on Tamazight
Language and Culture. Courses (elementary and upper intermediate) are open to any citizen
who wishes to enrol. Similarly, the Institute of Cultures facilitates the teaching and learning of
Tamazight through internet courses (www.melillatamazight.es). This option will be reinforced
from 2014 by employing teachers who will take charge of course tuition. Moreover, the
Institute of Cultures is attempting to reach agreements with universities with a view to
providing the teaching and educational benefit of Tamazight with an official and regulated
nature.
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to promote, by appropriate measures, mutual understanding
between all the linguistic groups of the country and in particular the inclusion of
respect, understanding and tolerance in relation to regional or minority languages
among the objectives of education and training provided within their countries and
encouragement of the mass media to pursue the same objective.

177

231. The authorities have not directly responded to the Committee of Experts’
recommendation in their third periodical report. The Committee of Experts has been
made aware of some positive campaigns and initiatives at local or regional level, as
well as specific measures at state level from which regional or minority languages can
benefit.
233. On the other hand, there is still a lack of tolerance from some regional and local
authorities and society at large with regard to the regional or minority languages that
are not co-official or are spoken in fringe or remote areas. This lack of recognition
harms the protection of these languages. The Committee of Experts stresses the
necessity, within some Autonomous Communities, to promote tolerance regarding the
linguistic minorities and regarding the multilingual basis of these communities,
especially by the respective regional authorities.
All the political parties represented in the Assembly and some thirty trades union, social and
cultural organisations have been involved in the creation of the Social Pact for Inter-Culturality
(PSI), which was promoted by the Government of the City of Melilla in 2013. As a result of this
initiative, the Commission of the Presidency and Citizen Security adopted a document for
ratification by the Assembly in solemn declaration. This document, entitled the Declaration
Proposal of the Assembly of the City of Melilla for a Social Pact for Interculturality, states in its
operating provisions: “The City undertakes to develop Article 5.2. h) of its Statute of Autonomy
(mentioned above) with a view to implementing the principles and objectives of the European
Charter for Regional and Minority Languages”. This expressly states the City Government’s
desire for the aims and principles contained in Article 7 of the Charter to be adopted, as its
own, by the whole Assembly of the Autonomous City and therefore to represent the standard
for public policies on the defence and preservation of Tamazight as a regional or minority
language.
The commitments of the PSI as regards the Administration’s workings include implementation
of training programmes for awareness and intercultural competence “aimed at managers and
public employees and those involved in the design and application of local public policies”.
The PSI framework document states: “The learning and teaching of intercultural competence
is essential to democratic culture and social cohesion”. As regards intercultural competence in
the linguistic area, in 2014 the Institute of Cultures will promote Tamazight courses aimed at
groups of those local public employees with a more direct and efficient relationship with those
citizens who speak the language. Initially, the courses have been proposed to the Local Police
and (although they depend on the State Administration) to health workers (doctors, nurses,
auxiliaries etc.) employed in the District Hospital and in health centres in the City.
It should be underlined here that the use of written documents in Tamazight in administrative
procedures and formalities is not feasible at present. Firstly, because Tamazight still lacks a
standardised written form that is universally accepted (at least of the language used in the
linguistic region that includes Melilla), it is used and transmitted orally in the main; secondly,
because the vast majority of speakers do not usually write in their mother tongue.
With regard to the media, the regional state broadcaster, Televisión Melilla, promotes and
facilitates the broadcast of Tamazight-language programmes. A weekly news programme is
broadcast exclusively in the language.
Moreover, the City also encourages the production and dissemination of audiovisual works in
Tamazight. In 2013, the Institute of Cultures produced and released a documentary (Ziara) on
maraboutism and popular religiousity in Melilla and adjoining areas of Morocco, whose
protagonists mainly speak Tamazight. These parts of the documentary were subtitled (not
dubbed) in Castilian.
The Institute of Cultures also produced and released a feature-length fiction film (Solteros) in
which its characters of Amazigh origin sometimes express themselves in their mother tongue.
As in the previous case, the parts in Tamazight are subtitled (not dubbed) in Castilian.
It should also be underlined that in 2014 the Institute of Cultures will propose to the Melilla
Press Association an agreement by which local journalists receive information about

178

Tamazight and are helped to learn the language. It is notable that practically all the local
media (three television stations, four radio stations and three newspapers) employ journalists
whose mother tongue is Tamazight.
Paragraph 4
In determining their policy with regard to regional or minority languages, the Parties
shall take into consideration the needs and wishes expressed by the groups which use
such languages. They are encouraged to establish bodies, if necessary, for the
purpose of advising the authorities on all matters pertaining to regional or minority
languages.
247. As for all other Part II languages, the Committee of Experts has not been made
aware of any particular body or bodies representing the interests of the speakers
and advising the authorities in language matters.
.
The Institute of Cultures was created for purposes including the organising and supporting of
cultural activities that properly integrate the knowledge and practice of Tamazight. This led in
2013 to the promotion and subsidising of a theatrical work “Ahora sí”. This was created,
scripted and performed by Imazighen (the plural of Amazigh) women who used both the
Castilian and Tamazight languages on stage. The work was performed in the events hall of
the National Distance University (UNED) and at Melilla’s most important theatre, the Kursaal,
and was attended and supported by the principal local authorities.
For the Amazight New Year in the second fortnight in January, the Institute of Cultures
schedules a series of public events in which Tamazight is the working language. There are
musical performances, story-telling, song recitals and traditional ballads by groups and
individuals who address the public in Tamazight. To help non-Tamazight speakers to
understand these artistic displays, leaflets with the Castilian translations and their original
phonetic transcriptions (in Latin script) are published and handed out.

DARIJA IN CEUTA
1. INTRODUCTION
19 and 56. Clarify the status of Arabic Darija in cooperation with the speakers and if
necessary with the aid of a scientific study to determine whether the language has an
ongoing presence in Ceuta.
The Institute of Ceutan Studies is conducting an in-depth study on this matter. To date, its
conclusions are well advanced and its completion is expected soon. The study findings will be
transferred as appropriate to the Directorate General for Coordination of Competences with
Autonomous Communities and Local Entities, of the Ministry for Finances and Public
Administrations.
This study attempts to assess various aspects of Ceuta’s highly diverse and complex linguistic
situation. It places special emphasis on Castilian and Ceutan Arabic (Darija) as their speakers
are in the majority and have special characteristics with regard to bilinguism. Other
measurement parameters used will provide information on the important sociolinguistic
characteristics that have a bearing on this detailed, accurate study.

179

Other languages used in Ceuta have not been ignored in this study. These include Berber or
Tamazight together with Hebrew and Hindi, which are in a clear minority, and in whose
communities the relevant data has been gathered for the final report.
The study is coordinated by qualified professors from the Area of Arabic and Islamic Studies
of the Department of Semitic Studies of the University of Granada.

2. APPLICATION OF THE CHARTER
Article 7 – Objectives and principles
Paragraph 3
The Parties undertake to promote, by appropriate measures, mutual understanding
between all the linguistic groups of the country and in particular the inclusion of
respect, understanding and tolerance in relation to regional or minority languages
among the objectives of education and training provided within their countries and
encouragement of the mass media to pursue the same objective."
233. There is still a lack of tolerance from some regional and local authorities and
society at large with regard to the regional or minority languages that are not co-official
or are spoken in fringe or remote areas. This lack of recognition harms the protection
of these languages. The Committee of Experts stresses the necessity, within some
Autonomous Communities, to promote tolerance regarding the linguistic minorities and
regarding the multilingual basis of these communities, especially by the respective
regional authorities.
Nowadays, there is a lack of data to attribute a lack of tolerance towards Ceutan Arabic
(Darija) in Ceuta. It is clear and evident that the different languages are used in complete
freedom.
Partial studies have been conducted on tolerance and respect for minorities in a
comprehensive manner, not only concerning the difference in mother tongue of the various
communities but also extending this to all cultural aspects.
Paragraph 4
In determining their policy with regard to regional or minority languages, the Parties
shall take into consideration the needs and wishes expressed by the groups which use
such languages. They are encouraged to establish bodies, if necessary, for the
purpose of advising the authorities on all matters pertaining to regional or minority
languages
247. Take into account the needs and wishes expressed by the groups who speak
these languages. You are encouraged to create for them, when necessary, bodies
responsible for advising the authorities on the issues involving regional or minority
languages.
The Autonomous City of Ceuta has the Institute of Ceuta Studies, a local autonomous body,
to advise it on a variety of fields and subjects relating to Ceuta, as well as issues regarding
regional or minority languages. The Foundation Award for Coexistence is also worthy of
mention. One of its aims is its participation and collaboration with institutions in the design and
development of programmes and action that promotes, safeguards and galvanises culture and
cultural heritage, especially with regard to cultural diversity.

180

181

