Humanitarian and medical mission

Co-operation Group to Combat Drug Abuse and Illicit trafficking in Drugs

P-PG (2014) Misc 1rev

Substitution
maintenance
treatment in
Ukraine

Substitution maintenance treatment in Ukraine:
Humanitarian and medical mission

Report prepared by Catherine Ritter and endorsed by the medical experts participating
in the mission: Gabrielle Welle-Strand (Norway), Bogusław Habrat (Poland),
Miran Pustoslemšek (Slovenia).

Co-operation Group to Combat Drug Abuse and Illicit trafficking in Drugs

Content, Abbreviations
Summary

5

1 Background, scope and purpose

7

2 The Mission

11

2.1 Team
2.2 Aims
2.3 Actions undertaken during the mission

11
11
12

3 Methodology

13

4 Substitution maintenance therapy (SMT) in Ukraine

14

4.1 Number of people with SMT
4.2 Supply of SMT medication

14
16

5 Consequences of the political crisis in Ukraine
5.1 Consequences for the people using drugs / with SMT
5.1.1 Direct testimonies in Dnepropetrovsk
5.1.2 Situation of people in SMT from Eastern Ukraine
5.2 Consequences for health staff
5.2.1 Crimea
5.2.2 Mainland Ukraine
5.3 Responses developed so far

6 Recommendations

AIDS
ART
BPN
GFATM
HIV
IDP
MOH
MTD

Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
Antiretroviral therapy
Buprenorphine
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis
and Malaria
Human Immunodeficiency Virus
Internally displaced people
Ministry of Health
Methadone

19
19
22
22
22
22
22

24

6.1 Scenario 1: Current situation
6.2 Scenario 2: Full interruption of supply also in other regions of Ukraine
6.3 Scenario 3: After the crisis – stabilisation of the situation
6.3.1 People with SMT
6.3.2 Health professionals
6.3.3 Central level

7 Conclusions
Appendix 1: References

18

24
25
25
26
26
27

28
30

NGO
Non-governmental organisation
PG
Pompidou Group
SMT
Substitution Maintenance Therapy
SSDC
State Service of Ukraine on Drugs Control
UNAIDS Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
UNODC United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
WHO
World Health Organization
UCDC
Ukrainian Centre for Disease Control
Alliance Ukraine
HIV/AIDS Alliance in Ukraine

5

Summary
Based on a request by the State Service of Ukraine on Drugs Control to support
Ukraine with regards to the emergency situation of people undergoing substitution
maintenance therapy (SMT) in Ukraine, the Pompidou Group put together a team
consisting of medical experts from Norway, Poland, Switzerland, and Slovenia. The
mission was organised by the Pompidou Group, together with the Ukrainian Drug
Control Service (State Service of Ukraine on Drugs Control or SSDC) and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC).
On 16-21 May 2014 the expert team travelled to Ukraine in order to assess the
situation concerning opioid substitution treatment, and to provide assistance in
developing an emergency plan aimed at supporting the continuation of SMT in times
of crisis. The experts visited two cities, Kiev and the Dnepropetrovsk, close to the
conflict zone in the east of Ukraine.
The experts met people who left their hometowns in Crimea due to the interruption of
SMT on the peninsula. They also met people from Eastern Ukraine who left this
conflict-striven region in order to continue their treatment in safer regions of Ukraine
where SMT is currently not at risk of being interrupted. Meetings also took place with
health professionals, NGOs such as International HIV/AIDS Alliance in Ukraine
(Alliance Ukraine), international organisations (UNODC, WHO, UNAIDS) and SSDC.
According to persons enrolled in SMT, in Crimea the majority of the more than 800
people in SMT had to stop their treatment abruptly due to the interruption of its provision
on the peninsula on 25 May 2014. A minority only had access to proper detoxification
schemes (approximately 20 people) in Crimea or to rehabilitation or specialised
treatment in the Russian Federation. About 50 people in SMT moved to the mainland
in order to continue SMT there.
SMT started in Ukraine in 2005 and is available to a minority of opioid users (9000 in
the whole country out of 310,000 people using drugs, 80% injecting opioids).
Nevertheless, this treatment has been seen as effective in reducing the negative
consequences of drug use, both at an individual level (clinical stabilisation, decrease
of use of illicit opioid, reduction of overdoses, and prevention of blood-borne diseases)
and for the community at large (reduced criminality for example) (WHO, UNODC et
al. 2004).
The discontinuation of SMT in Crimea and lack of medical supply of methadone and
buprenorphine in Eastern Ukraine poses a great challenge to the progress recently
observed in the field of HIV prevention and drug treatment in the country.

P-PG (2014) Misc 1rev

1

Background, scope
and purpose

On 28 March 2014, the Head of the State Service of Ukraine on Drugs
Control alerted the Executive Secretary of the Pompidou Group of an
emerging humanitarian crisis concerning the situation of people receiving
substitution maintenance treatment (SMT) in Crimea, and requested support
in dealing with this situation. Following the unlawful annexation of Crimea by
Russia, the authorities in de facto control of the territory had announced that
SMT in Crimea would have to be interrupted.
This communication from the State Service of Ukraine on Drugs Control was
considered by the Bureau of the Permanent Correspondents of the
Pompidou Group as a matter of urgency during its meeting on 4 April 2014.
The Bureau underlined the Council of Europe Member States’ obligation to
provide adequate health care under Article 2 on the protection of life under
the European Convention on Human Rights and to follow the guiding
principles of the policy paper on preventing risks and reducing harm linked to
the use of psychoactive substances adopted by the Pompidou Group in 2013.
The Bureau considered it high priority that the de facto authorities continue
to provide substitution treatment with the medicines included under the WHO
List of Essential Medicines. Furthermore, the Permanent Correspondents
were requested to look into ways to assist the other Ukrainian regions in their
efforts to provide aid in this emerging medical and humanitarian crisis.
The Bureau further recalled that the Committee of Ministers of the Council of
Europe reiterated its solidarity with Ukraine and its people and underlined
that the current crisis in Ukraine must be resolved peacefully, based on the
territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, as well as in
strict adherence to international law.

7

8

In the light of all the above and the fact that the Bureau agreed to follow up the
matter at the 74th meeting of Permanent Correspondents on 2-3 June 2014 to
determine whether the situation has been rectified by the de facto authorities.
Since then the Secretariat had stayed in close and ongoing consultations
with all authorities involved.
The contacts in these consultations include Mr Volodymyr Tymoshenko
(Head of Drug Control Service of Ukraine – SSDC), Mr Oleksandr Kulikovsky
(Deputy to the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the Council of
Europe), Ms Evgenia Koshkina (Director of the National Research Centre on
Addiction of the Russian Federation, Permanent Correspondent of the
Russian Federation to the Pompidou Group), and Mr Vyacheslav Egorov
(Deputy Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the Council
of Europe).
As a concrete conclusion from these consultations the Bureau deemed it
necessary to send an expert group of specialised medical doctors to the
Crimea to assess the situation for the following reasons:
Firstly, during the Bureau meeting the attending PCs were informed that the
position of the Russian Federation is that at the moment Crimea is under
Russian jurisdiction and consequently Russian legislation applies. Any
medical treatment is therefore delivered according to Russian legislative
provisions. Under these provisions substitution treatment with methadone is
illegal as it is on the list of illicit substances in the Russian Federation.
According to the Russian authorities, a plan for treatment for opioiddependent people in Crimea is under preparation. The Russian authorities
stated that they are aware of the human rights of people using drugs. People
who were previously under substitution treatment in Crimea would be
provided with the legally available prolonged treatment available in the
Russian Federation. It was stated that such treatment could be provided in
Crimea or the Russian Federation; however it would require relocating people
in SMT to various hospitals in different parts of the Russian Federation.
Secondly, abrupt deprivation of methadone under opioid substitution
treatment results in serious pain and suffering caused by opioid withdrawal
and can lead to severe health consequences, including an increased risk of
death through overdosing as a result of relapse into illicit opioid use.
Consequently the current situation entails grave consequences and risks for
the people under substitution treatment in Crimea.

9

Thirdly, the Head of the State Service of Ukraine on Drugs Control suggested
establishing a medical expert group for a medical assessment of the situation
organised as a medical humanitarian mission.
In view of the above, the Secretary General of the Council of Europe granted
special permission to the Pompidou Group to organise such a humanitarian
medical expert mission to Crimea to in order to assess the medical follow-up
of people in SMT.
Since Crimea is under de facto control of the Russian authorities and
consequently any visit to the peninsular requires a Russian visa and support
from Russian authorities, a mission to Crimea would have had to be
conducted with approval from the Russian Federation. The Russian
Permanent Correspondent of the Pompidou Group informed the Secretariat
that she could only send us an official reply to the mission request upon
receipt of an approval by her authorities.
According to her, the Russian Federation is actively involved with the persons
enrolled in SMT in Crimea. The persons are received by well-trained doctors
and are in close contact with psychologists and social workers. Some of the
persons decided to stop the substitution treatment and accepted an offer to
be treated in well-established clinics (for example, ten people in SMT were
recently transferred to Saint Petersburg). Others continue their methadone
treatment. Several Russian experts from Moscow went to Sevastopol and
Simferopol in order to train local medical staff on a gradual detoxification of
methadone and buprenorphine. The Federal Drug Control Service of the
Russian Federation (FSKN) plays an active role as well in the Crimea. The
Russian Federation is aware of the situation and is doing as much as possible
for the people concerned in order to provide them with the necessary
treatment.
Without permission from the de facto authorities to access Crimea, it was
agreed with the Member States of the Pompidou Group and the SSDC to
organise the mission to other regions of Ukraine where people from Crimea
and Eastern Ukraine are currently seeking refuge and continuation of SMT.
The Secretariat has also been informed that since the unrest is spreading
quickly in Eastern Ukraine, SMT is also at risk of being disrupted in other
regions of Ukraine. In particular the regions of Donetsk and Luhansk are at
risk of being cut off from essential medical supplies, including methadone
and buprenorphine. In this context the Ukrainian Drug Control Service

10

requested the Pompidou Group send an international expert team to Kiev
and Dnepropetrovsk to assess the situation of persons in SMT and to develop
an emergency plan based on international standards.
In response to this request, the Pompidou Group sent medical experts from
Norway, Poland, Switzerland, and Slovenia to Ukraine from 16 to 21 May 2014.
The mission was organised by the Pompidou Group, in conjunction with the
Ukrainian Drug Control Service (SSDC) and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC).

2
The Mission
2.1 Team
The medical members of the team were:
Dr. Gabrielle Welle-Strand (Norway);
Dr. Bogusław Habrat (Poland);
Dr. Miran Pustoslemšek (Slovenia);
Dr. Catherine Ritter (Switzerland).
Thomas Kattau and Robert Teltzrow represented the Pompidou Group, and
Mirzahid Sultanov represented the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC).
Various representatives of the Ukrainian Drug Control Service (SSDC) in Kiev
and Dnepropetrovsk were present during different times of the mission.
English-, Russian- and Ukrainian-speaking interpreters completed the team.

2.2 Aims
The international expert team had the following aims:
n

Assess the current situation regarding opioid substitution treatment

n

Develop an emergency plan based on international standard
guidelines in order to:
n

Support the continuation of effective SMT in the current situation

n

Develop an emergency plan if SMT is interrupted in Eastern
and South-Eastern Ukraine

n

Make recommendations on how to strengthen SMT after the crisis

11

12

To fulfil those aims meetings with following people were organised:
People who are using drugs or people enrolled in SMT;
NGOs (HIV/AIDS Alliance) and patients’ associations;
Health professionals, in particular those providing drug treatment
services;
International organisations (UNAIDS, UNODC, WHO);
Policy makers (SSDC, UCDC)
n

n

n

n

n

2.3 Actions undertaken during the mission
The mission took place 16-21 May 2014. Contacts with a significant numbers
of testimonies were made possible.
Day
Friday
16 May
Saturday
17 May

Activities
n
n

n

n

Sunday
18 May
Monday
19 May

n
n

n
n
n

Tuesday
20 May

n

n

n

Wednesday
21 May

n
n

n

Arrival in Kiev
Preparation of mission
Workshop: Meeting with SMT coordinators from different regions of
Ukraine, including Eastern Ukraine, people enrolled in SMT,
International Organisations and NGOs, SSDC, UCDC, UNODC
Experience Exchange
Workshop continued
Development of recommendations
Arrival in Dnepropetrovsk
Meeting with the Head of the regional Health Department
Meeting at the main drug treatment centre with internally displaced
people using drugs or enrolled in SMT (approximately 20 from Crimea)
and health professionals
Meetings with representatives of international organisations (UNAIDS,
WHO, UNODC, UN Resident Coordinator Office)
Visit of an SMT site treating 300 people in Kiev (integrated care, Kiev
City Narcology Clinical Hospital ‘Sociotherapy’)
Meeting with HIV Alliance
Medical experts travelled back
Diplomatic meetings (Pompidou Group delegation continues meetings
with policy makers: Ministry of Health and Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Press conference: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zo2UC6XtLyE

3
Methodology
The medical team has based its report mainly on testimonies by people
in SMT, health professionals, the Ukrainian officials and representatives
of International Organisations and NGOs. Due to the situation in Ukraine
the experts were confronted with information that is subject to a degree
of interpretation. Hence, cautiousness in interpreting the findings of the
mission is necessary. The methodology aimed to increase the validity of
findings by interviewing different sources and persons (triangulation) who
were directly or indirectly affected by the crisis situation. This was the
only methodological tool available to the experts, in order to verify the
validity of the testimonies given to them.

13

14

Substitution
maintenance
therapy (SMT)
in Ukraine

4

Up to very recently, as stated in ‘The state programme to ensure HIV
prevention, treatment, care, and support to HIV-positive people and patients
with AIDS for years 2009-2013’ (Law of Ukraine 2009), injecting drug use
was ‘the main factor of HIV infection spread’. As a result of prevention activities
developed over the last years, the number of new HIV infections among people
who inject drugs decreased (WHO Regional office for Europe 2013).
Scaling up the access to SMT for people who use drugs is one of the
prevention activities of the programme. HIV infection is a criterion of priority
(along with tuberculosis and pregnancy) to start SMT. The aim of ensuring
SMT and rehabilitation for 20,000 people who inject drugs (Law of Ukraine
2009) was not achieved according to the evaluation of the national AIDS
programme conducted in 2012 (WHO Regional office for Europe 2013).

4.1 Number of people with SMT
Approximately 9000 people had access to SMT in Ukraine at the beginning
of March 2014, and 800 in Crimea, where SMT was started in 2006
(Kazatchkine 2014).
By 1 May 2014 there were 8175 people enrolled in SMT (not including
Crimea); 7299 are receiving methadone and 876 buprenorphine.
Approximately one quarter of them are women (WHO Regional office for

15

Europe 2013). The number of treatment slots for buprenorphine treatment is
limited due to the higher price of buprenorphine (only 11% of people in SRT
are receiving buprenorphine). The number of people who can be treated in
each site is centrally determined by governmental regulation. Consequently,
doctors have no ability to influence the number of persons in SMT according
to local needs.
Most SMT medication and sites are financed by the GFATM; Ukrainian health
authorities are financing the programme only partly.
Staff delivering SMT is put under a very high level of control. Mistakes, even
without consequences for the patients, can be prosecuted.
Most people receiving SMT live in Eastern and South-Eastern Ukraine
including Crimea.

Figure 1: Number of SMT patients in Ukraine (regions)



16

Figure 2: Number of patients in Ukraine II



4.2 Supply of SMT medication
The main supply of substitution medication is stored in Kharkov, from where
it is transported to the main pharmacies and deposits in the different regions
of Ukraine. It is required by law that the transporters are guarded by armed
escorts of a local security company (Titan). The transport of smaller quantities
of SMT medication from the main pharmacies to the SMT sites does not need
to be guarded. The delivery of SMT medication is logistically managed by
Alliance Ukraine. The transport company hired for the delivery is Liki Ukraine.
On 29 April an incident occurred after a delivery of SMT medication to
Donetsk. The transporter was stopped by armed men and the security guards
from Titan guarding the transporter were disarmed. The attackers were not
able to open the armoured vehicle.

17

HIV Alliance Ukraine is currently considering supplying SMT medication to
the crisis regions by using different roads (from Kharkov to Luhansk) or by
aircraft delivery (to Donetsk) in order to avoid a shortage of medication.
Different governmental regulations regulate SMT storage and treatment.
Local practitioners criticised that:
n

Pharmacies are only allowed to have reserves of SMT medication
limited to one month’s supply (regulation 333). This poses logistical
problems because the main pharmacies have to be supplied every
month (risky under the current security situation). The practitioners
recommended that the regulations be changed in order to allow SMT
stocks to last 3 months or more. However, changing this regulation
would need approval by the Committee of Ministers of Ukraine. A
decision on changing the regulations cannot be expected in the near
future.

n

Take-home dosages of Methadone cannot be prescribed.

n

Transportation of SMT medications is supposedly five times more
expensive than the medication itself.

n

Local production of substitution medication is possible but not
available thus far.

18

5

Consequences
of the political crisis
in Ukraine

According to UNAIDS representative in Ukraine, Crimea was considered to
be a ‘best practice’ example with regards to SMT. Among the 800 people
formerly enrolled in SMT in Crimea 38% are HIV infected and of those 50%
are taking ART medication. UNAIDS expects that no more than 50 people in
SMT from Crimea will seek refuge and treatment in other regions of Ukraine.
The NGO HIV Alliance Ukraine estimates that approximately 200 persons
will be displaced because of the discontinuation of SMT.
Considering that among the 800 people with SMT in Crimea, 43 went to the
mainland to continue their SMT, approximately 20 to Russia, 20 detoxified
with intravenous buprenorphine, the greatest majority of people saw their
treatment rapidly interrupted. The premature interruption of treatment is
related to an increased risk of overdose (due to the loss of tolerance)
(UNODC and WHO 2013).
Professionals feared that the efficiency of other health services (particularly
HIV and tuberculosis integrated care) might be reduced due to the absence
of SMT, since SMT is one way to support adherence to ART and follow up
care for HIV (WHO, UNODC et al. 2004).
In order to avoid interruption of HIV and tuberculosis, HIV Alliance Ukraine
has delivered sufficient medication necessary to cover the needs in Crimea
up to the end of 2014. Also the supply of other harm reduction materials to
Crimea is uncertain.
Officially, SMT provision stopped in Crimea on 1 May 2014. However, the
treatment was still partially available for some people in SMT in Simferopol
and in some other sites up to 20 May.

19

25 persons previously enrolled in SMT in Crimea had arrived in the mainland
of Ukraine by 20 May; approximately 20 of them moved to Dnepropetrovsk
(15 receiving methadone and 5 buprenorphine) and five moved to Kiev. Most
of those internally displaced persons are men.
On 27 May, after the mission was completed, HIV Alliance Ukraine informed
us that a total of 43 people in SMT had moved from Crimea, 26 to
Dnepropetrovsk and 17 to Kiev. Around 18 persons went to Saint Petersburg
to undergo detoxification. Less than 100 people with SMT actually left and/or
were undergoing another form of treatment. Apparently only 20 people were
put on a detoxification scheme with intravenous buprenorphine.

5.1 Consequences for the people using drugs /
with SMT
The information was gathered from a significant number of persons in SMT
and from different sources (HIV Alliance Ukraine Hotline and direct meetings
with people from Crimea in Kiev and Dnepropetrovsk).
After the unlawful annexation, people enrolled in SMT were confronted with
the choice of either staying in Crimea, undergoing detoxification and
rehabilitation (in the Russian Federation), or moving to mainland Ukraine with
the hope of continuing SMT.
5.1.1 Direct testimonies in Dnepropetrovsk
18 persons from Crimea enrolled in SMT informed the expert team of the
following:
n

Psychological pressure by the Russian authorities, with police visiting
them at their homes, creating a sense of being prosecuted, and of
changing their status: they no longer felt that they were ‘patients under
treatment’, but ‘criminals’, since SMT is illegal in the Russian Federation.

n

While being hospitalised (with the aim of detoxification or rehabilitation,
the reason is unclear), cellular phones were taken away. Patients
were only allowed to speak to their relatives once a week. This was
creating a feeling of being imprisoned.

n

Another kind of psychological pressure was described regarding
treatment, i.e. people were given no other choice than to undergo the

20

‘Russian form’ of treating addiction (abstinence-oriented with
detoxification followed by rehabilitation).
n

People in SMT reported having been charged (4000 roubles) for
treatment that is usually free of charge. Precisions are lacking regarding
the type of treatment (continuation of SMT, detoxification, etc.).

n

Extremely fast tapering of substitution medication was described, for
example a decrease of methadone in four days (120 mg to 80 mg,
40 mg and then 20 mg), or in three days (170 mg to 75 mg and then
20 mg), in other cases there was a reduction of 25 mg per day.

n

For reasons that could not be explored further, ten deaths of people
previously enrolled in SMT were reported between March and May
2014.

n

People were afraid of not being accepted anymore in treatment
centres, because some of them took illicit drugs due to the lack of SMT.

n

The availability of illicit substances has increased recently in Crimea
(heroin).

n

Moving from Crimea was described as being rather difficult (especially
with families) or even prohibited (generally for men aged between
16-60 years), since authorisation to leave Crimea might not be
given by Russian customs. At the same time, patients estimated
that 400-500 would come to the mainland if proper information had
been/would be provided. People with SMT described being prevented
from leaving Crimea. A medical certificate is insufficient to allow them
to leave the peninsula.

n

Persons now receiving SMT in Dnepropetrovsk said that the medical
care provided to them on mainland Ukraine was good. They were
also satisfied by the support provided by HIV Alliance Ukraine for
accommodation. Some regretted that there was no additional support
from governmental services for housing and employment.

n

Seven out of eighteen people reported having lost their jobs due to
the interruption of SMT in Crimea. The following reasons were
named: their physical condition (withdrawal syndrome) did not allow
them to work anymore, closing down of McDonalds and the fact that
they cannot continue their work after leaving Crimea. A person calling
the hotline of HIV Alliance Ukraine reported that they lost their job
because the information that they are enrolled in SMT was disclosed
to their employer.

21

n

Some said that their medical data and the information that they are
drug users were disclosed (breach of confidentiality). People reported
having had to fill in questionnaires without knowing why.

n

False information was provided to patients, for example: they were told
(by doctors) that no treatment would be available on the mainland.

n

Some were informed that residential treatment in Russia would be
free of charge. In the end they had to pay.

n

The information was spread that millions of roubles were made
available in Crimea (donated by the Russian Federation) for treatment.

n

In Sebastopol, after a protest from the patients regarding the way they
were treated, Russian authorities went to Crimea and promised
patients ‘anything they need’. Ten people apparently went to Russia
for promised SMT.

n

Persons from Crimea were informed that they would not be welcome
on the mainland, that their life would be in danger there (they ‘would
be killed’), or affirming that they would not be allowed to come back
after 30 days of leave.

n

Access to harm reduction services was reduced.

n

More drug use screening in Crimea was reported, including
mandatory urine testing.

Experts’ impressions concerning physical and mental conditions of the
displaced persons:
The people met by the expert team were apparently glad to continue treatment
in mainland Ukraine. Generally, the patients appeared to be in an acceptable
state of health. Some of the patients were rather thin or looked tired. It can be
assumed that only those who are physically stable were able to travel and seek
for treatment outside of Crimea. Following that thought, those who stayed in
Crimea are probably the ones who are most in need of medical assistance.
According to a doctor at an SMT site in Kiev, the people arriving from Crimea
showed a high degree of stress. He said that many of them used illicit drugs
in the period before they could continue SMT in Kiev.
A medical screening of physical and mental fitness was not conducted by the
expert team.

22

5.1.2 Situation of people in SMT from Eastern Ukraine
The expert team was informed that doctors in the Donetsk region already
started reducing the dosages of methadone given to people in SMT by 5-10 mg
per week due to the uncertainty about whether new supplies would arrive
soon in the region. According to treatment staff, people in SMT in this region
are very concerned, frustrated and one person in SMT even panicked and
threatened treatment personnel. The medical expert team also met one man
who moved from Mariupol (Donetsk oblast) to Dnepropetrovsk, since he was
told that SMT would be interrupted in his hometown.

5.2 Consequences for health staff
5.2.1 Crimea
OST coordinators in mainland Ukraine told the expert team that some doctors
in Crimea already had a negative attitude towards SMT before the illegal
annexation of the peninsula. However, some doctors who previously
supported SMT now changed their attitudes and openly criticised SMT. They
seem now to favour abstinence-oriented therapies. In addition, some SMT
sites have been taken over by armed groups.
5.2.2 Mainland Ukraine
According to OST coordinators from Odessa, treatment staff did not
communicate the risk that methadone supply could be interrupted also in
Odessa in order to avoid panic among patients.
5.3

Responses developed so far

The following information regarding responses developed so far was reported:
According to the Drug Control Service there are 416 free treatment slots
available in 15 different sites in the mainland. A regulation specifies that
people in SMT from Crimea, Donetsk, Odessa and Kharkov have to be
provided with free treatment.
Alliance Ukraine set up a specific programme (financially supported by the
Soros Foundation) for people in SMT from Crimea who want to move to other

23

cities in Ukraine such as Kiev and Dnepropetrovsk. They provide internally
displaced people (IDPs) with support for lodging for three months. The budget
can cover the needs of 100 people in SMT. Alliance also organised a hotline
working non-stop seven days a week. Since 1 May (over a period of 17 days)
the line received 200 calls, 50% from Crimea, and 10% from parents.
A change of medication from methadone to buprenorphine in Crimea was
considered, since buprenorphine is available in the Russian Federation as
an analgesic. It is not used for substitution therapy in the Russian Federation
but it is also not on the list of illicit substances like Methadone. This idea was
not further explored, since experts reckoned that it was not realistic to
convince Crimean authorities to provide buprenorphine to people in SMT.

6

24

Recommendations
The recommendations are presented according to three different scenarios:
current situation, full interruption of supply, and after crisis interventions.

6.1 Scenario1: Current situation
The current situation is characterised by instability, with difficulties to deliver
SMT medication in certain regions, as well as difficulties in receiving objective
information.
In this context, experts mandated by the Pompidou Group recommend:
n

Ensuring the safe transportation of the medication (airline, train).

n

Informing the people in SMT of the situation objectively, and discuss
anticipated difficulties with them.

n

Ensuring medical confidentiality of people with SMT.

n

Considering take home dosages of methadone in order to facilitate
patients’ access to treatment in unsecure environment.

n

Continuing to provide harm reduction measures (information and
education, sterile injection equipment, condoms).

n

Creating a national task force capable of monitoring the situation on
a daily basis and implementing emergency actions when necessary.
The task force could consist of Ukrainian policy makers, international
and local organisations as well as patient organisations.

n

Appealing for international and national fundraising in order to finance
possible emergency measures including housing, employment, social
support for internally displaced people.

n

Creating a media platform (internet, mobile phone or national hotline)
providing objective and up-to-date information to persons in the

25

affected regions in Ukraine. People in SMT need to be kept updated
with objective information in order to take the most appropriate
decision when facing displacement and interruption of SMT.
n

Increasing the volume of supply of SMT medication, which is allowed
to be stored at the sites. The current law (regulations 333) allows no
more than one month of storage locally. A three-monthly supply would
reduce costs for transportation and guarantee supply for a longer time
in affected regions.

6.2 Scenario 2: Full interruption of supply also
in other regions of Ukraine
In the absence of possibility to ensure a secure supply of SMT medication,
we recommend:
n

Searching for assistance among international organisations, NGOs,
and local well-recognised persons to ensure a secure way to deliver
substitution medication.

n

Training health professionals in detoxification according to evidencebased medical protocols.

n

Ensuring detoxification in medically acceptable conditions, according
to evidence-based medical protocols.

n

Ensuring transmission and access to objective information for
emergency measures, for example the location of alternative SMT
sites in other regions.

n

Providing harm reduction measures (information and education,
sterile injection equipment, condoms, etc.).

n

Setting up alternative SMT site close to sites that no longer can
provide SMT medication.

6.3 Scenario 3: After the crisis – stabilisation of
the situation
Even though the situation regarding SMT has improved over the last ten
years since the beginning of its implementation, this scenario points out
numerous aspects that stakeholders want to improve. SMT is centrally

26

organised, with little flexibility when it comes to effective and efficient
health care delivery. Medical staff are obliged to follow the strict legal
frameworks of SMT.
Experts in the field advocate necessary changes. A recent report about
substitution maintenance treatment in Ukraine by Emilis Subata points
out a number of interventions that can improve (Subata 2013). To reach
such challenging goals, a joint advocacy effort is necessary to convince
policy makers to implement much needed reforms. Indeed, international
and local stakeholders recognised that their advocacy effort could be
more coordinated.
Therefore, we recommend:
n

Creating a working group consisting of representatives of the
MOH, SSDC, external and local experts, and NGOs.

n

Conducting a revision of the SMT protocol. This is necessary to
base SMT treatments on medical evidence and not to such a
large extend on control-related aspects.

6.3.1 People with SMT
It is recommended to:
n

Scale up services targeting people using drugs in all regions of
Ukraine.

n

Facilitate access to SMT by increasing the number of available
treatment slots and reducing the threshold of access to SMT.

n

Allow driving under SMT for stabilised people and those with a
driving licence.

6.3.2 Health professionals
Health professionals should be able to:
n

Work according to internationally- and evidence-based medical
protocols on SMT. This includes more flexibility when it comes
to limitations of dosages prescribed (upper limits), and patients’
involvement in the treatment plan.

27

n

Create working conditions that allow proper medical and social
care, with fewer administrative constraints.

n

Facilitate take home dosages for stabilised patients.

n

Ensure SMT support by international and local medical
professional organisations.

n

Encourage research in addiction medicine involving Ukrainian
institutes and universities.

n

Develop integrated services (for both somatic and psychiatric
comorbidities).

n

Monitor the needs for SMT.

6.3.3 Central level
Policy makers should consider the following interventions:
n

Create sufficient stocks of medication and regulations that allow
larger stocks in main pharmacies.

n

Allow for state financing of SMT.

n

Make SMT a key priority of the Ukrainian MOH.

n

Ensure sustainability of SMT programmes in Ukraine (especially
after the end of GFATM financial support).

n

Develop national production of methadone and buprenorphine.

n

Inform both the medical professionals and the general public
thoroughly and objectively about SMT in order to ensure
objective and evidence-based information.

7

28

Conclusions
The instability in Ukraine in the recent months has accentuated the situation
for the already vulnerable population of people using drugs in Ukraine. The
SMT programmes, which have been scaled up considerably during the last
ten years, have provided opioid-dependent drug users with an internationally
recognised medical treatment of opioid dependence. The necessary and
essential efforts to reduce the transmission of HIV infection in Ukraine is
undermined by the interruption or reduction of SMT provision, and this at a
time when the preventive measures were beginning to show concrete and
effective results; namely a decrease of new HIV infections among people
who inject drugs.
Prior to the present crisis, the SMT programme was in the process of and in
need of considerable up-scaling concerning numbers, to meet a larger need
among the many opioid-dependent individuals in Ukraine. The existing SMT
programme is also in need of sustainable qualitative improvement, as pointed
out by many of the informants we met during our mission. Hopefully, their
proposals for improvement of the SMT in Ukraine will be listened to in the
future, once political stability is restored. The goal must be to develop an
approach that is more oriented towards health care and individuals enrolled
in SMT, putting less emphasis on control measures for the provision of care
and more on the quality of the treatment delivered. International contributors
finance the greatest proportion of SMT in Ukraine, which puts at risk the
long-term provision of SMT.
After the interruption of SMT in Crimea, numerous stakeholders both at
national and international level share great concern regarding the future of
SMT. Significant action has occurred in reaction to this. The efforts have to
be fostered since the most recent developments show that it becomes
increasingly difficult to provide SMT in Eastern Ukraine too. One can expect
that people with SMT will also leave for other parts of Ukraine in search of
continuation of treatment.

29

Actions developed so far have to be completed by a more intensive
intervention that will comprehensively address the needs of people in SMT in
Crimea and in mainland Ukraine. These needs do not only include SMT and
other necessary medical treatment and harm reduction, but also housing, social
assistance and employment and other aspects resulting from relocation as
a result of displacement.
Given the pan-European role of the Pompidou Group, and the pivotal
mandate of the CoE in safeguarding human rights, the Permanent
Correspondents of the Pompidou Group take the initiative to set up an
inter-agency immediate response group (PG, WHO, UNODC, NGO
stakeholders) to coordinate relief efforts in the most effective way and pool
competences and resources to allow for swift action. A first meeting could be
organised in June by the PG Secretariat at the CoE office in Kiev.

30

Appendix

1

References
Kazatchkine, M. (2014).
"Russia's ban on methadone for drug users in Crimea will worsen the
HIV/AIDS epidemic and risk public health." BMJ 348: g3118.
Law of Ukraine (2009).
"THE STATE PROGRAM to ensure HIV prevention, treatment, care, and
support to HIV-positive people and patients with AIDS for years 2009-2013.
APROVED by the Law of Ukraine № 1026-VI of 19.02.2009
http://www.unaids.org.ua/hiv/response/programm;
http://zakon4.rada.gov.ua/laws/show/1026-17."
Subata, E. (2013).
"Opioid substitution treatment in Ukraine. 31 December 2013.
Commissioned by the ICF International HIV/AIDS Alliance in Ukraine
(available on request).".
UNODC and WHO (2013).
"Opioid overdose: preventing and reducing opioid overdose mortality.
Discussion paper UNODC/WHO."
WHO, UNODC, et al. (2004).
"Position paper Substitution maintenance therapy in the management of
opioid dependence and HIV/AIDS prevention."
WHO Regional office for Europe (2013).
"HIV prevention for People Who Inject Drugs implemented by the
International HIV/AIDS Alliance in Ukraine."
WHO Regional office for Europe (2013).
"HIV/AIDS treatment and care in Ukraine. Evaluation report 2013.
Part of the overall Ukrainian National AIDS programme evaluation
conducted in September 2012. Avaiable at:
http://www.euro.who.int/en/health-topics/communicable-diseases/
hivaids/publications/2013/hivaids-treatment-and-care-in-ukraine.
Accessed 11 November 2013.".

