28 April 2008
Ministry of Integration and Gender Equality

Third Monitoring cycle of the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages

After a preliminary examination of the 3rd Periodical Report on the
Charter, the Committee of Experts found that additional information on
the report would be needed before the committee could continue its
examination.
On the 20th of March 2008 the Swedish Government Offices in
Stockholm received an invitation from the expert committee to reply to
a questionnaire the latest on the 30th of April 2008 in order to allow the
Committee of Experts to complete its examination.
Sweden was also invited to make the questionnaire and Sweden’s answers
to it public. The questionnaire and Sweden’s answers to it was made
public on the Swedish government website for human rights,
www.manskligarattigheter.se on the 28 of April 2008, it was also among
others distributed to minority media.

General comments
Before presenting its answers to the questionnaire Sweden would like to
give the Committee of Experts some additional information concerning
activities concerning the national minorities in Sweden.
The Swedish Government’s work to improve the implementation of the
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages (Language
Charter) and the Framework Convention for the Protection of National
Minorities (Framework Convention) is an ongoing process. The
Government Investigation on Finnish and South Sami Languages
submitted its reports “The Right to My Language – Enhanced Minority
Rights Protection” in May 2005 and “To Reclaim My Language – Measures

2
to Strengthen the Sámi Language” in February 2006. In its reports the
investigator made a number of proposals that are now being processed
within the Government Offices.
The current Government and the Ministry of Integration and Gender
Equality has also commissioned reports in order to explore additional or
alternate possibilities of improving the implementation.
In December 2007 the report “National Minority Languages in Courts
and Agencies – An Alternative” was submitted by Prof. and former
Supreme Court judge Mr. Bertil Bengtsson. The report contains a
number of proposals regarding the use of Sámi, Finnish and Meänkieli,
such as:
• The current administrative area for Finnish should not be
expanded.
• The current administrative area for Sámi should be expanded with
two municipalities (Strömsund and Storuman).
• Individuals have the right to use Sámi, Finnish and Meänkieli in
the whole country if the government agencies or municipalities in
question have staff with language skills in these languages.
• Sámi and Finnish can always be used in written contacts with the
following agencies: Parliamentary Ombudsman, The Office of
the Chancellor of Justice, the Ombudsman against Ethnic
Discrimination, Social Insurance Agency and the tax authorities.
• In municipalities where the population is expected to use Sámi,
Finnish or Meänkieli in contacts with the authorities, the
municipality and county council should act so that there is staff
with appropriate language skills available. Government agencies
are to do the same if there is a need for it.
• Healthcare providers should act so that there is staff with
appropriate language skills in Sámi, Finnish and Meänkieli
available where there is a need for it.
• If there are elderly people in need of care in Sámi, Finnish or
Meänkieli the municipality is to provide for the availability of
staff with appropriate language skills.
• Pre-school in Sámi and Finnish should be provided in the whole
country, as proposed by the Government Commission on
Finnish and South Sámi Languages.
• If a municipality fulfills the legislated requirements that apply
within the administrative areas, the municipality may voluntarily
join the current administrative area and thus be entitled to
government funding.
The report is currently submitted for consideration by a number of
public authorities, municipalities and organizations that represent
national minorities.

3
Additional reports that have been commissioned by the Government and
submitted are:
- the Institute for Language and Folklore: “The Roma Language and
Roma Language Planning in Sweden 2007” February 2008,
- the Institute for Language and Folklore: “The Situation of Meänkieli in
Sweden” March 2008, and
- the Jewish Community in Sweden (Judiska centralrådet i Sverige) /Ms.
Susanne Sznajderman-Rytz: “Yiddish – A Language without Country but
with Domicile in Sweden” February 2008.
These reports contain a number of proposals to strengthen and to
promote Romani chib, Meänkieli and Yiddish in Sweden. The proposals
are now being processed within the Governments Offices.
On the 2 of April 2008 the Swedish Ministry of Integration and Gender
Equality arranged a conference in cooperation with the Swedish
Association of Local Authorities and Regions concerning the rights of
the national minorities in Sweden. The conference was aimed at all
municipalities in Sweden and had as its objective to provide a forum for
discussion and sharing of information and good practices on issues
related to the implementation of the Language Charter and the
Framework Convention in practice in the municipalities. Themes such as
e.g. elderly care, right to mother tongue education and consultation
mechanisms were examined.

Answers to questionnaire

PRELIMINARY SECTION

2. Please indicate all regional or minority languages as defined in paragraph
a of Article 1 of the Charter which exist within your State's territory. Indicate
also the parts of the territory of your state where the speakers of such
language(s) reside.
Question 1: Please inform the Committee of Experts whether any specific
measures have been taken to clarify if Elfdalian/Älvdalska corresponds to the
definition of a regional or minority language contained in Article 1.a. of the
Charter (see 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts, paragraph 26).

The Government Offices has over the last years had an ongoing dialog
with representatives of the Elfdalien community and in February 2008
representatives of the Ministry of Integration and Gender Equality met
with representatives of the municipality of Älvdalen and Ulum Dalska

4
(an organization for the protection and promotion of Elfdalian). The
current situation and needs of Elfdalian were discussed during this
meeting. The arguments for recognizing Elfdalian as a regional or
minority language will be given further consideration in the
Government’s ongoing process of reforming the Swedish policy on
national minorities.

PART II

Objectives and principles pursued in accordance with Article 2 paragraph 1

Article 7.1c
Question 2: What steps have been taken by the Swedish authorities "to
reverse the trend of diminishing support for the associations of Finnishspeakers" (2nd Report of the Committee of Experts. paragraph 37)?

As mentioned in Sweden’s 3rd periodical report the objectives of the
national language policy emphasizes that everyone must have a right to
languages, including developing and using their own mother tongue and
national minority language, as well as the opportunity to learn foreign
languages. Measures for language conservation are necessary if the
national minority languages are to develop and be preserved. In order to
promote achievement of the language policy objectives, state-financed
language conservation and development activities has be coordinated and
given new resources, which makes possible increased efforts in support
of the national minority languages. Since the 1 July 2006 the SwedishFinnish Language Council has been integrated into the Institute for
Language and Folklore and receives annual funding from the Swedish
Government as a part of this governmental body. As stated in the
Swedish 3rd periodical report, this integration has been successful and has
given more resources and leverage to the promotion of not only Finnish,
but also other national minority languages.
Sweden has taken note of the comment made by the Committee of
Experts in its 2nd report paragraph 37 and would like to give the
following information. The government subsidies mentioned by the
Committee, is granted in accordance with ordinances by the National
Board of Health and Welfare. All public authorities in Sweden are
independent of the Government Offices and the Government Offices
does not have the right to change lawful decisions made by government
agencies or interfere in their decision making process.

5
Article 7.1.d
Question 3: Apart from the survey referred to in the periodical report (see p.
39), what steps have been taken by the Swedish authorities to improve the
provision of healthcare in regional or minority languages (see 2nd Report of
the Committee of Experts, paragraph 40)?

Sweden has taken note of the comments made by the Committee of
Experts in paragraph 40 and agrees that questions concerning health and
elderly care for national minorities are important. In addition Sweden
would like to inform the committee that Sweden, apart from the survey
mentioned in the 3rd periodical report, has taken the following measures.
Public health

In March 2008 the Swedish Government presented a new government
bill on a national public health policy (En förnyad folkhälsopolitik, prop.
2007/08:110). The current health situation of the national minorities is
unknown, inter alia due to lack of health statistics that identify national
minorities. The UN Special Rapporteur on Health Mr. Paul Hunt has
previously identified specific health related problems that the Sámi
population has to deal with. In order to investigate whether the national
minorities have specific health problems, the Swedish National Institute
of Public Health (Statens folkhälsoinstitut) will be given the task to
analyze the current public health situation of the national minorities and
to propose improvements. The task is to be performed in cooperation
with representatives of the national minorities.
Dignity guarantee

The Government has appointed a special investigator that is to propose a
dignity guarantee for health and social care for older people. The
intention is to make clear what all elderly care will have to offer and what
the elderly and their family members can expect. The investigator shall
also analyze different ways on how to assure that women and men,
regardless of their cultural or ethnical background receive the health care
and social care they need, in time and that the health and social care is of
good quality. The investigator is to present its proposals at the latest on
the 31 of May 2008.
Free choice in elderly care

In 2007 the Government appointed an investigator to examine the
conditions for greater freedom of choice in health and social care. The
starting point for the proposals to be made by the investigator was to
examine the conditions for giving older people and persons with
disabilities more opportunity to choose their provider of social services.
The intention of making the services more responsive to the needs and
wishes of the individual user can for example mean better opportunities

6
for persons with different language or cultural needs to receive care
adopted to their requirements. In February 2008 the investigator
presented its report (SOU 2008:15) and the report is at present being
circulated for comments. The Government has set aside 300 million SEK
to make it easier for and encourage municipalities to introduce a free
choice system.

PART III

Measures to promote the use of regional or minority languages in public life
in accordance with the undertakings entered into under Article 2 paragraph
2.

All Part III languages

Article 8
Question 4: Please specify what concrete measures have been taken by the
Swedish authorities to raise the awareness of the right to receive mothertongue education among local authorities, teachers and parents (see 3rd
Periodical Report, p. 68).

The National Agency for Education has the responsibility to account the
measures that municipalities have taken in order to inform schools and
parents concerning pupils rights to mother tongue education on
minority languages.
In order to raise awareness of the national minorities right to receive
mother tongue education the agency has among other things published
brochures, newsletters and information concerning this on the agencies
website. The agency has also proposed a pilot ordinance to make it
possible for pupils with minority languages to get distance education.
The Swedish National Agency for School Improvement has during 2008
and 2009 received a special task to support development and production
of books and other learning materials for the national minorities. For
this purpose the agency has received an extra funding of 10 million SEK.
Apart from this the agency has produced learning materials on national
minority languages and courses for distance learning of minority
languages which are available trough the website www.modersmal.net.

7
Article 8.1.h
Question 5: How many students follow the teacher training in Sámi, Finnish
and Meänkieli at Luleå Technical university?

In 2007, the number of full time equivalents registered for the teacher
education programme directed towards minority language studies,
summed up to nearly 7. The vast majority of which were registered for
the courses directed towards Finnish.

Article 8.1.i
Question 6: Do the Swedish authorities envisage producing reports on the
educational situation of national minorities on a regular basis (see 2nd
Report of the Committee of Experts, para. 102, 251)?

Sweden has taken note of the Committee of Experts opinion that the
National Agency for Education should be given the task to produce
reports concerning the educational situation of the national minorities
on a regular basis. At present the National Agency for Education
produces statistics, on a regular basis, on the numbers of pupils that
participate in mother tongue education and the number of pupils who
have the legal right to mother tongue education. For the time being the
agency does not produce reports on a regular basis concerning the
national minority languages and the Swedish Government has not
decided if such a task should be given to the agency.

Article 9.1.a.iv
Question 7: Is there a legal obligation which would oblige judicial authorities
to produce, on request, written documents in regional or minority languages
(see 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts, para. 112, 188 and 259)?

There is no legal obligation which would oblige judicial authorities to
produce, on request, written documents in Sámi, Finnish and Meänkieli.
However section 5 of the Acts (1999:1175) and (1999:1176) gives the
right to have documents pertaining to the court or matter orally
translated to Sámi, Finnish and Meänkieli.

8
Article 9.3
Question 8: Have any measures been taken to ensure that the most
important national statutory texts (other than the acts concerning the right to
use Sámi, Finnish and Meänkieli in dealings with public authorities and
courts) are also made available in Sámi, Finnish and Meänkieli (see 2nd
Report of the Committee of Experts, para. 117-119, 189-191, 264-266)?

Sweden has no additional information than already has been presented in
the 3rd periodical report.

Article 10.2.c/d
Question 9: Apart from the information project of Kommunförbundet
Norbotten (see 3n1 Periodical Report, p. 14), what other concrete steps have
been taken by the Swedish authorities to publish official documents of
regional and local authorities in regional or minority languages (see 2nd
Report of the Committee of Experts. para. 128-130, 198-200, 273-275)?

The Swedish Government offices has taken not of the comments made
by the Committee of Experts. In order to improve the knowledge on
national minorities and minority rights in Sweden the Government has
given the Swedish Sámi Parliament an assignment to make a study on a
future government website on national minorities. The Sámi Parliament,
in its role as a government agency, has previously successfully
established a website (www.samer.se) with information about the Sámi
and their situation in Sweden. In March of 2008 the Sámi Parliament
presented a study proposing the establishment of a government website
on national minorities. The purpose would be to disseminate
information to government agencies, municipalities, the general public
and the national minorities. The proposal is now being considered by the
Ministry of Integration and Gender Equality within the framework of
reforming Sweden's minority policy.
Apart from this the Public Employment Service, which is a governmental
agency, has translated some fact sheets on labour market programs to
two different varieties of Sámi and to Meänkieli.
The police will shortly translate an information form intended for
suspects in custody into 22 different EU languages and another 15
languages commonly used in Sweden, either by minorities or spoken by
relatively recent immigrant groups. This publication will be available to
the target groups in paper form but will also be more widely accessible to
the public, including the national minorities that speak Yiddish, Sámi
(North, South and Luleå Sami, Meänkieli, Finnish and Romani Chib.

9
This information will be accessible via the electronic form system of the
police.

Sámi

Article 8.1.a.iii
Question 10: Have additional means been provided to the Sámi School
Board in order to facilitate its work to promote pre-school education?

The Sámi School Board is negotiating for an agreement with local public
authorities concerning the pre-school education. The result of these
negotiations is not satisfactory. The Government has taken measures in
order to investigate in what way the financial conditions can be
improved.
The National Agency for Education produces statistics on the mother
tongue support in the Sámi pre-school, see also answer to question 6.
The agency also inspects the responsibility for pre-schooling on the
municipality level.

Article 8.1.e.iv
Question 11: How many pupils in secondary education not attending
Bokenskolan in Jokkmokk have made use of the possibility of distance
learning? Does that method include teaching of and in Sámi?

Sweden do not have any statistics on how many pupils in secondary
education, not attending Bokenskolan in Jokkmokk, that have made use
of the possibility of distance learning. The teaching that is offered is on
the Sámi language.

Article 8.1.d.iv
Question 12: To what extent is Sámi vocational education made available at
Bokenskolan in Jokkmokk (see 3n1 Periodical Report, p. 65)?

At Bokenskolan in Jokkmokk a specially designed program called
“Sámiska programmet” (“Sámi program”) is offered. The program

10
consists of a total of 2 500 upper secondary credit points, 500 of those
credit points, that is 20 percent, is vocational education.

Article 8.1.e.iii
Question 13: Has the trend in reducing the provision for the study of Sámi
at the University of Uppsala been stopped (see 2nd Report of the Committee
of Experts, para. 94)?

Uppsala University has no special means to support the study of Sámi
languages. This means that all the courses that the Department of
Modern Languages provide have to be financed by funds generated by
students as they register for – and complete – courses. For a number of
years the number of students studying Sámi has been quite low. This
year, for example, there are eight students registered on the Sámi
courses. As a consequence of this, Sámi was redefined from a major to a
minor discipline in 2006.
Even so, it is possible to graduate as a PhD in Sámi within the subject
Finish-Hungarian languages.

Question 14: To what extent do the universities of Umeå and Luleå offer
teacher training in Sámi (e.g. number of classes and students; see 3rd
Periodical Report, p. 65)?

Umeå University and Luleå University of Technology have special
assignments regarding the Sámi language. Following the provisions in
the annual appropriation directions, Umeå University is obliged to offer
education in Sámi. Umeå University does not have any assignment
regarding teacher training. Luleå University of Technology, however, is
obliged to offer teacher training directed towards Sámi language teaching
in primary and secondary school. It is important to note that the teacher
training itself is not in Sámi, which seems to implied in question 14. The
teacher training directed towards Sámi language teaching is a
specialisation within the ordinary teacher training programme.
In the year 2007, there were only one applicant to the Sámi language
teacher course in Luleå. However, the applicant finally opted for the
corresponding course at Umeå University instead.
In 2007, as well as in 2006 and 2005, the number of active students
participating in the Sámi language teacher course at Luleå University of
Technology sums up to the equivalent of less than half a student
studying full time. However, if one were to count also the education in
Sámi at Umeå University, the figure for 2007 would be slightly more

11
than 25 Sámi language students studying full time. Occasionally, teacher
training students at Umeå University follow Sámi language courses
within the framework of the teacher training programme.
Luleå University of Technology is also obliged to offer teacher training
directed towards Finnish and Meänkieli. As in the case of Sámi language,
in 2007 there were only one applicant to the Meänkieli language teacher
course at Luleå University and finally the applicant opted for the
corresponding course at Umeå university instead. In 2006 there were
only 2 applicants and none in 2005.
The teacher training course directed towards Finnish had 12 applicants in
2007. Corresponding numbers of applicants for the years 2006 and 2005
are 4 respectively 3.

Article 8.1.h
Question 15: Have other measures (see 3rd Periodical Report, p. 66 and67)
been taken to overcome the shortage of Sámi teachers (see 2nd Report of the
Committee of Experts, para. 99)?

Apart from what has already been mentioned in Sweden’s 3rd periodical
report the Swedish Government has set up a committee to reform
teacher education in Sweden. The government has decided to assign the
committee new tasks, among other things to analyse in what way teacher
education courses in Finnish, Sámi and Meänkieli should be designed in
order to cover the demand for competent minority language teachers in
compulsory school and upper secondary school.

Article 9.1
Question 16: Have any steps been taken to remedy the lack of legal
terminology in Sámi (see 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts, para.
109)?

As mentioned in Sweden’s 3rd periodical report (page 31) the Sámi
Parliament (Sámi Language Board) is responsible for conservation of the
Sámi language. This means that the Sámi terminology is first and
foremost a responsibility for the Sámi Language Board within the Sámi
Parliament. For this work the Sámi Parliament receives state-funding.
The Sámi Parliament has, for instance, been commissioned by the
government to put together a handbook on the Sámi language for the
benefit of the public authorities. For more information concerning the
handbook please also see question 17.

12
Article 9.1.a/b/c.ii
Question 17: Have the Swedish authorities taken practical and
organizational measures to ensure that Sámi can be used before courts (see
2nd Report of the Committee of Experts. para. 110/113/115)1

The Government has commissioned the Sámi Parliament to make a
handbook on how municipalities and government agencies should be
able to make the Sámi language more visible, increase the Sámi-speaking
staff and increase the usage of Sámi in contacts with municipalities and
public authorities. The handbook also, among other things, includes a
suggestions for an action plan concerning the use of the Sámi language.

Article 10.1.a.iii.c
Question 18: Have the national authorities taken further measures (see 3rd
Periodical Report. p. 17) to increase the proportion of Sámi-speaking staff?

The Public Employment Service in the county of Norrbotten has a large
network with other state agencies and municipalities through which it is
possible to offer service in Sámi, however this kind of service is very
seldom asked for. The Public Employment Service has also been
participating in the working group with representatives from state
agencies, with the mission to present a handbook in the Sámi language
(see also answer to question 19).
When it comes to the police it welcome all new applicants and when
advertising vacant posts it emphasise that it regard manifoldness and
diversity as an asset and that people with differing backgrounds are
welcome, regardless of linguistic and cultural origin, sexual preferences,
handicaps, etc. A prerequisite is of course that the applicants have the
necessary professional qualifications and otherwise possesses the
competence needed for the job. The police trainee recruitment drive is
aimed at the public and young people in general and this means that it
can also reach those who belong to national minority groups, for
example the Sámi. In its capacity as employer the police management has
occasionally granted leave to employees who for a while wish to pursue
Sámi handicraft, reindeer herding or some other branch of livelihood,
and in this manner indirectly promoted Sámi culture.
Please see also answer to question 17.

13
Article 10.2.b
Question 19: Have the Swedish authorities taken any further steps to
remedy the lack of Sámi speaking staff in local and regional authorities and
to encourage the users of Sámi to submit oral and written applications in
their language (see 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts, para. 126130)?

In the recruitment of new staff to the Public Employment Service’s
service center in the county of Norrbotten one of the requirements were
that the applicants should have a good command of one of the varieties
of the Sámi language.
When recruiting, provided of course that the applicant otherwise meet
the employment requirements, the police have a positive attitude
towards applicants of Sámi descent. When Sámi speaking police officers
are needed in the police force it is even specifically stated in vacancy
advertisements that Sámi speaking applicants will be favourably received.
However, no specific written material, such as forms, etc., is published in
Sámi, as practically everyone reads, writes and speaks Swedish.
Please see also answer to question 17.

Article 10.4.a
Question 20: Are translators and interpreters systematically provided in
practice (see 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts, p. 135)?

In the Administrative Procedure Act (SFS 1998:286) section 8 it is also
stated that public authorities should provide interpreters if needed. This
law applies to all governmental agencies.
As mentioned in Sweden’s 3rd periodical report translations and
interpretations should be provided if needed and without extra cost for
anyone who is party to a case. These cost are born by the court. The
National Courts Administration (NCA) has been allocated extra funds
by the Government to be able to meet such costs. NCA does not,
however, report its costs for regional language translation separately.
When it comes to the Public Employment Service it does not have
interpreters or translators employed. The agency however purchases this
service when necessary. The same applies for the police, when there is no
Sámi speaking personnel.

14
As a part of a survey, Sápmi 2008, commissioned by the public service
companies SR Sámeradio and Sveriges Television questions concerning
the use of Sámi in dealings with courts and public authorities were asked.
According to the survey only 4% of the Sámi speaking population uses
Sámi in dealings with courts and public authorities. The survey also
shows that a greater number of the Sámi speaking population makes use
of the rights to get elderly or child care fully or partially in Sámi. Since
most of the contacts with courts and public authorities usually are
pursued in writing these differences shown by the survey could indicate
that one reason for the low number of persons using Sámi in dealings
with public authorities depend on the circumstances that many Sámi
speaking persons does not know how to read and write in Sámi.
According to the survey 60% was of the opinion that the law
(1999:1175) concerning the right to use the Sámi language in dealings
with public authorities and courts fill an important function.

Article 11.1.e.i
Question 21: Have the Swedish authorities taken concrete measures to
encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a newspaper in Sámi?

In its 3rd periodical report on the implementation of the European
Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, Sweden informed about the
final report of Presskommittén [the Swedish Press Committee] which
was submitted in January 2006. The Press Committee’s report, which has
been circulated for comments, included inter alia proposals for
amendments to the press subsidies system that are intended to facilitate
the publication of daily newspapers in languages other than Swedish,
including Sámi, Finnish and Meänkieli. Based on the Press Committee’s
report, the Riksdag decided in June 2006 on certain changes to the
production subsidies that were to come into force on 1 January 2007.
The decision did however not contain any of the proposals for changes
that were especially intended to facilitate the publication of daily
newspapers in languages other than Swedish. These proposals are still
being discussed within the Government Offices.
The European Commission was notified of the amendments adopted by
the Riksdag but then announced that the changes could not preliminarily
be approved. Instead, a review of the entire press subsidy system would
be undertaken to examine whether it was compatible with the European
common market. With regard to the Commission’s decision, the coming
into force of the amended conditions for production subsidies was
postponed.

15
The European Commission’s review of the Swedish press subsidies
system is still ongoing. The Swedish Government intends to submit a
government bill to the Riksdag, preliminary in the autumn of 2008,
which will include proposals to amend the press subsidies system with
the aim of making it compatible with the common market. The adoption
of the bill will inter alia entail the implementation of the changes adopted
by the Riksdag in 2006, e.g. that the minimum requirement for the
number of copies in a newspaper issue will be reduced from 2 000 to
1 500 subscribed copies. This will lower the threshold for establishing
new daily newspapers in both Swedish and national minority languages.
The amendments will be notified to the European Commission, and the
implementation of the new conditions requires an approval of the
Commission. Before such an approval, other amendments to the press
subsidies system can not be implemented.

Finnish

Article 8.1.a.iii
Question 22: What action has been taken by the Swedish authorities to
promote Finnish pre-school education, in particular with regard to
awareness-raising among municipalities, schools and parents (see 2nd
Report of the Committee of Experts. para. 160/162)?

Please see answer to question 4.

Article 8.1.b/c.iv
Question 23: What steps have been taken by the Swedish authorities to
ensure that municipalities are aware of their obligation to offer teaching in
or of Finnish and to inform parents of this possibility?

Please see answer to question 4.
Question 24: Has the 2008 budget bill, which included less strict
requirements regarding mother tongue instruction in Finnish (see 3rd
Periodical Report, p. 38 and 39), been adopted by the Riksdag?

As mentioned in the 3rd periodical report the Government has, in the
budget bill for 2008, proposed that the rules for mother tongue tuition
in Finnish and Yiddish shall be the same as regards Romani Chib, Sámi
and Meänkieli. The budget bill has been adopted by the Riksdag.

16
Article 10.1.a.iii.c
Question 25: Have the Swedish authorities taken measures to improve the
competence in producing written documents in Finnish (see 2nd Report of
the Committee of Experts, para. 194)?

An important part of improving the competence in producing written
documents is the improvement of terminology. As mentioned in
Sweden’s 3rd periodical report and under question 2 above, the statefinanced language conservation and development activities has been
coordinated and given new resources which makes possible increased
efforts in support of the national minority languages. Since the 1 July
2006 the Swedish-Finnish Language Council has been integrated into the
Institute for Language and Folklore and receives annual funding from
the Swedish Government as a part of this governmental body. This
means that the Finnish terminology is first and foremost a responsibility
for the Language Council within the Institute for Language and
Folklore.
At the Public Employment Service in the county of Norrbotten all
service is available in Finnish. The staff is to a very large extent bilingual
(Swedish and Finnish). In the Haparanda-Torneå area there is a very
close co-operation between the Public Employment Services in the two
countries.
There is, in almost every police station in the county of Norrbotten
Finnish speaking personnel to meet the possible need for assistance in
the Finnish language.
Article 10.2.g
Question 26: What progress has been made with regard to the use of Finnish
place names (see 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts, para. 201)?

It is the responsibility of the governmental agency called Lantmäteriet to
promote an appropriate and careful handling of place names and formally
approving place names. Lantmäteriet also has an advisory board on place
names where, amongst others, the Institute for Language and Folklore
and the Sámi Parliament are represented. This is one way to safeguard
the use of traditional place names in Finnish and other national minority
languages.
It is important to keep in mind however that neither Lantmäteriet, nor
any other national body, has the formal capacity to approve place names
chosen by the municipalities in Sweden. Since the question of Finnish
place names is to a great extent a question for the northern counties in

17
Sweden, a special responsibility has been given to the Department of
Dialectology, Onomastics and Folklore Research in Umeå (DAUM).
DAUM is a part of the Institute for Language and Folklore and receives
annual funding from the Swedish Government. The task of the institute
is to preserve our immaterial cultural heritage by, on a scientific basis,
maintaining and mediating the knowledge of dialects, folklore, folk
music, place names and person names. DAUM has the geographical
responsibility for the two northernmost counties in Sweden,
Västerbotten and Norrbotten. As a part of the responsibility for place
names, DAUM is responsible for providing expertise and opinions when
the local authorities take decisions on place names and names used on
public maps.

Meänkieli

Article 8.1.a.iii
Question 27: Have additional measures (see 3rd Periodical Report, p. 42)
been taken to improve the offer of pre-school education in Meänkieli, in
particular in municipalities other than Pajala (see 2nd Report of the
Committee of Experts, para. 231/232)?

Sweden has no additional information than already has been presented in
the 3rd periodical report.

Article 8.1.b.iv
Question 28: Only few pupils outside Pajala receive mother tongue education in
Meänkieli (see 2nd Report of the Committee of Experts, para. 235). What action has
been taken by the Swedish authorities to ensure that municipalities are aware of
their obligation to offer teaching in or of Meänkieli and to inform parents about this
possibility?

Please see answer to question 4.

Article 8.1.c.iv
Question 29: Are the Swedish authorities developing a strategy to strengthen
the offer of Meänkieli in secondary education (see 2nd Report of the
Committee of Experts, para. 239)?

18
A strategy has not been developed largely because of a lack of teachers
able to teach technical and vocational education in Mäenkieli in
secondary education.

Article 8.1.h
Question 30: Has teacher training been improved with a view to
strengthening secondary education in Meänkieli (see 2nd Report of the
Committee of Experts, para. 247/248)?

Please see answer to question 15.

Article 9.1.a/b/c.ii
Question 31: Have the Swedish authorities taken any practical and
organizational measures to ensure that Meänkieli can be used before courts
(see 2 Report of the Committee of Experts, para. 257/260/262)?

Sweden has no additional information than already has been presented in
the 3rd periodical report.

Article 10.1.a.iii/c
Question 32: Have the Swedish authorities taken measures to improve the
competence in producing written documents in Meänkieli (see 2nd Report of
the Committee of Experts, para. 269)?

When it comes to the Public Employment Service in the county of
Norrbotten the command of Meänkieli is not a problem for the staff.
Along the Finnish border it is very common with the command of
Meänkieli among the staff at the Public Employment Service. However
the job seekers with Meänkieli as their mother tongue usually speaks
Swedish when they visit the Public Employment Service. There have
been no initiatives to produce written documents in Meänkieli,
Please also see answer to question 2 and 25, the same applies for
meänkieli.

19
Article 10.2.b
Question 33: Have the Swedish authorities taken any concrete steps to
encourage users of Meänkieli to submit applications in their language to
local and regional authorities (see ibidem, para. 271/275)?

Meänkieli is a often used as a colloquial language and it is therefore very
unusual that anyone sends an application or other written document in
Meänkieli. Should this be the case the police have the capacity to handle
the situation as most police stations in the county of Norrbotten have
Meänkieli speaking personnel.
Apart from this information Sweden has no additional information than
already has presented in the 3rd periodical report.

Article 11.1.e.i
Question 34: Please provide further information about concrete measures to
encourage and/or fascinate the creation of a newspaper in Meänkieli.

Please se answer to question 21.

Article 12.9
Question 35: Are the bodies responsible for collecting, keeping a copy of
and presenting or publishing works produced in Meänkieli (e.g. Riksarkivet,
Kungliga biblioteket, Nordkalottbiblioteket, Lansbiblioteket in Norrbotten,
see 3 Periodical Report, p. 29/30, 115) also collecting audio or audiovisual
works?

As part of their general responsibility for cultural heritage, it is
conceivable that these institutions might in some cases collect material of
this kind. However the institutions with the primary responsibility for
collecting audio and audiovisual works are the Institute for Language and
Folklore, that also has a special responsibility for Meänkieli, and the
Swedish National Archive of Recorded Sound and Moving Images
(SLBA). The SLBA has existed since 1979 and the collections consist
mainly of radio, TV, film, video, records and multimedia. According to
Swedish Legal Deposit law one copy of every such product must be sent
to the archive. The long-term goal is to collect, preserve and disseminate
the complete production of recorded sound and moving images in
Sweden, and therefore, also audio and audiovisual works in Meänkieli
issued in Sweden.

20

