Sweden’s report on the Council
of Europe Charter for Regional
or Minority Languages
presented in accordance with Article 15 of the
Charter, third Periodical Report

2

Foreword
In Sweden’s view the right to use minority languages both privately and
in public is an integral part of the international protection for human
rights. Sweden ratified the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages on 9 February 2000 and the charter came into force in Sweden
on 1 June the same year.
The Sami language was spoken in Sweden long before the country
became a nation state. Finnish and Meänkieli have been spoken in
Sweden for a very long time as well. Speakers of Romani Chib and
Yiddish have been in Sweden since the 16th and 17th century
respectively. The recognition of these languages as national minority
languages in Sweden is an expression of them being an integral part of
Sweden’s cultural heritage and of the need to create the conditions
needed to be able to preserve them as living languages in the country.
For the goals of the Government’s minorities policy to be fulfilled, the
needs and interests of national minorities must be considered in all parts
of the country and in all areas of society. This is true for central agencies,
as well as for regional and local authorities. For languages to be able to
develop and survive, they need to be used. For cultures to be enriched
and contribute to social development, they need space. It is my hope that
Sweden’s policy on national minorities is supporting such a development
for the national minorities and the minority languages.
Sweden hereby submits its third report on the measures implemented up
until 1 September 2007 to fulfil the country’s undertakings in accordance
with the Council of Europe’s European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages. The report has been set out and the answers given
in accordance with the instructions specified by the Council of Europe in
its general guidelines. The report discusses the measures implemented
and the changes that have occurred since Sweden submitted its last
report. It also tries to reply to the comments made and questions asked
by the Council of Europe in its reports about Sweden. An account of
the measures implemented is given article by article.
Stockholm, 20 September 2007
Nyamko Sabuni
Minister responsible for Sweden’s policy on national minorities

3

4

Contents
PRELIMINARY SECTION .......................................................................... 5
PART I......................................................................................................... 11
PART II ....................................................................................................... 26
PART III ...................................................................................................... 69
Language: SAMI ..................................................................................... 69
Article 8 – Education......................................................................... 69
Article 9 – Judicial authorities ......................................................... 76
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services.......... 80
Article 11 – Media.............................................................................. 85
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities................................... 87
Article 13 – Economic and social life ............................................... 92
Article 14 – Transfrontier exchange ................................................ 93
Language: FINNISH................................................................................ 96
Article 8 – Education......................................................................... 96
Article 9 – Judicial authorities ....................................................... 100
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services........ 103
Article 11 – The media .................................................................... 105
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities................................. 108
Article 13 – Economic and social life ............................................. 112
Article 14 – Transfrontier exchange .............................................. 112
Language: MEÄNKIELI ....................................................................... 114
Article 8 – Education....................................................................... 114
Article 9 – Judicial authorities ....................................................... 117
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services........ 120
Article 11 – Media............................................................................ 121
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities................................. 124
Article 13 – Economic and social life ............................................. 126
Article 14 – Transfrontier exchange .............................................. 127
APPENDICES ........................................................................................... 128
Appendix 1, ratified articles .................................................................. 128
Appendix 2, Relevant Swedish legislation ............................................ 130
Appendix 3, Summary of comments made by national minority
organisations.......................................................................................... 168

5

PRELIMINARY SECTION

1. Please provide the necessary background such as the relevant historical
development in the country, an overview of the demographic situation
with reference to the basic economic data for the regions, as well as
information on the constitutional and administrative structure of the state.
Historical background
Sweden’s ethnic and cultural diversity has a long historical tradition.
Several groups have been minorities in Sweden for a very long time and
they have actively defended their respective cultures and languages,
which today constitute a living part of Swedish society. The groups in
Sweden that are now recognised as national minorities are: the Jews; the
Roma; the Sami, which is also an indigenous people; the Sweden-Finnish
population and the Tornedalers. These groups have lived in Sweden for a
very long period of time and have a religious, linguistic or cultural
affiliation as well as a desire to preserve their identity. They all make use
of their language and in some cases the languages have several varieties.
Sweden’s constitutional and administrative structure
Sweden has three democratically elected levels of government: the
Riksdag (Swedish parliament) at the national level; the county councils at
the regional level; and the municipalities at the local level. They each
have different tasks and spheres of responsibility. Elections to the
Riksdag, county council and municipality assemblies are held every
fourth year on the same day. The division of responsibility between the
state, the county councils and the municipalities is determined by the
Riksdag by law. The Sameting (the Sami parliament) is the Sami
population’s own democratically elected body as well as a Swedish
central agency. Elections to the Sami parliament are held every fourth
year and Sami people who are registered on the Sami electoral register are
eligible to vote.
Demographic situation
Quarterly, half-yearly and annual statistics on the population of Sweden
are compiled by the national statistics agency, Statistics Sweden.
Population statistics are presented in three sub-groups. The first includes
population broken down by e.g. sex, age, citizenship and country of
birth. The second describes population changes, e.g. migrations, births
and deaths. And finally, future population trends are forecasted. Sweden
does not compile official statistics on people’s ethnic belonging,
however, apart from their citizenship and country of birth, since there
are no methods of calculating ethnic background that are both ethically
acceptable and scientifically reliable. It is hence impossible for Sweden to
submit statistical data on its national minorities. According to the

6
Personal Data Act (1998:204)1, it is prohibited to process personal
information that reveals a person’s race, ethnic origin or religion/belief.
It is worth remembering in this context that Sweden is a large country
with a small population (9 127 058 on 31 March 2007). The population is
not evenly spread over the entire country. Instead, half of the population
is concentrated in just 3% of the country’s surface area. Today, eight out
of ten live in the south of the country and most of these live in the
metropolitan areas around the capital, Stockholm, Göteborg and Malmö.
The rural population, particularly in the northern two-thirds of the
country, is extremely sparse. In Norrbotten, the northernmost county,
there are about three inhabitants to every square kilometre, compared to
Stockholm, where the corresponding figure is approximately 253.

2. Please indicate all regional or minority languages, as defined in
paragraph a of Article 1 of the Charter which exist on your State’s
territory. Indicate also the parts of the territory of your country where the
speakers of such languages(s) reside.
Sami
The Sami language consists of several varieties, three of which are spoken
in Sweden (North Sami, Lule Sami and South Sami). When Sweden
ratified the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, all of
these varieties were recognised as part of the Sami language.
An area stretching from Idre in Dalarna county to Karesuando in
Norrbotten has been traditionally inhabited by Sami. Nowadays, many
Sami live in the coastal areas of northern and central Sweden as well as in
Stockholm. The administrative district for the use of the Sami language
comprises the municipalities of Arjeplog, Gällivare, Jokkmokk and
Kiruna.
Finnish
The Finnish language is spoken all over Sweden although it is especially
concentrated in the municipalities of Norrbotten and in the region
around Lake Mälaren in central Sweden (Mälardalen). Historically, the
geographic base for the Finnish language is in Norrbotten, close to the
Finnish border. The administrative district for the use of the Finnish
language comprises the northernmost Swedish municipalities - Gällivare,
Haparanda, Kiruna, Pajala and Övertorneå.
Meänkieli

1

Extracts from the Personal Data Act, as well as other acts and ordinances submitted in this
report and not submitted in previous reports, can be found in the enclosed appendices of
relevant Swedish legislation, Appendix 2.

7
Meänkieli is a language that has a strong geographical affiliation and is
hence mainly spoken by people who were born in the Tornedalen region,
close to the Finnish border. The majority of Tornedalers, as they are
known, live in the municipalities of Haparanda, Övertorneå and Pajala, as
well as in various parts of Kiruna and Gällivare. All these municipalities
constitute the administrative district for Meänkieli.

3. Please indicate the number of speakers for each regional and minority
language. Specify the criteria for the definition of “speaker of regional or
minority language” that your country has retained for this purpose.
Speakers of regional or minority languages
As stated under Point 1 (Demographic situation) above, Sweden does
not compile official statistics on people’s ethnic belonging, apart from
their citizenship and country of birth, since there are no methods of
calculating ethnic belonging that are both ethically acceptable and
scientifically reliable. There are hence no official statistics on ethnic,
linguistic or cultural background. The figures given below are therefore
rough estimates and are medians from different sources provided by
researchers and the various linguistic minority groups themselves. They
can also be found in Swedish Government Bill Nationella minoriteter i
Sverige [National Minorities in Sweden] (1998/99:143).
Sweden has no official definition of “speaker of a regional or minority
language” but instead applies the definition given in Article 1 of the
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. A regional or
minority language should therefore have been used by its citizens in a
certain territory within a state and should differ from the official
language of the country. Moreover, a significantly large number of
people should speak it. If a language does not fulfil the criterion of
having a strongly historical and geographic affiliation, it could be covered
by the Convention as a non-territorial language. The criteria for being “a
speaker of a regional or minority language” also include selfidentification; only the individual him/herself can decide his/her own
affiliation.
Sami
The Sami population in Sweden amounts to approximately 15 000 –
20 000 people. There are about 9 000 speakers of Sami in Sweden.
The Sami are an indigenous people. According to the Sami Parliament
Act (Sametingslagen) (SFS 1992:1433), which determines who is eligible
to vote to the Sami parliament, a Sami is a person who considers
him/herself to be Sami and who speaks or has spoken Sami at home, or
whose parents or grandparents speak or have spoken Sami at home, or
has a parent who is or has been on the Sami parliament electoral register.

8

Finnish
Gällivare. A figure mentioned is that roughly 40 000 have some knowledge of
Meänkieli. In the 1950s a remarkable movement of people took place from the
region of Tornedalen to the southern part of the county of Norrbotten and
the whole country.
The Sweden-Finnish population in Sweden is put at about 450 000, an
estimated 50% of whom use the Finnish language to some extent. About
16 000 Finnish speakers live in the county of Norrbotten.
Meänkieli
Approximately 50 000 Tornedalers live in the municipalities of
Haparanda, Övertorneå and Pajala and in certain parts of Kiruna and
Gällivare. A rough estimate is that about 40 000 have some knowledge of
Meänkieli. During the 1950s, a large-scale movement of people took
place from the areas around Tornedalen to the southern parts of the
county of Norrbotten and the rest of Sweden.

4. Please indicate the non-territorial languages, as defined in paragraph c,
Article 1 of the Charter, used on your State’s territory and provide
statistical data concerning speakers.
Romani Chib
Romani Chib consists of several different varieties. In connection with
Sweden’s ratification of the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages, all the varieties spoken in Sweden were recognised as one
minority language.
The number of Roma living in Sweden is estimated at between 40 000
and 50 000 people. The Romani population in Sweden is not
homogenous. It includes descendants of the Romani groups that arrived
in Sweden in the 16th century as well as those who came to Sweden at
the end of the 20th century. Among the oldest Romani groups in
Sweden is the Finnish Kalé Roma, of which there are an estimated 3 200.
The Travellers, who have also been in Sweden since the 16th century, are
estimated to be around 20 000 in number. The Romani community in
Sweden also includes the 2 500 or so Swedish Kelderash Roma whose
forefathers came to Sweden some 100 years ago. The largest group of
Roma in Sweden, normally referred to as “non-Nordic” Roma, is
estimated to be about 15 000 in number and came to Sweden at the end
of the 1960s or later. As a result of the collapse of former Yugoslavia, at

9
least 5 000 Roma came to Sweden, mostly from Bosnia and
Herzegovina.2
There are no figures as to the number of speakers of the different
varieties of Romani Chib in Sweden.
Yiddish
The Jewish community in Sweden is estimated at around 20 000 – 25 000
people and includes those with either one or both parents of Jewish
origin. There are an estimated 3 000 Yiddish-speakers in Sweden.
As far as Yiddish is concerned, it is important to remember that the
number of Yiddish-speakers in Europe has decreased unnaturally as a
result of the Holocaust during the Second World War. Today, efforts are
being made by Jewish congregations to increase the number of Yiddishspeakers in Sweden.

5. Please provide recent general statements on the policy of your State
concerning the protection of regional or minority languages where it may
be of use to supplement the above four points.
The goals of the Swedish minorities policy
The goals of the Government’s minorities policy have not changed since
Sweden submitted its first and second report to the Council of Europe
concerning the implementation of the European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages. The Government still considers that the national
minorities right to protection and the right to use minority languages
both privately and in public are, in accordance with the Framework
Convention for the Protection of National Minorities and the European
Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, an integral part of the
international protection for human rights. The recognition of these
languages as national minority languages in Sweden is also an expression
of the integral part they play in Sweden’s cultural heritage and of the
need to create the conditions needed to be able to preserve them as living
languages in the country.
An integrated language policy
In December 2005, the Swedish Riksdag discussed Government Bill
Bästa språket - en samlad svensk språkpolitik [The best language - an
integrated Swedish policy on languages] (Government Bill 2005/06:2).
According to the adopted language policy goals, everyone has the right
to languages, including developing and using their own mother tongue
and national minority language. To achieve the goals of the language
policy, government-financed language conservation has been
2

Fact sheet Ju 03.11e Sveriges Roma en nationell minoritet [The Swedish Roma - a
national minority].

10
coordinated and strengthened as from 1 July 2006. Government-financed
language conservation for Yiddish, Romani Chib, Finnish and Meänkieli
is now accommodated within the Swedish Institute for Dialectology,
Onomastics and Folklore Research. As far as Sami is concerned, the
Sameting continues to have responsibility for managing Sami language
conservation.
The Delegation for Roma Issues
During the autumn of 2006, the Government appointed a Delegation for
Roma Issues with the task of improving the situation of the Roma in
Sweden. The delegation consists of ten members, half of whom are of
Roma origin. A number of experts and a broad reference group
consisting of representatives for the Roma organisations have also been
appointed for permanent consultation.
One of the delegation’s first tasks is to gather experiences and
knowledge in the area and submit proposals for how the living
conditions of Roma in Swedish society can be improved. The delegation
is also to promote and support municipal projects and activities aimed at
improving the situation of Roma. Finally, the delegation is to inform and
disseminate knowledge about Roma and their situation in Sweden and
encourage the exchange of knowledge and experiences among central
agencies and municipalities. In its activities, the delegation will draw
particular attention to the conditions for Roma children and young
people, the need for support and the situation for women and girls. A
gender equality and child perspective is to be fully integrated into the
delegation’s analyses and proposals. The work also presupposes a close
dialogue and cooperation with Roma, both women and men as well as
girls and boys. The delegation is to present its final report in December
2009 and will then put forward proposals for how the work on
improving the situation of Roma in Sweden is to continue.

11

PART I

1. Please state the main legal act(s) and/or provisions that you consider
essential for the implementation of the European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages in your country.
Please provide:
– copies of those acts and/or provisions, in English or French, should your
country not have done so in relation to the initial periodical report;
– details and copies of new legislation or policy documents with relevance
to the regional or minority languages;
– details of case law or other legal or administrative developments in this
field
International agreements, treaties and legal instruments do not
automatically become part of Swedish law. Treaties that have been
ratified by Sweden must be incorporated into Swedish law in order to be
directly applicable in Swedish courts and public authorities. One way of
achieving this is to incorporate a treaty into Swedish law by stating in the
laws or other enactment that the provisions of the treaty shall apply
directly as Swedish law. A treaty may also be directly applicable in
Sweden by “transformation”, which involves the provisions of the treaty
being translated into Swedish and, normally after some revision, being
included in a Swedish enactment. If the provisions in a treaty
correspond with the content of current Swedish law, no special
procedures are necessary.
Even before the Sweden ratified the European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages, Sweden already fulfilled many of the provisions in
the charter through other legislation in other areas such as education, the
freedom of religion, the freedom of speech and the prohibition of
discrimination. Furthermore, Chapter 1, Section 2 of the Instrument of
Government states that opportunities should be promoted for ethnic,
linguistic and religious minorities to preserve and develop a cultural and
social life of their own.
In addition to the laws that already existed when Sweden ratified the
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, several other
measures, presented in the Government Bill National Minorities in
Sweden, have been taken within the framework of the Government’s
minorities policy. The proposals in the bill were adopted by the Swedish
Riksdag in December 1999 (Government Bill 1998/99:143, Committee
Report 1999/2000:KU6, Government Communication 1999/2000:69).

12
In accordance with the decision, two new acts on the right to use Sami,
Finnish and Meänkieli in dealings with public authorities and courts were
adopted and Sweden ratified the European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages and the Framework Convention for the Protection
of National Minorities.
The Act (1999:1175) concerning the right to use the Sami language in
dealings with public authorities and courts and the Act (1999:1176)
concerning the right to use Finnish and Meänkieli in dealings with public
authorities and courts entitle individuals to use Sami, Finnish and
Meänkieli in their contacts with public authorities and courts of law in
geographical areas where these languages are spoken by tradition. These
acts also entitle individuals to receive elderly and child care either totally
or in part in the national minority language. These acts entered into force
on 1 April 2000.

2. Please indicate the bodies or organisations, legally established in your
state, which further the protection and development of regional or
minority languages. Please, list the names and addresses of such
organisations.

The Delegation for Roma Issues (- has replaced the Council on Roma
Issues)
Swedish Government Offices
Regeringsgatan 30–32
SE-103 33 Stockholm
Swedish Institute for Dialectology, Onomastics and Folklore
Research
Box 135
SE-751 04 Uppsala.
National Agency for School Improvement
Karlbergsvägen 77-81
SE-113 35 Stockholm
The National Archives
Box 12541
SE-102 29 Stockholm
Sami Education Centre
Borgargatan 2
SE-962 31 Jokkmokk

13

Sami Education Board (-the Sami schools’ own authority)
Köpmansgatan 4
Box 155
SE-962 24 Jokkmokk
The Sameting (Sami parliament)
Adolf Hedinsvägen 58
SE-981 33 KIRUNA
Telephone: +46 0980 780 30
Telefax: + 46 980 780 31
E-mail: information@sametinget.se
www.sametinget.se
Sáminuorra (Sami youth organisation)
Adolf Hedinsvägen 36
SE-981 33 KIRUNA
Telephone: + 46 0980 821 47
The Language Council (- part of the Swedish Institute for Dialectology,
Onomastics and Folklore Research, see above)
Box 20057
SE-104 60 Stockholm
Swedish Arts Council
Box 27215
SE-104 60 Stockholm
The Finnish Language Council in Sweden (now part of the Language
Council, see above)
SWEBLUL (Swedish Bureau for Lesser-Used Languages)
+46 8 420 68 892
www.sweblul.se

3. Please indicate if any body or organisation has been consulted on the
preparation of this periodical report or about the implementation of the
recommendations of the Committee of Ministers addressed to your state.
In the case of an affirmative answer, specify which one(s).
The Government’s third report on the implementation of the European
Charter for Regional or Minority Languages has been drafted by the
Ministry of Integration and Gender Equality in cooperation with the
other ministries i.e. the Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Health and Social
Affairs, Ministry of Education and Research, Ministry of Agriculture,
Ministry of Culture and Ministry of Employment.

14

When compiling the report, information has been gathered from the
relevant authorities, including the Norrbotten County Administrative
Board, the National Agency for School Improvement, the National
Agency for Education and the National Courts Administration.
Furthermore, a consultation meeting concerning the report, to which
organisations representing all national minorities were invited, was held
on 4 September 2007. SWEBLUL and the Delegation for Roma Issues
were also invited. An opportunity to comment on the report was given
to all the delegates during the meeting. The following organisations were
invited to the consultation meeting:
The Sameting (Sami parliament)
Sverigefinländarnas delegation (Delegation of the Sweden Finns)
Svenska Tornedalingars Riksförbund – Tornionlaaksolaiset (Swedish
Tornedalian Association)
Judiska Centralrådet (Official Council of Jewish Communities in
Sweden)
Riksförbundet Romer i Europa (Roma in Europe National Union)
Riksförbundet Roma International (National Union Roma
International)
Resandefolkets Romanoa Riksförbund (Travellers’ Romany Association)
Föreningen Resande Folkets Riksorganisation (National Organisation of
the Association of Travellers)
Romernas Riksförbund formerly Nordiska Zigenarrådet (Roma National
Union formerly Nordic Gypsy Council)
Representatives of the Sameting, Delegation of the Sweden Finns,
Swedish Tornedalian Association, National Union Roma International,
Travellers’ Romany Association, SWEBLUL and the Delegation for
Roma Issues were present at the meeting.
4. Please indicate the measures taken (in accordance with Article 6 of the
Charter) to make better known the rights and the duties deriving from the
application of the Charter.
The Swedish minorities policy is intersectoral. In order to bring about
effective, sustainable implementation of this policy, an interministerial
working group has been in place since 2000. The working group, which is
headed by the Ministry of Integration and Gender Equality, comprises
officials from the Ministry of Justice, Ministry for Foreign Affairs,
Ministry of Education and Research, Ministry of Culture, Ministry of
Health and Social Affairs and Ministry of Agriculture. The working
groups tasks are to coordinate government minorities policy measures,
strive to ensure the policy has an impact within various subject areas and
help to monitor and evaluate it. During 2005, the work done by the
group has helped to raise the level of awareness of national minorities

15
within the Swedish Government Offices and to integrate the minorities
perspective into the relevant sector policies to a greater extent than
before.
Education on the Government’s undertakings with respect to the
Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities (the
Framework Convention) and the European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages (the Minority Language Charter) has been included
in the training programme held four times a year for new Swedish
Government Offices employees.
Norrbotten County Administrative Board has the task of monitoring
the application of the acts concerning the right to use Sami, Finnish and
Meänkieli in dealings with public authorities and courts (SFS 1999:1175
and SFS 1999:1176). The County Administrative Board also distributes
government grants to municipalities and county councils in accordance
with the Ordinance (SFS 2000:86) on government grants for measures to
support the use of Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli . The County
Administrative Board reports annually to the Government on how
government funding is being distributed to municipalities and county
councils and on the results and costs of regional initiatives. Information
to the general public concerning the acts on the right to use Sami,
Finnish and Meänkieli in dealings with public authorities and courts of
law is given on the Norrbotten County Administrative Board website.
Information on the special legislation governing national minority
languages is also part of the introduction training given to new county
administrative board employees.
A special working group at the County Administrative Board has
evaluated the extent to which the authorities comply with the legislation
governing minority languages and the extent to which individuals invoke
it. The evaluation shows, among other things, that the use of minority
languages in dealings with public authorities and courts is associated with
various difficulties and that information initiatives need to be improved.
It also shows that, as regards the legislation concerning national minority
languages, it is important to gain deeper knowledge about the extent to
which individuals are able to utilise the rights and opportunities offered
by the legislation.
In an effort to increase awareness of the minority language legislation,
the County Administrative Board working group, in cooperation with
the Norrbotten Branch of the Swedish Association of Local Authorities,
organised a conference in Jokkmokk at the end of 2004. This resulted in
cooperation between the two bodies being further strengthened in order
to help the Association to stimulate its member municipalities to extend
their collaboration on minority language issues within the various fields
of public administration. Reports by the County Administrative Board
to the Government show that efforts are ongoing to draw up minorities

16
policy action plans within all the municipalities covered by the minority
language legislation.
An information project “Information in minority languages” is currently
ongoing. In the project, the municipalities within the administrative
districts for minority languages, the Norrbotten Branch of the Swedish
Association of Local Authorities, Norrbotten County Council and
Norrbotten County Administrative Board are cooperating to increase
the amount of information available in the national minority languages.
The County Administrative Board is also using the following tools to
disseminate information on the rights and obligations implicit in the
Minority Languages Charter and on minorities policy decisions taken by
the Riksdag:
– Advertisements in newspapers and other publications,
– Provision of background material to the mass media which has resulted
in a large number of articles aimed at disseminating knowledge about the
Swedish minorities policy and the special conditions in the county,
– Hosting of or participation in several annual conferences/seminars in
cooperation with various actors, including the Norrbotten Branch of the
Swedish Association of Local Authorities, organisations representing the
national minorities, ministries and cultural organisations where the target
groups have been regional/local authorities, cultural organisations,
nonprofit associations, etc. The aim has been to disseminate knowledge
about, generate commitment for and develop methods for supporting
the minority languages,
– Regular meetings with the relevant municipalities, county councils and
the Norrbotten Branch of the Swedish Association of Local Authorities
to discuss how to use government funding, joint investigations and
activities concerning national minority issues and
– Cooperation with the Luleå University of Technology in the form of
investigative tasks and support to feasibility studies regarding the
possible establishment of a research centre for national minorities and
minority languages at the university, etc.
Through its evaluation of implemented government initiatives, the
Committee on the Constitution at the Swedish Riksdag has followed up
the decision on national minorities and minority languages adopted by
the Riksdag in 1999.3 The follow-up shows that there is a gap between
central government and the municipal level when it comes to
implementation of the minorities policy. One conclusion drawn by the
Committee from the follow-up is that each national minority should be
analysed separately in relation to the Framework Convention and the
Minority Languages Charter. The Committee on the Constitution at the
3 Åström, Nationella minoriteter och minoritetsspråk – konstitutionsutskottets uppföljning av 1999 års riksdagsbeslut
[National minorities and minority languages - follow-up of the 1999 Riksdag decision by the Committee on the
Constitution]. Background, contents and results.

17
Swedish Riksdag arranged a hearing in March 2006 on the
abovementioned follow-up of the minorities policy. The hearing was
broadcast on national television.
For the goals of the Government’s minorities policy to be fulfilled, the
needs and interests of national minorities must be considered in all parts
of the country and in all areas of society. This is true for central agencies,
as well as for regional and local authorities.
Local self-governance has a long tradition in Sweden and is an important
part of Swedish democracy. The local self-governance means that there
shall be an independence for the municipalities, and within certain
frameworks, free right of determination in certain matters of public
interest that are linked to the municipality’s own areas or its members
and that are not exclusively dealt with by central government. Several of
the areas regulated in the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages are areas that are not exclusively regulated by central
government. The Government has taken steps to increase knowledge
about the minorities policy and to improve its implementation on all
levels of society, particularly on the local level.
As a result of the conclusions reached by the Committee on the
Constitution in the abovementioned evaluation of the Swedish
minorities policy and the recommendations submitted to Sweden by the
Council of Europe concerning the application of the Framework
Convention and the Minority Languages Charter in Sweden, the
Government sent out a minorities policy questionnaire to all 290
municipalities in the country. The aim of the questionnaire was to
disseminate knowledge about the rights and obligations implicit in the
Framework Convention and Minority Languages Charter, to obtain
information on how the municipalities are progressing with their
implementation of the convention and charter and how they want the
Government to support them in their application of the convention and
charter on the local level.
During the autumn of 2007, the Government is planning to hold a
national conference on the national minorities, minority languages and
the rights and obligations implicit in the Framework Convention and the
Minority Languages Charter, in cooperation with the Swedish
Association of Local Authorities and Regions. The recommendations of
the Council of Europe and the results of the abovementioned
questionnaire survey will form part of the basis of the conference.
In March 2006, the Government submitted its report En nationell
handlingsplan för de mänskliga rättigheterna 2006-2009 [A national action
plan for human rights, 2006-2009] (Government Communication
2005/06:95) to the Swedish Riksdag. Before establishing the action plan,
a survey of the situation regarding human rights in Sweden was

18
performed. The survey is based on the opinions put forward by
international bodies, the evaluation of the first action plan and a number
of “reference groups”, including NGOs, municipalities and central
agencies in Sweden. The survey also covers the situation for the national
minorities and the action plan announces a number of measures affecting
them. The action plan has been distributed to all the municipalities in
Sweden, several organisations including all organisations representing the
national minorities in Sweden and central agencies.
As part of Sweden’s follow-up of the Council of Europe
recommendations regarding compliance with the Framework
Convention in Sweden, the Government organised a seminar in April
2005 in cooperation with the Council of Europe. The seminar discussed
issues regarding implementation of the Framework Convention at the
local level and legislation for the protection of national minorities, as
well as language issues. Representatives of the Council of Europe, the
Swedish Government, the Swedish Government Offices and other
relevant central agencies, municipalities and national minorities took part
in the seminar.
As mentioned in Sweden’s second report to the Council of Europe on
the implementation of the Minority Languages Charter in Sweden, the
Government organised two regional conferences, one in Göteborg in
December 2003 and one in Stockholm in April 2004, on human rights
and national minorities. The report also mentioned another conference
that was to take place in Luleå in December 2004. This conference went
ahead as planned. The aim of the conference was to disseminate
knowledge about Sweden’s undertakings under the Framework
Convention and the National Minorities Charter. These conferences
were primarily for representatives of municipalities, county councils and
certain central agencies. The conferences showed that there is a
considerable need to problematise and concretise the significance of
Sweden’s undertakings for the national minorities and the minority
languages at the local level. In order to facilitate and encourage such a
process, the Government has given Göteborg University the task of
producing a handbook on human rights and national minorities for
municipal activities. The handbook is to be designed as a practical tool
for local politicians and civil servants and is to concretise how municipal
activities can promote human rights and the rights of national minorities.
The task shall finally be presented during the autumn of 2007.
The Government has also given the Sami Parliament the task of
compiling a draft handbook for how municipalities and other public
administrations can draw more attention to the Sami language in
practice, improve the Sami language skills of its employees and increase
the general public’s use of Sami in contacts with municipalities and other
administrations. The handbook is to be presented on 31 January 2008.
The Sami Parliament has also initiated a drive to establish contact with

19
municipalities in the South Sami region in order to inform about Sami as
a national minority language and offer the municipalities support and
help in the issue.
In order to strengthen the position of Romani women, a special project
was initiated in this area in 2002. A working group was formed
comprising Romani women and representatives of the Swedish
Government Offices. Since February 2005, the working group has held a
number of seminars on the regional level with and about Romani women
and with municipality officials who work with Roma issues. The
objective has been to discuss the situation facing Romani girls and
women as regards education and working life and to stimulate and
inspire the formation of local networks among Romani women. A
seminar was held in Stockholm in 2005 and seminars have also been
conducted in Malmö, Luleå and Göteborg during the spring of 2006.
This work has now been taken over by the Delegation for Roma Issues.
For further information on the delegation, refer to the Introduction,
Point 5.
In order to inform about the minorities policy and Sweden’s
undertakings under the Framework Convention and Minority Languages
Charter, information has been posted on both the Government’s
website, www.regeringen.se and on the Government’s human rights
website at www.manskligarattigheter.se. The Minority Languages
Charter is also available in both Swedish and English on these websites.
On two occasions, information posted on the human rights website has
particularly focused on national minorities - in 2003 on the subject of
Roma and in 2004 on the theme of national minorities.
As Sweden mentioned in its previous reports to the Council of Europe
concerning the implementation of the Minority Languages Charter, the
Government has produced a brochure on the acts concerning the right to
use Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli in dealings with public authorities and
courts (SFS 1999:1175 and 1999:1176). This brochure is still being
distributed.
The Government has also produced a fact-sheet on the national
minorities and minority languages. The fact-sheet is available in Swedish,
English and all the national minority languages and can be downloaded
from the Government’s website and the Government’s human rights
website.
To disseminate knowledge about the national minorities, minority
languages and Sweden’s undertakings under the Framework Convention
and Minority Languages Charter to a wider audience, the Government
Offices are also participating in various large-scale national events such
as the Annual Human Rights Days and the Göteborg International Book
Fair.

20

Both the Swedish Arts Council and the Swedish Institute for
Dialectology, Onomastics and Folklore Research are actively
disseminating cultural information to the general public on the
significance of Yiddish, Romani Chib, Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli as
national minority languages in Sweden in accordance with the
undertakings in the Minority Languages Charter. This is being done
through, inter alia, web-based information initiatives.
As far as education is concerned, the National Agency for Education has
produced an information pack on the rights of the national minorities in
schools, in conjunction with the Agency’s publication of an in-depth
study of the situation of Roma in Swedish schools (report 292:2007) in
the spring of 2007. The information pack will be distributed to
municipalities and schools during the spring and at the beginning of the
autumn 2007. Furthermore, the National Agency for School
Improvement has published the folder “Moving between Languages” in
16 different languages, in order to inform people of their right to home
language teaching. The folder is primarily aimed at parents but also at
schools and municipalities.

5. It is understood that the full details of the measures taken to implement
the recommendations of the Committee of Ministers will appear in the
body of the report. Nevertheless, please summarise those measures for each
recommendation.
1. Implement the proposals from the Government Investigation for the
Finnish and South Sami Languages calling for an extension of the
administrative districts for Finnish and Sami and the adoption of special
legislation on regional or minority languages and the establishment of a
national agency to oversee implementation.
The investigator submitted its interim report on 1 May 2005 entitled
Rätten till mitt språk - förstärkt minoritetsskydd [The right to my language Reinforced minority protection] (Official Government Report 2005:40)
The commission submitted its final report on 21 February 2006 entitled
Att återta mitt språk - Åtgärder för att stärka det samiska språket
[Reclaiming my language - Measures to strengthen the Sami language]
(Official Government Report 2006:19). The investigator proposes an
extension to both the Finnish and the Sami administrative districts and
puts forward other proposals in the minorities policy area. The
investigators proposals has been circulated for comments and thereafter
discussed within the Swedish Government Offices. This discussion has
led to a decision to gather supplementary information.
The gathering of supplementary information

21
In July 2007, the Ministry of Integration and Gender Equality initiated
an investigation into whether there are viable alternatives to the current
system of geographically delimited “administrative districts” for
language, within which people are entitled to use Sami, Finnish and
Meänkieli at public authorities and courts of law. The investigator will
submit its final report by 30 December 2007.
Refer to Part II, Article 7.1.d for more detailed information.
2. Implement practical measures to strengthen access to the teaching of
regional or minority languages by remedying the prevailing structural
problems and resource problems and by formulating special strategies to
increase access to teachers and offer lower secondary school education in
regional or minority languages.
Practical measures have been implemented to strengthen the access to
teaching in the national minority languages. The National Agency for
School Improvement has arranged national conferences for Sami,
Meänkieli and Romani Chib. A number of language and cultural
activities in conjunction with the national minority groups’ work with
the Agency’s website Tema Modersmål (Mother tongue theme website)
have also been implemented for Yiddish, Romani Chib, Sami and
Meänkieli. Information about these activities is conveyed to almost 2 000
people every year in the form of newsletters, seminars and conferences.
The aim is to increase knowledge about and change attitudes towards
teaching in regional or minority languages. A brochure entitled “Moving
between languages” is available in languages such as Romani Chib (Arli)
and Finnish. The Agency has also produced teaching media in Romani
Chib, for Swedish-speaking Roma and Swedish, travelling Roma. A
Swedish-Romani Chib dictionary has also been compiled. The Agency
has also developed a digital image and sound dictionary in, for example,
Finnish and North, Lule and South Sami for use in pre-schools and
schools. Information on how to adapt working tools and on new
resources for language development is available for regional and minority
languages on the Mother tongue theme website.
Further information on the work being done by the National Agency for
School Improvement can be found in Part II, Article 7 and Part III.
Refer to Part II, Article 7.1.h for information on university studies in
Yiddish and Romani Chib.
3. Adapt the existing forms of teaching in regional or minority languages to
Sweden’s undertaking under the Charter, by, for example, increasing the
quality of and access to “mother tongue” tuition and implement suitable
measures for bilingual teaching.

22
In May 2003, the Government decided to implement a pilot scheme for
mother tongue tuition in nine-year compulsory school for a period of
four years. The pilot scheme, which started in 2004, has made it easier to
provide mother tongue tuition for the national minorities. One of the
elements of distance learning courses for national minority languages is
information about other national minority languages. The tuition is for
pupils from grade 6 in compulsory school (12-13 year-olds) and is given
in different languages, e.g. Sami and Meänkieli. The National Agency for
School Improvement intends to develop these activities further.
Refer to Part II, Article 7.1.f for more information.
4. As a matter of urgency, to adopt flexible and innovative measures to
preserve the South Sami language.
In cooperation with e.g. the Sami Education Board, the National Agency
for School Improvement has made efforts to promote the development
and production of teaching media and dictionaries in South Sami. Older
South Sami teaching resources have also been made available online.
Umeå University is arranging part-time courses in South Sami, making it
easier for students who want to combine language studies with other
studies.
For more information refer to Part II, Article 7.1.f and Part III, Article 8
regarding the Sami language.
5. Establish a structured policy and implement organisational measures to
encourage oral and written use of Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli in contacts
with courts of law and public administrations within the specified
administrative districts.
The Norrbotten County Administrative Board, one of whose tasks is to
enforce special language legislation that applies inside the administrative
districts, has urged municipalities in these districts to draw up action
plans to encourage the oral and written use of Sami, Finnish and
Meänkieli in contacts with public authorities and courts of law.
For more information refer to Part III, Article 10 regarding Sami.
6. Encourage and/or facilitate the establishment and/or preservation of at
least one newspaper in Sami and Meänkieli.
In its second report on the implementation of the European Charter for
Regional or Minority Languages, Sweden informed about the

23
Government’s intentions to appoint a commission on the media,
Presskommittén [the Swedish Press Committee]. According to the Press
Committee’s directive, it was to highlight/study the scope for improving
the situation for the national minorities. As the Committee of Experts
noted (Points 147 and 286), the Press Committee submitted its final
report in January 2006. The report included inter alia proposals for
amendments to the press subsidies that are intended to facilitate the
publication of daily newspapers in languages other than Swedish,
including Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli. The Press Committee’s report
has been circulated for comments.
Based on the Press Committee’s report, the Riksdag decided in June
2006 to make certain changes to the production subsidies that were to
come into force on 1 January 2007 (Government Bill 2005/06:201,
Committee Report 2005/06:KU40, Government Communication
2005/06:367). According to this decision, the minimum requirement for
the number of copies in a newspaper issue was reduced from 2 000 to 1
500 subscribed copies, which lowered the threshold for establishing new
daily newspapers in both Swedish and minority languages. The Riksdag
decision did not contain any of the proposals for changes that were
especially intended to facilitate the publication of daily newspapers in
languages other than Swedish.
The European Commission was notified of the changes in production
subsidies adopted by the Riksdag but then announced that the changes
could not preliminarily be approved. Instead, a review of the entire
production subsidy system would be undertaken to examine whether it
was compatible with the European common market. With regard to the
Commission’s decision, the Riksdag decided that the amended
conditions for production subsidies would not come into force on 1
January 2007 but at a later date determined by the Government.
The European Commission’s review of the press subsidies is still
ongoing, and before it is concluded, it is impossible to implement the
adopted changes or implement new amendments to the press subsidies.
Refer also to Part II, Article 7.1.c regarding the support given by the
Swedish Arts Council to cultural magazines published in e.g. Sami and
Meänkieli.
7. Take measures to increase awareness and understanding of regional and
minority languages in Swedish society as a whole.
Promoting awareness and understanding of regional and minority
languages is an integral part of the cultural aspects of the national
minorities policy. Support has also been given by the Swedish Arts
Council for information campaigns concerning the national minorities.

24
The Swedish Institute for Dialectology, Onomastics and Folklore
Research is also working actively to inform about the national minority
languages, their history and use.
Refer to Part II, Article 7.3 for further information on measures taken to
increase respect and knowledge concerning the national minorities and
their languages.

6. Indicate what steps your state has taken to inform the following of the
recommendations:
– all levels of government (national, federal, local and regional authorities
or administration);
– judicial authorities;
– legally established bodies and associations.
The Council of Europe’s Committee of Experts on the application of the
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages has presented the
results of its first review of Sweden’s implementation of the European
Charter for Regional or Minority Languages (the Minority Languages
Charter) and the Council of Europe’s Committee of Ministers has
thereafter adopted a resolution containing certain conclusions and
recommendations. The report and the resolution are available in their
original language on the Government’s human rights website at
www.manskligarattigheter.se. The resolution has also been translated
into Swedish and all the national minority languages. These translations
are also available via the website. The resolution and the
recommendations it contains have also been sent to all the organisations
that represent the national minorities and other relevant parties on
several occasions, often in conjunction with meeting invitations.
Sweden submitted its second report to the Council of Europe on its
compliance with the Minority Language Charter in June 2004. The
Council of Europe Committee of Experts presented the results of its
review in a report in March 2006 and the Committee of Ministers
adopted its recommendations in September of the same year. This report
and recommendations are also available via the Government’s human
rights website. The recommendations have been translated into Swedish
and will also be translated into the national minority languages. The
resolution and the recommendations it contains have also been sent to all
the organisations that represent the national minorities and other
relevant parties on several occasions, often in conjunction with meeting
invitations.
The recommendations submitted by the Council of Europe regarding
the Framework Convention and Minority Languages Charter are also
discussed in the training course given to new employees in the Swedish
Government Offices (see above under Part I, Point 4).

25

7. Please explain how your state has involved the above, in implementing
the recommendations.
The Government has regular consultation meetings with representatives
of the national minority organisations. For further information on this
point, refer to Part I, Points 4, 5 (Recommendations 5 and 6) and Part
III, Article 10 regarding Sami.

26

PART II

1. Please indicate what measures your State has taken to apply Article 7 of
the Charter to the regional or minorities languages referred to in
paragraphs 2 and 4 of Part I above, specifying the different levels of
government responsible.
Measures that the Swedish authorities have implemented in relation to
regional- or minority languages and non-territorial languages in
accordance with Article 7 of the Charter:
Article 7 Objectives and principles
1. In respect of regional or minority languages, within the territories in
which such languages are used and according to the situation of each
language, the Parties shall base their policies, legislation and practice on the
following objectives and principles:
a) the recognition of the regional or minority languages as an expression of
cultural wealth;
b) the respect of the geographical area of each regional or minority
language in order to ensure that existing or new administrative divisions
do not constitute an obstacle to the promotion of the regional or minority
language in question;
c) the need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages
in order to safeguard them;
d) the facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of regional or minority
languages, in speech and writing, in public and private life;
e) the maintenance and development of links, in the fields covered by this
Charter, between groups using a regional or minority language and other
groups in the State employing a language used in identical or similar form,
as well as the establishment of cultural relations with other groups in the
State using different languages;
f) the provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study
of regional and minority languages at all appropriate stages;
g) the provision of facilities enabling non- speakers of a regional or
minority language living in the area where it is used to learn if they so
desire;
h) the promotion of study and research on regional or minority languages
at universities or equivalent institution;
i) the promotion of appropriate types of transnational exchanges, in the
fields covered by this Charter, for regional or minority languages used in
identical or similar form in two or more States.

27

2. The Parties undertake to eliminate, if they have not yet done so, any
unjustified distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference relating to the
use of a regional or minority language nor intend to discourage or
endanger the maintenance or development of it. The adoption of special
measures in favour of regional or minority languages aimed at promoting
equality between the users of these languages and rest of the population or
which take due account of their specific conditions is not considered to be
an act of discrimination against the users of more widely used languages.
3. The Parties undertake to promote, by appropriate measures, mutual
understanding between all the linguistic groups of the country and in
particular the inclusion of respect, understanding and tolerance in relation
to regional or minority languages among the objectives of education and
training provided within their countries and encouragement of the mass
media to pursue the same objective.
4. In determining their policy with regard to regional or minority
languages, the Parties shall take into consideration the needs and wishes
expressed by the groups which use such languages. They are encouraged to
establish bodies, if necessary, for the purpose of advising the authorities on
all matters pertaining to regional or minority languages.
5. The parties undertake to apply, mutatis mutandis, the principles listed in
paragraphs 1 to 4 above to non-territorial languages. However, as far as
these languages are concerned, the nature and scope of the measures to be
taken to give effect to this Charter shall be determined in a flexible
manner, bearing in mind the needs and wishes, and respecting the
traditions and characteristics, of the groups which use the languages
concerned.

Article 7.1.a – Recognition of regional or minority languages as an
expression of cultural wealth
In December 1999, the Riksdag adopted the Government’s proposal in
Bill 1998/99:143 Nationella minoriteter i Sverige [National Minorities in
Sweden] (Committee Report 1999/2000:KU6, Government
Communication 1999/2000:69). The Government subsequently ratified
the Council of Europe Framework Convention for the Protection of
National Minorities (the Framework Convention) and the European
Charter for Regional or Minority Languages (the Minority Language
Charter). Since then, minorities policy has been established as a separate
policy sector and a minister has been appointed with responsibility for it.
Following the general election in September 2007, the Minister

28
responsible for minorities policy has been Nyamko Sabuni, the Minister
for Integration and Gender Equality.
The Riksdag’s decision to recognise Jews, Roma, Sami, Swedish Finns
and Tornedalers as national minorities, and their languages Yiddish,
Romani Chib (all variants), Sami (all variants), Finnish and Meänkieli as
national minority languages, is a recognition of their important part in
Sweden’s cultural heritage and hence a manifestation of cultural wealth.
Since the national minorities’ culture, language and religion are
important parts of Sweden’s cultural heritage, the curricula and syllabi
for the nine-year compulsory and upper secondary schools (Lpo 94 and
Lpf 94) lay down that there must be teaching about the national
minorities and the minority languages.
Another manifestation of the recognition of the important share of
Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli in the Swedish cultural heritage was the
introduction of Acts (1999:1175 and 1999:76) concerning the right to
use Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli in dealings with public authorities and
courts. The monitoring of the acts concerning the right to use minority
languages, which has been carried out at the behest of the Riksdag’s
Committee on the Constitution, shows that the laws have had a positive
effect in raising the status of the languages and that the reform has
resulted in other measures which have been of benefit to the national
minorities. (cf. Part I, Point 4)
Article 7.1.b – Respect for the geographical region of every regional
or minority language
The current division of Sweden into municipalities and counties does not
constitute a barrier to the promotion of regional or minority languages.
The municipalities in Norrbotten which are administrative districts for
Finnish and Meänkieli are among those in the region which have the
highest number of Finnish-speaking inhabitants. In addition, the
population in a number of these municipalities comprises Tornedalers,
many of whom speak Meänkieli. Therefore the prevailing division into
municipalities has not been regarded as a barrier to the promotion of
these languages. As regards Sami, the population is more widely spread
over a larger area. Nevertheless, the Sami population is more
concentrated in the administrative districts for Sami than in other parts
of Sweden. Even if there are pockets of Sami inhabitants in many
municipalities in northern Sweden, this has not been considered a barrier
to drawing the boundaries of the present administrative districts.
As stated by Sweden in its two previous reports on the implementation
of the European Charter on Regional or Minority Languages (the
Minority Language Charter), the Swedish Municipality and County

29
Council Boundaries Act (1979:411) adequately provides for the
implementation of the obligations laid down in the Minority Languages
Charter. Chapter 1, Section 1 of the same act makes provision for
changes in the division into municipalities if such changes may be
assumed to bring lasting benefit to a municipality, or part of one, or
other benefits to the population at large. Particular attention must be
paid to the wishes and views of the municipality or municipalities most
closely affected by the change. If such a municipality is opposed to a
revision of the municipal boundaries, a decision to change them can only
be promulgated if there are special reasons for it. Particular attention
must also be paid to the wishes and views of the local inhabitants.
According to the preparatory works for the Municipality and County
Council Boundaries Act (1979:411), the boundaries may not be redrawn
unless there are good objective reasons to do so (Government Bill
1978/79:145 Proposed law on changes in the division of the state into
municipalities, county councils and parishes, etc.). All advantages and
disadvantages must be taken into careful consideration. Judgement must
be based on the conditions in the population.
Against that background, the Government considers that the legislation
satisfactorily guarantees that changes in the division into municipalities
and county councils cannot take place if they would be contrary to the
promotion of regional or minority languages.
Article 7.1.c – Measures to promote regional or minority languages
State subsidies
It has been possible for a few years now for organisations representing
national minority groups to receive state subsidies. The aim of these
subsidies is to promote efforts that strengthen the culture and identity of
such groups, support minorities policy and allow the groups to exert
more influence in society. As from 2006, this state support is regulated
by the Ordinance (2005:765) on state subsidies for national minorities.
A total of SEK 4 million is available every year.
Language and culture
The Swedish Arts Council is responsible for implementation of the
cultural policy laid down by the Government and the Riksdag. It
allocates funds in sectors such as drama, dance, music, literature, public
libraries, cultural journals, museums, exhibitions and art. One task is to
promote contacts between the various cultures in Sweden.
At the initiative of the Government, it earlier examined different ways of
giving Jewish, Romany, Yiddish, Sweden-Finnish and Tornedal culture
greater scope in Swedish cultural life. Its report, ‘De nationella
minoriteterna och kulturlivet’ [The national minorities and cultural life]

30
(Swedish Arts Council 2001:4), was submitted to the Government in
2001 and the outcome was that since 2002, the Swedish Arts Council has
had a particular responsibility, and special resources, to promote the
languages and culture of the national minorities. This in turn has enabled
a significant increase in the state support given to cultural centres,
libraries and theatres, etc. The Arts Council shall carry out measures
based on the focus laid down in the draft budget for 2002, while taking
into account the recognition accorded by the Riksdag to Finnishlanguage theatre (Government Bill 2001/02:1, expenditure area 17,
Committee Report 2001/02:KrU1, p. 35). The Government has every
year earmarked special funds for this purpose, now amounting to SEK 8
million per annum. These funds are allocated by the Swedish Arts
Council in sectors such as literature, libraries, theatre and dance,
museums, language development and the dissemination of information.
The Swedish Arts Council has also provided state support to the
Tornedal Theatre, Uusi Teatteri (Sweden-Finnish theatre group), the
Roma Cultural Centre in Stockholm, the Roma Library in Malmö, and
the Jewish community. These are just some examples of activities that
have received state cultural subsidies. In issues concerning both the
allocation of this support and the culture and languages of Sweden’s
national minorities, the Swedish Arts Council consults representatives of
the national minorities, through e.g. The Swedish Bureau for Lesser
Used Languages (SWEBLUL). As part of this consultation process,
SWEBLUL sends copies of subsidy applications received by the Swedish
Arts Council to organisations representing the national minorities,
which in turn propose who they think should receive the support. Their
opinions are then considered before the Swedish Arts Council makes a
final assessment. According to information from the Swedish Arts
Council and representatives of the national minorities organisations, this
consultation works effectively and in most cases the organisations and
the Swedish Arts Council arrive at the same conclusion about the way in
which budgetary allocations should be made.
Cultural journals
Since 1999, the Swedish Arts Council has also had a special task to give
support to the cultural journals of national minorities. It must primarily
be allocated in the form of production support but can also be accorded
to projects or information efforts with a view to stimulating publications
of this kind. During 2006, the Swedish Arts Council allocated a total of
SEK 500 000 to six journals which are published wholly or partly in
Yiddish, Romani Chib, Sami, Sweden-Finnish and Meänkieli.
The Sameting Council for Cultural Affairs
For information, refer to Part III, Article 12.1.a regarding Sami.
The Year of Cultural Diversity in Sweden
The Government proclaimed 2006 the Year of Cultural Diversity in
Sweden’. The aim was to increase awareness of the significance of ethnic

31
and cultural diversity in cultural life. Another objective is to
henceforward increase the ethnic and cultural diversity of state-financed
cultural activities. This implies making cultural activities more
multifaceted and increasing the number of authors, practitioners and
cultural administrators with non-Swedish or minority background so
that they constitute a greater proportion of those who are professional
active within the entire spectrum of state-financed cultural life. During
that year there were certain events and projects linked to the national
minorities languages and culture. Examples that may be mentioned are
the participation by various Regional State Archives in a project, the
purpose of which was to digitalise records containing information about
Sami conditions. These Archives were also involved in activities such as,
for example, an exhibition about children in Tornedalen, lectures about
Jews in Östersund and an investigation of source material on Sami
history.
Film
In the film sector, the Swedish Film Institute has responsibility for the
distribution of state funds. There are no particular language criteria for
film production support by the Institute and it is thus possible also to
apply for it for the production of films in the national minority
languages. In 2006 the Government gave the Film Institute the task of
reviewing the possibilities for promoting film production in the national
minority languages. In its report, the Institute noted that there is only
very limited production of films in these languages in Sweden, but that
the reason is not the difficulty of obtaining production support for them,
but rather the absence of applications for it. The report also makes clear
that there is no broad base for film production in the national minority
languages, even though the situation varies and the Sami to some extent
constitute an exception. One way to increase the number of applications,
according to the Film Institute, would be to make efforts in the
education institutes and in the regional resource and production centres.
Support for Sami films is currently already included in the activity of the
regional production centre, Filmpool Nord. The Film Institute also
emphasises that the import of films produced abroad in the relevant
minority languages would be a means of increasing their availability.
Language conservation
As mentioned earlier in this report, see the Introduction, point 5, in
December 2005 the Riksdag approved the Bill Bästa språket – en samlad
svensk språkpolitik [The Best Language - a Coherent Swedish Language
Policy] (Government Bill 2005/06:2). The language policy objectives
emphasise that everyone must have a right to languages, including
developing and using their own mother tongue and the national minority
language, as well as the opportunity to learn foreign languages.
Measures for language conservation are necessary if the national
minority languages are to develop and be preserved. It is a case of setting

32
norms and standards and of providing advice. In order to promote
achievement of the language policy objectives, state-financed language
conservation has been coordinated and given new resources, which
makes possible increased efforts in support of the national minority
languages. Language conservation – i.e. by the Language Council of
Sweden, the Swedish-Finnish Language Council and the Plain Swedish
Group in the Swedish Government Offices – was grouped together on 1
July, 2006 to form a new authority called the Swedish Institute for
Dialectology, Onomastics and Folklore Research. In total, language
conservation has thereby been reinforced by SEK 4.2 million with effect
from 2006 (of which SEK 2 million in the current year).
Via the new language conservation organisation, the Swedish Institute
for Dialectology, Onomastics and Folklore Research has been given the
task of developing and promoting the conservation of national minority
languages. The Institute also collects, preserves and researches dialects,
place-names, personal names and folklore. Within the new organisation,
the Language Council has responsibility for work on Finnish, Romani
Chib and Yiddish, while the Department of Dialectology, Onomastics
and Folklore Research in Umeå (DAUM) is responsible for Meänkieli
and Sami. However, the Sami Parliament (Sami Language Board) still has
responsibility for conservation of the Sami language. DAUM has
recently appointed a language consultant for Meänkieli, who will take up
work on 3 September, 2007, with responsibility for documentation and
information, as well as research and adding to DAUM’s archive on
Meänkieli.
As a stated above, the Swedish Institute for Dialectology, Onomastics
and Folklore Research has since 1 July, 2006 had responsibility for
conservation of Romani Chib. As representatives of both the Romani
organisations and the Council of Europe have pointed out, there is a lack
of teaching materials in Romani Chib. A precondition for Sweden being
able to produce adequate teaching material in Romani Chib is the
availability of dictionaries, collections of rules for the written language,
grammars, etc. There is today no information about the existence of
material of this kind in Sweden. In light of this, the Government has
tasked the Institute for Language and Folklore to carry out a more
thorough study of the situation of Romani Chib in Sweden. Within the
framework of this task the Institute for Dialectology, Onomastics and
Folklore Research shall
– catalogue what varieties of Romani Chib are spoken in Sweden and the
extent to which the different varieties are used,
– investigate whether in Sweden or other countries there are dictionaries,
rules of the written language, grammars or other forms of teaching
materials for the varieties of Romani spoken in Sweden; and
– submit proposals for how the future work on language conservation
should be carried out for the variants of Romani Chib spoken in Sweden.

33

This task is to be carried out after consultation with a reference group of
representatives of Romani organisations gathered together by Institute
for Dialectology, Onomastics and Folklore Research. A report on the
implementation of this task shall be submitted in February 2008.
On 8 February 2007 the Government decided to appoint a special
investigator to look into the possibility of drafting legislation on
language. The investigator shall also consider whether such legislation
should include regulations about the national minority languages. A
report is to be submitted by no later than 31 December 2007 and the
earliest any possible law could enter into force is 2009.
Archives
The Archives Commission which submitted its final report in 2002
(Arkiv för alla [Archives for all] (Official Government Report 2002:78)
included proposals for measures to facilitate the preservation of archive
material from the national minorities. Among them was a
recommendation that special archive institutions should be given
responsibility for the respective minority languages, that documents
should be digitalised and that resources allocated by the Swedish Arts
Council should be earmarked for these issues. The Government’s
response to the commission’s proposals was contained in a Bill presented
in 2005 (Government Bill 2004/05:124). Its conclusion was that it was
extremely important to ensure the preservation of documents in the
national minority languages and to create equal preconditions for
archives which the national minorities can independently develop
further. Against that background the National Archives was
commissioned to develop forms of work for cooperation with other
institutions and organisations on issues affecting documents in the
national minority languages. This task was to be carried out in
cooperation with representatives of the national minorities. In addition,
the Government recognised that regard should be had to the national
minority groups in appointing members of the Committee on Individual
Archives, the National Archives’ committee on cooperation with, and
support for, individual archives institutions (such as, for example, the
Sweden-Finnish archives).
As a consequence of the task given to the National Archives, a network
of the relevant cultural heritage institutions, cultural centres,
organisations and authorities has been created as a link in future work.
The National Archives has also carried out a series of interviews and
visits in order to obtain knowledge about documents in the languages
concerned and their preservation. In the short term, the work is to be
continued by consolidating the network and by continued cataloguing of
the documents. A nationwide inquiry is planned, as well as a conference
with a various interested parties. In the longer term plans are being laid

34
for assessing and summarising results and for possible proposals for a
more permanent allocation of responsibility.
In this connection, mention should also be made of the efforts to
facilitate digital transmission in other scripts. The National Archives is
making preparations to be able to receive and handle digital material
drafted in scripts other than those ordinarily received, including in the
official minority languages. That applies e.g. to Sami.
Article 7.1.d – Facilitating and/or encouraging use of regional or
minority languages in public and private life
Information efforts
In the years immediately following the parliamentary decision about
Swedish national minorities policy, the Norrbotten County
Administrative Board, the municipalities, regional and local authorities
affected, together with minorities organisations, focused on information
efforts with a view to making minorities policy and the
rights/obligations which follow from the minority language acts betterknown and to increasing the availability of written information,
especially at the local authority level. A further stage in this activity was
to make inquiries/reports in order to obtain a picture of how minority
languages are used and what priorities should be established.
During 2004 the Police, together with the Prosecutor-General, produced
an information brochure intended for those held in detention on
suspicion of crime. It makes clear the rights of those in detention, for
example.
– the right to defence counsel,
– the right to an interpreter for those unable to speak Swedish,
- the right to necessary medical attention,
– the right to communicate with close relatives as soon as that can be
done without prejudicing police inquiries; and
– the right of contact with their consulate, in the case of foreign citizens.
In addition to information about these rights the brochure also gives a
description of the process which gets under way in connection with
detention. This brochure has been translated into Yiddish, Romani Chib,
Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli.
Proposals for extension of the administrative districts for language
As a consequence of the minorities policy introduced in 2000, measures
were taken in a series of policy sectors to meet the policy objectives.
They included the introduction of certain relaxations in the regulations
on nine-year compulsory schooling and upper secondary schooling, in
order to make it easier for the national minorities to receive tuition in
their mother tongue. Other examples are that within the cultural sector

35
certain resources were earmarked for the national minorities cultures (cf.
Part II, Article 7.1.c).
As the Council of Europe’s Committee of Experts is aware, legislation
was introduced following the establishment of the minorities policy. On
1 April 2000, acts entered into force concerning the use of Sami, Finnish
and Meänkieli in dealings with public authorities and courts (1999:1175
and 1176). These language laws came about as a consequence of
Sweden’s ratification of the Framework Convention for the Protection
of National Minorities and the European Charter on Regional or
Minority Languages. The language laws entail the right to use Sami,
Finnish or Meänkieli in dealings with public authorities and courts on
matters related to the exercise of authority and the right to pre-school
and elderly care wholly or partly in one of these three languages. The
application of these laws is limited to certain geographical areas, the
administrative districts, embracing seven municipalities in Norrbotten,
namely Arjeplog, Gällivare, Jokkmokk, Haparanda, Kiruna, Pajala and
Övertorneå.
Against the background of views expressed by the Sweden-Finnish
interest groups, as well as by the Council of Europe, to the effect that
there are also language needs outside the present Finnish administrative
district, the Government appointed a special investigator in January 2004
with the task of analysing preconditions for enlarging the Finnish
administrative district, to include also Stockholm and Mälardalen.
In the course of this work, the question arose of the critical situation for
the South Sami language. Supplementary terms of reference in February
2005 gave the investigator the additional task of analysing the
preconditions for extending the Sami administrative district to apply also
in the South Sami area.
The investigator adopted the name “The Investigation on the Finnish
and South Sami languages” [Utredningen om finska och sydsamiska
språken]. An interim report, Rätten till mitt språk – förstärkt
minoritetsskydd [The right to my language – reinforced minority
protection] (Official Government Report 2005:40) was submitted in
May 2005 and the final report Att återta mitt språk – Åtgärder för att stärka
det samiska språket [Regaining my language – measures to strengthen the
Sami language] (Official Government Report 2006:19) in February 2006.
Its proposals include that the administrative district for Finnish should
be enlarged to extend to a total of 53 municipalities in the Stockholm
and Mälardal region. As regards the Sami language, it is proposed that
administrative district should be enlarged to include an additional 20
municipalities in the South Sami area. By the South Sami area is meant
the southern parts of the traditional Sami language area which comprises

36
parts of the counties of Norrbotten, Västerbotten, Jämtland and
Dalarna.
The extended administrative districts are proposed to embrace the same
rights as apply in the present administrative districts, namely the right to
pre-school and elderly care wholly or partly in Finnish or Sami, as well as
the right to use to Finnish or Sami in dealings with public authorities and
courts in matters related to the exercise of authority.
The cost of enlarging the administrative districts were estimated by the
commission to amount to a total of SEK 92.15 million per year during a
four-year introductory phase (SEK 69.6 million for the Finnish
enlargement and SEK 22.55 million for the Sami enlargement).
These considerations were circulated for formal comment and are now
being processed within the Government Offices.
The gathering of supplementary information
At the behest of the Norrbotten County Administrative Board working
group, which is also mentioned in Part I, point 5, Recommendation 5,
Luleå University of Technology carried out a study of the individual
user’s exploitation of the legal right to use Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli
in dealings with public authorities and courts. The study shows that the
actual increase in the use of minority languages in dealings with both
authorities and courts has been limited. The decisive obstacles, according
to the report, lie in the attitudes and values attaching to use of language
in contacts between officials of the authorities and the language user.
Linguistic, psychological and socioeconomic factors have meant that
individuals have chosen to use Swedish in contacts with the authorities.
In the study it is proposed that a more concentrated effort should be
made, affecting a number of linguistic domains other than those relating
purely to contacts with the authorities, in order to give support to the
minorities.
The Norrbotten County Administrative Board, which exercises
supervision over the special language laws that apply within the
administrative districts, reports annually to the Government on its
follow-up to the regional measures. From these reports, it emerges that
use of the right to contact with the authorities has not noticeably
increased since the above-mentioned study was carried out by Luleå
University of Technology.
Within the framework of the Investigation on the Finnish and South
Sami languages, a study was made of the Swedish-Finns’ and the Sami’s
needs for public service. From this investigation it appears that the
sectors which are stated to be important for public service are schools,
pre-schools, elderly care and healthcare.

37
The present system of administrative districts builds on the idea that a
national minority and its language is concentrated in a certain given
geographical area and that greater protection should be given to the
language in that region. The investigator questions whether the system
of geographically delimited administrative districts is an optimal
solution, because the individual’s possibilities to uphold the minority
language and culture are dependent on where in Sweden he or she lives.
The investigation comes to the view that in the longer term,
consideration should be given to whether the administrative district
model should be supplemented by rights attaching to the individual and
not simply to a specific territory, in the same way as has been done in,
for example, Finland.
When the proposals from the Investigation on the Finnish and Sami
languages were circulated for comment, it emerged that many
municipalities and authorities were neither positive nor negative about
the proposal for extended administrative districts. Against that, the
majority were agreed that the full costs of the proposals must be borne
by the central government. Some of the bodies consulted, including the
Ombudsman against Ethnic Discrimination (DO) and a few
municipalities, argued that there may be better alternatives than the
system of administrative districts. The views put forward included that
rights should be attached to the individual and to important functions of
society that particularly affect individuals.
In July 2007, the Ministry of Integration and Gender Equality initiated a
inquiry into whether there are viable alternatives to the current system of
geographically delimited administrative districts for language, within
which people are entitled to use Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli in dealings
with public authorities and courts.
The inquiry includes examination of whether there is any alternative
system that gives individuals the necessary opportunities to
– use their minority language in contacts with authorities,
– obtain a place in pre-school in which activities are conducted wholly or
partly in the minority language; and
– enjoy elderly care wholly or partly in the minority language.
The inquiry shall
– analyse what real significance extended administrative districts for
Finnish and Sami would have for the possibilities of Swedish Finns and
Sami to develop and preserve their languages, as compared with
alternative models,
– weigh the benefits of an enlarged administrative district against the
financial consequences,
– analyse whether it is possible to satisfy the individual’s right to use his
minority language in contacts with the authorities by means of
legislation already existing in various sectors,

38
– analyse whether it is possible to supplement the existing legislation
within various service sectors in such a way that the national minorities’
language rights are better served; and
- analyse possible negative consequences of substituting the geographical
administrative districts by alternative models and in that way especially
taking into account the significance of the symbolic and statusenhancing value that the present language legislation has for minority
languages.
The aim of the inquiry shall be to achieve a system that lives up to the
national minorities’ right to retain and develop their language in the
private and public context, while ensuring that the financial
consequences are commensurate in relation to the benefit from the
measures.
The situation in the Nordic countries and to some extent in other
European countries will be illuminated and serve as a factual basis for the
inquiry. There will also be consultation with representatives of the
national minorities concerned, with the relevant authorities and the
Commission on Language Law [Språklagsutredningen]. The inquiry will
be conducted during the autumn of 2007.

Access to the media
There is nothing in Swedish law or in practice that prevents national
minorities from producing or using any forms of media. No distinction
is made between people in the basic laws that govern freedom of the
press and freedom of expression. Everyone is free to start and run media
companies or to use or not use the media. Nonetheless, the Swedish
Government has considered it important to implement appropriate
measures to facilitate access to the mass media for persons belonging to
national minorities.
Public service television and radio have a major responsibility to pay
heed to the needs of the national minorities. From the broadcasting
licences for the Swedish public service companies – Sveriges Television
(SVT), Sveriges Radio (SR) and Sveriges Utbildningsradio (UR)
[Education Broadcasting Company] – it has long been evident, and
remains so, that work on behalf of language and ethnic minorities is a
priority area. The licence applicable until 2002 placed Sami, Finnish and
Meänkieli in a special position in programme activity. Since 2002
Romani Chib has also had a similar special position and the public
service companies have also had to take account of the fact that Yiddish
likewise has the status of a minority language. In March 2006 the
Government approved the Bill Viktigare än någonsin! Radio och TV i
allmänhetens tjänst 2007-2012 [More important than ever! - Public
service radio and television 2007-2012] (Government Bill 2005/06:112).

39
It sets out the overarching guidelines that apply to SVT, SR and UR
during the present licensing period 2007-2009. According to the
broadcasting licences for the present period, the companies must take
into account linguistic and ethnic minorities’ interests. This activity must
be a priority area and access to it must be improved. The minority
languages Sami, Finnish, Meänkieli Romani Chib must be given a special
position. In addition, the public service companies must conduct a
dialogue with the groups affected. As regards Yiddish, it was stated in
the Bill (Government Bill 2005/06:112) that there are currently too few
Yiddish speakers in Sweden to justify this group’s being given a special
position in programming, but the public service companies should take
account of the fact that Yiddish has the status of a minority language in
Sweden.

Radio and TV broadcasts in minority languages
It is up to the public service companies to shape their programming
within the framework of the generally applicable formulations in the
broadcasting licences. Sveriges Television (SVT) broadcasts various
programmes in Romani Chib, Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli. During
2005, programmes in Romani Chib were sent in the form of two
documentaries produced in-house. During 2006 SVT broadcast no
programmes in Romani Chib.
In 2006 Sveriges Radio (SR) broadcast nationwide programmes in twelve
different languages, of which four were in national minority languages.
During 2006 SR broadcast 165 hours in Romani Chib, an increase over
2005 when SR broadcast 120 hours in Romani Chib. SR broadcasts in
Romani Chib in 2005 consisted both of a 30 minute current affairs
programme dealing with everyday issues for Roma in Sweden, and of a
news and current affairs programme with a mixture of social information
and material on Romani culture.
SR has also broadcast programmes about and with Yiddish speakers.
For information about TV and radio broadcasts in Sami, Finnish and
Meänkieli, see Part III, Article 11 for the respective languages.
IT accessibility
IT is of importance not only to the majority population but also to the
national minorities. One problem for the Sami group has been that there
has been no support for the language in data-processing. For that reason
the Nordic Ministers for Sami Affairs and the Presidents of the Sami
Parliaments made an approach to the IT industry to bring about a
change. So far the result has been that as from 2004 there has been
support for the Sami language in the latest version of Windows.
Continued efforts are being made in this area, including drawing the

40
attention of the authorities to this possibility. Thanks to the Nordic
work, there is also support for the Sami language in the new European
Telecommunications Standard for mobile telephones. Provided that the
mobile telephone industry applies this standard, it is possible to send and
receive text messages (sms) in Sami.
Elderly care
According to law, elderly people speaking Finnish or Meänkieli have the
right to receive care wholly or partly in these languages within the
relevant administrative district, which comprises Gällivare, Haparanda,
Kiruna, Pajala and Övertorneå.4 The same applies to Sami, for which the
administrative district comprises Arjeplog, Gällivare, Jokkmokk and
Kiruna. In addition, the needs of the elderly who belong to the national
minorities must be taken into account nationwide.
In the spring of 2006, the Swedish Association of Local Authorities and
Regions conducted a questionnaire survey including questions about
whether the municipalities provide care and healthcare in the languages
of the national minorities. A total of 281 of the 290 municipalities in
Sweden replied to the inquiry. The report on it shows that health and
social care in a national minority language is given as regards Romani
Chib: in seven municipalities; Meänkieli: seven municipalities; Sami:
four municipalities; Yiddish: three municipalities; and Finnish: 70
municipalities.

Article 7.1.e – Cooperation between speakers of the same language
and other languages
Applications involving several groups that speak one of the national
minority languages have often been among the projects supported by the
Swedish Arts Council. Of particular importance from this aspect is
nevertheless primarily SWEBLUL, the Swedish National Committee for
the European Bureau for Lesser-Used Languages (EBLUL), which also is
consulted in matters affecting cultural support. SWEBLUL is an
association that represents all five national minorities in Sweden. It is
engaged in issues that affect all national minority languages in Sweden
and because of the common interests is therefore an asset for all groups.
It has on various occasions received funds from the Swedish Arts
Council, including SEK 200 000 jointly with the Sami Parliament for
information projects in 2005 and SEK 100 000 for the same purpose in
2006. Both previously and in the present year, money has been allocated
for song competitions in which participants perform in various minority
languages. The organisation has a rotating chairmanship and its
4

SFS 1999:1175 and 1176.

41
administration is conducted by a working group. SWEBLUL also takes
part in certain of the consultation meetings that the Government holds
with representatives of the national minorities organisations.
The Department of Finno-Ugric Languages at Uppsala University
provides for education and research in Sami and Finnish. Uppsala
University also provides research training in the Finno-Ugric Languages,
the only one of its kind. Recruitment of students from the basic
education systems in Estonian, Finnish, Sami and Hungarian for the only
research training in the Finno-Ugric Languages has been successful in
creating a relatively large critical and creative research environment. In
accordance with a decision by the Swedish National Agency for Higher
Education, Uppsala University has authority to conduct Bachelor and
Master Degree examinations in Finnish.
Through their national organisations, representatives of the national
minorities can meet and exchange experience. These meetings are partly
facilitated by financial support from the municipalities and partly also
from the central Government funds.
For further information about cultural subsidies and their allocation, as
well as central Government support for the national minority
organisations, refer to Part II, Article 7.1.c.
Article 7.1.f – Education in and studies of regional or minority
languages at all appropriate levels
The right to learn one’s own minority language, etc.
The Swedish National Agency for Education has responsibility to
monitor, assess and supervise at a national level. The Swedish National
Agency for School Improvement has as one of its tasks to support, in
close cooperation with municipalities, local work to raise quality
standards and improve the learning environment.
Teaching and studies in regional and/or minority languages is provided at
all levels within the Swedish education system. There is opportunity to
receive education in the mother tongue for pupils whose mother tongue
is Yiddish, Romani Chib, Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli in pre-school,
nine-year compulsory school and upper secondary school.
In its report on Sweden the Council of Europe has asked for statistics
regarding mother tongue tuition in the national minority languages. By
way of introduction, Sweden wishes to emphasise that the Swedish
National Agency for Education is working to improve the quality of
statistics collection for mother tongue tuition so that it will also cover
information on the national minority languages. What Sweden can

42
nevertheless provide information about at present is as follows. As
regards pre-school, there are no statistics on mother tongue tuition
broken down by language. During the academic year 2006/2007, 148 674
compulsory school pupils were entitled to mother tongue tuition (this
applies to all mother tongue tuition and not only in the national minority
languages). Of these, 83 042 pupils (59.9 per cent) received mother
tongue tuition. As regards nine-year compulsory school, the National
Agency for Education is collecting information on mother tongue
tuition, broken down according to the 10 biggest languages. The Agency
has in its report nevertheless given an account of the sub-division for the
national minority languages during the academic year 2004/2005, as
follows.

Finnish
Meänkieli
Sami
Romani
Chib
Yiddish

Number of eligible
pupils
9 992
1 190
637
1 208

Number of pupils
participating
41%
41%
63%
25%

8

100%

Pre-school
In its Bill Kvalitet i förskolan [Quality in pre-schools] (Government Bill
2004/05:11), the Government emphasises the multicultural pre-school.
The Government has amended the pre-school curriculum (Lpfö 98) to
the effect that pre-schools shall strive to ensure that every child with a
mother tongue other than Swedish develops his/her cultural identity and
ability to communicate both in Swedish and in his/her mother tongue.
Furthermore, the Government has clarified that the Ordinance
(1991:978) concerning state subsidies to the production of certain
teaching media shall also be used for teaching media used for mother
tongue support in pre-schools.
In the language administration districts for Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli,
pre-school activities are provided wholly or partly in these languages.
Romani pre-school
In April 2006, a new pre-school for Romani children opened in Malmö.
The Roma Youth Center is behind the initiative and the aim is to prepare
Romani children better prior to them starting school, since many
Romani pupils leave compulsory school with incomplete grades. Another
pre-school for Romani children, run by Romani women as a staff
cooperative, has existed in Göteborg for a few years now.

43
The new pre-school will have a Roma profile, but will be run in
accordance with existing guidelines and follow the national pre-school
curriculum. The focus lies on the Sweden language and on giving a basic
grounding in Romani Chib, as well as teaching about Roma culture. The
staff includes both Roma and Swedish people.
From the beginning, 15 children will attend the pre-school. The
intention is to start on a small scale and gradually increase the number of
pre-school places.
Nine-year compulsory school
Mother tongue tuition in nine-year compulsory school is governed by
Chapter 2, Sections 9-14 of the Compulsory School Ordinance
(1994:1194). A pupil has a right to mother tongue tuition if one or both
of its parents/guardians has a language other than Swedish as their
mother tongue and if that language is a language of daily intercourse for
the pupil. The legislation also requires that the pupil should have a basic
knowledge of the language. However, particularly beneficial rules apply
for mother tongue tuition in Romani Chib, Sami and Meänkieli. Those
pupils that have one of these languages as his/her mother tongue has a
right to mother tongue tuition in these languages even if that language is
not a language of daily intercourse at home. A municipality has an
obligation to provide mother tongue tuition in a language only if an
suitable teacher is available. Furthermore, at least five pupils in the
municipality must wish to have tuition in that language. This
requirement for a minimum number of pupils does not, however, apply
as regards Romani Chib, Sami and Meänkieli. However in the budget bill
for 2008 (prop. 2007/08:1 Budget proposition för 2008), the
Government has proposed that the rules for mother tongue tuition in
Finnish and Yiddish shall be the same as regards Romani Chib, Sami and
Meänkieli. The government budget bill for 2008 still has to be decided by
the Riksdag.
Mother tongue tuition may be arranged as a language choice, the pupil’s
choice, the school’s choice or outside the school timetable. Mother
tongue tuition may not extend to more than one language per pupil, with
the exception of Romani pupils from abroad or Finnish Roma who may
receive mother tongue tuition in two languages if there are special
reasons. Mother tongue tuition outside the timetable may be limited to a
maximum of seven school years if the pupil does not have a special need
for it. This limitation does not, however, apply as regards Sami,
Tornedal-Finnish or Finnish pupils.
Bilingual education
For pupils who have a language other than Swedish as their language of
daily intercourse with one or both of their parents/guardians, a
municipality may in accordance with Chapter 2, Section 7 of the
Compulsory School Ordinance (1994:1194) arrange some of the

44
education in grades 1–6 in the language of intercourse. According to
Ordinance (2003:306) on pilot schemes offering bilingual education in
nine-year compulsory school, a municipality may arrange pilot schemes
offering bilingual education in grades 7-9. A maximum of 50 percent of
the total bilingual education provided may be given in the language of
intercourse.
In 2003 the Government instituted a pilot scheme with bilingual
education in the upper years of compulsory nine-year school. For pupils
in grade 7–9 who have a language other than Swedish as their language of
daily intercourse with one or both of their parents/guardians, parts of
their education may be conducted in the language of intercourse. For the
total time during which bilingual tuition is arranged, a maximum of one
half may take place in the language of intercourse and the education
must be planned in such a way that instruction in Swedish progressively
increases during the years of education. Within this programme are
activities in Finnish, Romani Chib and Sami. The pilot scheme period has
been prolonged until 1 July 2009. The National Agency for School
Improvement will prepare an assessment of its outcome.
Study guidance
According to Chapter 5, 2 § of the Compulsory School Ordinance
(1994:1194) a pupil shall receive study guidance in his/her mother
tongue if necessary.
Independent schools
The obligation to provide mother tongue tuition is regulated for
independent schools under Chapter 1, Section 5 of the Independent
Schools Ordinance (1996:1206). This Section states that for the
independent schools, the regulations about mother tongue tuition
applicable to the corresponding type of school within the state school
system must be applied. That means that an independent compulsory
school has a duty to provide mother tongue tuition in the same way as a
municipality must provide such tuition within the compulsory nine-year
school. Furthermore, Chapter 1, Section 2 states that mother tongue
tuition can be arranged either in the independent school or on the basis
of agreements reached with another provider. Corresponding regulations
on the independent upper secondary schools’ duty to provide mother
tongue tuition are to be found in Chapter 2, Section 7 of the
Independent Schools Ordinance which refers to regulations on mother
tongue tuition applicable in the corresponding type of school in the state
education system.
The Government has a positive attitude to the creation of independent
schools. Independent schools are financed from public funds and may be
targeted towards national minority languages.

45

School-leaving marks
The ordinances (SKOLFS 1997:29) of the National Agency for
Education on the form of school-leaving marks for nine-year
compulsory schools, the schools for mentally disabled and the special
schools have been changed by amendment ordinance (SKOLFS
2002:18). It states that for modern languages and the mother tongue, the
marks must indicate which language the pupil has studied. If a pupil has
received a mark in more than two modern languages, this mark may be
recorded last in the list of subjects. It must then be stated whether the
mark has been received in accordance with targets/mark criteria within
the framework of the pupils’ choice or in accordance with targets/mark
criteria within the framework for language choice, as well as in what
language the pupil has received marks.
Upper secondary school
Chapter 5, Sections 7–13 of the Upper Secondary School Ordinance
(1992:394) contains regulations about mother tongue tuition in upper
secondary school. The rules and exceptions that apply to national
minorities are the same as in the Compulsory School Ordinance, the
only difference being that for an upper secondary school pupil there is a
requirement for good knowledge rather than basic knowledge of the
mother tongue in order to have the right to tuition in it. In upper
secondary school, mother tongue tuition can be arranged as an individual
choice, an extended programme or as a substitute for a language other
than Swedish and English. These rules apply both as regards both nonvocational and vocational national programmes in upper secondary
school.
Adult secondary education
In accordance with the Education Act, municipalities shall provide
municipal adult education (komvux). They shall endeavour to offer
education which meets the demand and needs. Each municipality must
publicise the possibilities for adult education and encourage adults to
participate in it. Those wishing to learn a regional or minority language
may request the municipality to provide such a course.
In folk high schools and adult educational associations, tuition is carried
out primarily in Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli. Tuition in Sami is given at
the Sami Education Centre.
Access to higher education
Adults who have the requisite qualifications to study at university have
the possibility to study languages. This is facilitated by the fact that a
number of universities nowadays provide both distance-learning and
part-time study.

46
To promote equal opportunities for education, the Government is
making a deliberate effort to overcome ethnic and social bias in
recruitment to universities and discrimination is prohibited under the
Act (2001:1286) on the equal treatment of students in higher education.
In its Bill Den öppna högskolan [Open higher education] (Government
Bill 2001/02:15, Committee Report. 2001/02:UbU4, Government
Communication. 2001/02:98), the Government presented a series of
proposals and judgements about improving the work of universities with
broader recruitment and facilitating the transition from upper secondary
school and adult education to university. As a result of these proposals, a
new provision was added in Chapter 1, Section 5 of the Higher
Education Act (1992:1434) to the effect that the universities and
university colleges must actively promote and broaden recruitment to
higher education. A recruitment delegation appointed by the
Government worked during the period 2002 – 2004 to stimulate
recruitment to the universities and university colleges and SEK 120
million were allocated for this purpose.
In the Bill Ny värld – ny högskola [New World – New University]
(Government Bill 2004/05:162, Committee Report 2005/06:UbU3,
Government Communication 2005/06:160), the Government’s measures
to continue work on broadening recruitment were presented. Since 15
January 2006, the Swedish Net University Agency has had a new name the Swedish Agency for Networks and Cooperation in Higher
Education - and a wider remit to support universities, etc., in their
efforts to broaden recruitment and improve their teaching.
For further information about the study of regional or minority
languages at the university and university college level refer to Part II,
Article 7.1.h below.
The Mother Tongue Theme website (Webbplatsen tema Modersmål)
The Swedish National Agency for School Improvement is one of the two
sectoral authorities in the field of education. It supports the work by
municipalities and schools to improve quality and results.
Responsibility for implementation and results has been decentralised to
local authorities and principals. To raise standards and achieve better
fulfilment of objectives in all parts of the education system, central
government allocates funds to stimulate local school development.
School leaders, teachers and head teachers active in pre-school, school
and adult education are the chief target groups for the Agency.
As regards the national minorities, the Agency’s work is conducted
primarily through the Mother Tongue Theme website. Over the period
2000 – 2005, the Government invested SEK 10 million in the

47
construction and development of this website. It is designed as a
resource for those working in child care and the school, but is also for all
those interested in support for the mother tongue, mother tongue
tuition and study guidance in the mother tongue. It contains information
and tools for communication as regards the mother tongue and embraces
more than 30 languages, including the five national minority languages.
Work on the website has been outsourced to more than 100 language
editors in 15 municipalities and organisations. It is managed by active
mother tongue teachers. In addition to producing educationally usable
material the website editors arrange national conferences for teachers
within the different minority languages. The ambition is to bring out
good educational resources and good opportunities for meetings.
As regards the national minority languages, the Agency has cooperated
with the Sami Education Board on three Sami language variants and also
gathered together teachers of Sami to improve their qualifications. The
Sami Working Group hosted a conference for editors in Abisko in the
autumn of 2007. Work on Yiddish has been developed in cooperation
with the Official Council of Jewish Communities in Sweden.
Responsibility for Finnish has been delegated to the Language Centre in
Stockholm and Trollhättan Municipality has been responsible for
Romani Chib. Efforts on behalf of Roma, in addition to the the Mother
Tongue Theme website, have consisted of support for compiling
dictionaries and teaching materials for different age groups, in five
variants of Romani Chib. The hope is that the dictionary that has been
produced for the Arli variant will go to print during the autumn of 2007.
As regards Romani Chib, the Agency has also cooperated with the
National Board of Education in Finland and the Council of Europe. As
regards Meänkieli, the support function for the the Mother Tongue
Theme website is in Pajala. It should also be mentioned that during 2003
the first conference ever held in Meänkieli took place in Sweden. Its
purpose was to create networks for work on Meänkieli in pre-school and
school, as well as to arouse an interest among teachers for the then newly
created Mother Tongue Theme website. Since then several conferences
about, and in, Meänkieli have been held in Pajala.
Through the Mother Tongue Theme website the Agency has during the
year further developed the pilot scheme that began in the autumn of
2004 with mother tongue tuition partly by distance-learning. During
2005 and 2006 the Swedish National Agency for School Improvement
carried out a pilot-project with mother tongue tuition in Sami partly by
distance-learning. The Sami Education Centre has offered distancelearning in Sami for some pupils. It will become possible for further
development of distance-learning in Sami to take place through the
Education Centre, particularly for upper secondary school pupils and for
adults. In the autumn of 2006, in cooperation with “Sofia distans”, the
Agency will begin the development of an internet-based package of
courses for pupils in grades 6-9 in compulsory nine-year school in

48
Finnish, Yiddish, Meänkieli and three variants of Romani Chib. The
courses are ready for introduction in the autumn of 2007.
Teacher training and in-service training for teachers
As was also mentioned in the second Swedish report on the
implementation of the European Charter on Regional or Minority
Languages, the Higher Education Ordinance (1993:100) makes it
possible for universities and university colleges to give those on teacher
training courses education about the national minorities and the national
minority languages.
Teacher training
Teacher training is flexibly designed in the following way. In the Degree
Ordinance, Annex 2 of the Higher Education Ordinance (1993:100),
there is a degree description for a teaching degree. On the basis of this
description and of other parts of the rule framework, the universities
develop their own teaching plans and curricula. That means that so long
as education fulfils the objectives set up in the degree description, it may
vary from one university to another.
A common arrangement is to have a teacher training programme with
‘open access’, which means that the students can choose their
specialisation (the school level, the subject skills, etc.,) after they have
already begun their studies in the teacher training programme. It also
happens that the teacher training programme has from the outset a clear
focus on the early years or on certain subjects. It is also common for
students to study on free-standing courses and subsequently to
complement their studies with educational courses with a view to
qualifying as a teacher. This structure gives great possibilities to choose
specialisation and direction in accordance with the students’ wishes. The
built-in flexibility necessarily entails certain problems of quantification in
seeking information about the number of students intending to qualify
as teachers, as well as about the direction that the teaching examinations
will take. It is also possible to provide teacher training by distance
learning.
The rules in force for university education ensure that students who
graduate have the necessary qualifications to meet the targets in the
curricula adopted by the Government. According to the Report for 2005
(2005:272) by the Swedish National Agency for Education, 5 out of 18
teacher training courses had compulsory courses in the national
minorities’ culture, languages, religion and history. Seven teacher
training courses offered optional courses in the national minorities’
culture, language, religion and history.

49
In cooperation with other universities, Luleå University of Technology
seeks to encourage more students to apply for these courses as well as to
raise their level of achievement.
It is also possible to provide teacher training by distance learning.
Furthermore, universities are free to cooperate with one another in
whatever fashion they judge appropriate.
The pressure of applications for higher education, including teacher
training, has in general fallen in 2007. The situation varies depending on
the subject or the university.
Otherwise, it may be stated as regards higher education that under the
Higher Education Act (1992:1434) universities have to provide
information about their work, which includes student recruitment.
The system by which funds are allocated to universities and university
colleges gives an incentive to recruit students: without students a
university receives no compensation for its costs at the basic and
advanced level. That applies to an even greater extent for courses such as
teacher training in Sami which Luleå University Technology has a special
undertaking to provide. This entails that the University must maintain
teacher qualifications, etc., in order to live up to the standards which are
required in higher education and which the Swedish National Agency for
Higher Education regularly assesses. In other words, Luleå University of
Technology has standing costs for this teacher training and needs to
recruit students in order to recoup them.
For further information about teacher training in Sami, Finnish and
Meänkieli, refer to Part III, Article 8.1.h regarding Sami.
Bilingual teachers, etc.
Prior to the 2006/2007 academic year, the Swedish National Agency for
School Improvement invited applications for an incentive allowance
(SEK 150 000/activity) for municipalities/schools that arrange tuition in
the mother tongue in different subjects, or alternatively allow mother
tongue speaking associate teachers to work in parallel with class
teachers/subject teachers. These bilingual teachers must also be given the
opportunity in the framework of their employment to study at
university (at least 20 university credits). The hope is that the
municipalities will make use of this opportunity and, for example,
appoint Romani staff.
At the initiative of the Swedish National Agency for Education, Malmö
University drew up a proposal for an educational programme in 2002 for
those wishing to work with primarily Roma children and pupils (120
university credits, which corresponds to a two-year university course).
Upon graduation, the student should be given a qualification as a

50
‘teaching assistant’. This course has unfortunately not got off the ground
because there have been no applicants. The offer nevertheless remains
open.
Improving qualifications, etc.
The National Agency for Education and the National Agency for School
Improvement made it possible in 2001-2003 for pre–school staff and in
2005 and 2006 for nine-year compulsory school staff to attend a
university course (respectively, 5 and 10 credits) entitled Att undervisa
flerspråkiga barn och elever i de lägre åldrarna [Teaching multilingual
children and pupils in the lower age-groups]. On the first occasion,
municipalities in northern Sweden were invited to send staff working
with Finnish, Meänkieli and Sami.
Teachers giving tuition in minority languages are each year invited to a
two-day course to improve their qualifications in their respective
languages, in the first instance for Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli. In 2006,
days of this kind will also be arranged for Romani staff. On 14 May,
2007 a conference was held in Göteborg for mother tongue teachers of
Romani Chib. A textbook author was also invited to the conference.
In January 2007 the Roma Culture Centre (RKC) in Stockholm
organised a language conference in which the Swedish National Agency
for School Improvement also participated.
On the Tema Modersmål website, a “media store” has been developed
with texts, pictures and sound. An inventory has been made of teaching
material in South Sami, as well as a catalogue of current research about
the way in which parents can support their children’s language
development when the mother tongue is in a minority situation. This
cataloguing has resulted in a text addressed to parents and teachers in
pre-school, pre-school class and the early years of nine-year compulsory
school. A week’s language immersion course has also been arranged for
pupils, parents and teachers, focusing on language learning in Sami.
Meetings for South Sami teachers and pre-school staff have been
arranged on three occasions, including in cooperation with Norwegian
South Sami organisations. The Agency disbursed a grant of SEK 1
million to the Sami Education Board to carry out this task.
For mother tongue teachers in Finnish, the National Agency for School
Improvement has produced an internet-based course.
Teaching media
Responsibility for teaching media lies with the municipalities as the
responsible authority for schools in their respective districts. The
National Agency for School Improvement on the other hand supports

51
the production of teaching media in minority languages. Instead of
supporting the development of traditional printed teaching materials, the
Agency is in the first instance relying on the development of the Mother
Tongue Theme website website. Here there are increased opportunities
to provide texts, pictures and sound material for educational use. The
website has also radically improved access to materials for tuition in and
about minority languages.
The Agency has been allocated a special grant of SEK 1.5 million to
support the development and production of South Sami teaching
materials. In 2006, the Government gave the Sami Education Centre
SEK 1 million for a special project to develop and produce South Sami
teaching media for adults. In addition, picture and sound wordlists in
Lexin [an online Swedish dictionary for immigrants] have been
translated into the three Sami variants. A South Sami dictionary has been
prepared and the vocabulary in the EU Sápmi project has been made
accessible, including on the Mother Tongue Theme website. For Roma,
however, there is a great need for printed material. The Agency therefore
provides support for the production of such teaching media in different
variants of Romani Chib. The initiative for the materials that have been
produced comes with certain exceptions from the Roma themselves. In
particular, fairy-tale books such as “Aja baja Alfons Åberg”, “Totte bakar”
and “Hinkar, spadar, kattor” have been translated into the Arli variant
and is used in mother tongue tuition together with a CD containing
fairy-tales recorded in Arli. During the spring of 2007, a textbook has
also been produced in the Swedish Romani variant.
The County Administrative Board has over the years had contact and/or
cooperation with regional representatives of the National Agency for
Education, the National Agency for School Improvement and the Sami
Education Board as regards issues relating to the development of
teaching media in Sami and Meänkieli.
For information about teaching media for adults in South Sami, refer to
Part III, Article 8.1.f.iii regarding Sami.
Reports relating to national minorities and education
The education situation for the national minorities
In November 2004, the Government gave the National Agency of
Education the task of performing a new survey of the education situation
for the national minorities in order to obtain a clear and up-to-date
picture of the overall situation for the minorities and outline further
measures that might be needed in the area. The Agency presented the
assignment in October (Report 2005:498). The Agency pinpointed
shortcomings in the current education situation for the national
minorities and proposed proposals for measures to improve it.

52

The Agency’s proposals mainly involved amendments being made to the
regulatory framework for mother tongue tuition and the need for
information initiatives. The proposals also presuppose an increased
awareness on the part of the municipalities of their responsibility for the
education situation of the national minorities and for arranging mother
tongue tuition.
The Agency proposes amendments to the government regulations
governing mother tongue tuition so that
– all five national minorities are offered tuition in the language even if it
is not a language of daily intercourse or if the pupils do not have basic
knowledge of it, and that
– all five national minorities are offered tuition in the minority language
even if the number of pupils is less than five.
The Agency also proposed that the Government should consider
incorporating a special provision governing the national minority
languages into the compulsory school and upper secondary school
ordinances, which would be a way of drawing positive attention to them.
The Government has subsequently tasked the National Agency for
Education to calculate the economic consequences of the proposals. The
Agency presented the assignment in April 2006 and the report is
currently being discussed within the Government Offices. The National
Agency for Education has also submitted proposals for how the
municipalities can improve the conditions for the education situation for
the national minority languages. These proposals will be communicated
to the municipalities via the Agency’s report.
The situation for the Roma in Swedish schools
In December 2005, the Government gave the Swedish National Agency
for Education Swedish the task of carrying out an in-depth study of the
situation for Roma in Swedish schools. The Agency produced a report in
the spring of 2007 which has been published (Report 292:2007). It was
produced in close cooperation with Romani representatives who were
employed on the project as experts. In its report the Agency argues that
the municipalities must intensify their visiting work and find attractive
solutions for pre-school activities for Romani children in cooperation
with their parents. In addition, the Agency saw a need to assert the
pupils’ obligation to attend school and their right to schools in a number
of ways, including through visiting work and meticulous monitoring of
pupils’ absences. The Agency will also monitor the Act (2006:67)
prohibiting discrimination and other degrading treatment of children and
school students, with a view to emphasising the importance of a secure
school environment. In the Agency’s view the municipalities should
make efforts to increase the proportion of Romani pupils who take
advantage of tuition in the mother tongue. In its report the Agency also

53
emphasised the importance of efforts in the municipalities to raise the
proportion of pupils who take advantage of tuition in the mother
tongue. Within the Government Offices further work is taking place on
processing certain of the proposals submitted by the Agency in its
report.
The Agency is at present working to improve statistics on the number of
participants in Romani Chib, so that more dialects can be reported.
Statistics currently exist as regards Kalderari/Lovara and Kalé but not for
Arli. The Agency has also noted that special measures of support are
often needed to improve school attendance by Romani children,
including the appointment of special assistants, ‘bridge-builders’, of
Romani origin.
Article 7.1.g – Opportunities for those who do not speak a regional or
minority language, and who live in the region where the regional or
minority language in question is used, to learn that language if they
so wish;
Language policy objectives
As mentioned earlier in this report, see Introduction, Point 5 and Part I,
Article 7.1.c, in accordance with the language policy objectives,
everybody has the right to learn foreign languages.
Education in pre-school, nine-year compulsory school and upper secondary
school
Refer to Part II, Article 7.1.f for more information.
Adult secondary education
Language courses in national minority languages are provided through
adult education associations which receive state subsidies for their
activities.
For further information about adult education, refer to Part II, Article
7.1.f and for Sami, refer to Part III, Article 8 regarding Sami.
Universities and other institutions of higher education
There are courses in Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli at university level. The
studies are open to all applicants who are qualified. In addition the
Government has taken measures as regards Romani Chib and Yiddish, in
that two universities have been given the task of developing education in
those languages. It is, however, still too early to say when courses in
them will start.
Refer to Part II, Article 7.1.h for more information.

54
For further information as regards regional languages, refer to Part III,
Article 8 for the respective languages.
Article 7.1.h – Promotion of studies and research in regional or
minority languages at universities or corresponding educational
establishments
In 2002, the Swedish Research Council was asked by the Government to
support research in minor languages, which include the national minority
languages, with a view to amalgamating fragmented resources into larger
and more effective research environments. The Research Council
consulted the universities about the way in which this effort could best
create long-term conditions to mobilise resources and conduct high-class
research within the sectors in question. In a number of cases this meant
that several small institutes for different minor languages at the same
university were amalgamated to create large institutions embracing
several similar languages.
Within the framework of this project, SEK 25 million were allocated
during the period 2002 – 2005 to a number of universities for research
and the development of research environments in minor languages.
Stockholm University was granted SEK 4.5 million for special projects in
Finnish and Umeå University approximately SEK 6 million for projects
in Sami. The funds which were distributed through the Research
Council constituted a restructuring and start-up contribution for a
limited period of time, while the universities assumed responsibility for
the long-term running of the newly-created research and educational
environments.
In the Government’s appropriation directions of 2007, covering their
budgetary allocation for the year, the universities of Lund and Linköping
were given the task of developing and building up education in minority
languages that has not previously been available at the university level,
i.e. Yiddish and Romani Chib. Lund University has been given
responsibility for Yiddish and Linköping University for Romani Chib.
Each university is granted SEK 1.5 million annually for three years for
this development. In order to build up this education, each university
needs to recruit teachers and researchers and to develop course plans and
curricula, etc. Since these resources began to be distributed only in
January 2007, the time has been too short for applications to be made
and for the courses to start this autumn.
Higher education in Finnish, Sami and Meänkieli has for some time been
provided on campus and sometimes by distance-learning. The
universities often show great flexibility (distance learning, part-time
study) in order to make matters easier for students who show interest in

55
language studies. Courses in Romani culture have for some time been
given at Uppsala University.
At Luleå University of Technology there is a two-year vocational
programme in the national minorities’ cultures. There is a certain
profiling of the three major minorities in northern Sweden, that is to say
Sami, Swedish Finns and Tornedalers. In addition, research on the
national minorities is carried out at Uppsala University, Stockholm
University and Malmö University.
For some time there has been a Forum for National Minorities in
Sweden (NAMIS) at Uppsala University. Its objectives are to collect
information and research on the national minorities and their languages,
as well as to circulate this information through seminars and courses.
In 2000 Paideia, the European Institute for Jewish studies in Sweden, was
founded with the aid of public funds (SEK 40 million through the Bank
of Sweden’s Tercentenary Fund). Paideia provides studies in Jewish
history, religion and other subjects, including a one-year course that also
accepts students from other countries. Paideia cooperates with the
Shalom Hartman Institute of Advanced Jewish Research in Jerusalem,
among others.
For further information about language studies and research in regional
languages, as well as the Research Council’s financial support, refer to
Part III, Article 8 with regard to the respective languages.
Article 7.1.i – Promotion of transnational exchanges
Transnational exchange and cooperation which affects all national minority
languages
All the Nordic countries – Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and
Sweden – have concluded agreements on cooperation in the cultural
field, and on cooperation between the local authorities about the right of
Nordic citizens to use their own language in the other Nordic countries.
The Nordic Council of Ministers decided in 2001 to extend the Nordic
language convention, to include Sami. This change has not yet entered
into force.
Cooperation between Finland, Sweden and Norway in the fields of
education and culture form part of the 1971 agreement between all five
Nordic countries on cooperation in the cultural field. This cooperation is
conducted by institutes and committees under the Nordic Council of
Ministers. The major part of the measures that have been adopted by the
Nordic Council of Ministers relates to different aspects of culture,
information services and education, where language is a central factor.

56
These projects include financial support for the translation of literature
and cooperation between the Nordic Language Boards. The Nordic
Council of Ministers has a special language programme for this,
‘Nordplus språk’.
There has long been a joint Swedish, Finnish and Norwegian working
group at the official level for the exchange of experience on minorities
policy.
As mentioned earlier in this report, the Swedish National Agency for
School Improvement has developed the Mother Tongue Theme website,
which targets teachers and pupils in the Nordic countries. The Agency
has encouraged contacts between South Sami and Lule Sami in Norway
and Sweden, between Finnish and Meänkieli in Tornedalen and Romani
Kale in Finland and Sweden. A network cooperation between
representatives of the national school organisations in Finland,
Denmark, Sweden, Norway and Iceland focuses on tuition in regional or
minority languages.
As regards universities and university colleges, the seats of learning are
responsible for implementing exchanges with other seats of learning
both within Sweden and abroad. They have been granted a large degree
of autonomy in this respect, which makes it possible for each institute on
its own initiative to determine which foreign partner or partners are best
suited for exchanges. It is mainly universities and university colleges that
have responsibility for bringing about exchanges with other seats of
learning both at home and abroad.
Sami
The transnational exchanges over the border between Sweden, Finland,
Norway and Russia are extensive, both within the private sector and
among the associations. An example of the latter is the foundation of the
Sami Council in 1956 and the Nordic Sami Institute which was
established in 1973. Today all the three Sami Parliaments in Norway,
Sweden and Finland cooperate in a joint organisation, the Sami
Parliamentary Council. Within the framework for this cooperation, work
on the Sami language has taken an important place.
For more information, refer to Part III, Article 14 regarding Sami.
Finnish
Transnational exchanges across the border between Sweden and Finland
take place within all sectors of society, both financial and cultural, as well
as in social life and this applies to both the private and the public sector.
For further information, refer to Part III, Article 14 regarding Finnish.
Meänkieli

57
Transnational cooperation takes place in Tornedalen through the
Tornedal Council and between the border municipalities of Haparanda
in Sweden and Torneå in Finland. One example is the language school in
Haparanda. About 50 per cent of the pupils come from Finland.
For further information, refer to Part III, Article 14 regarding Meänkieli.
Romani Chib
Sweden and Finland have cooperated on Roma issues since the 1970s in
the form of seminars being arranged every second year in Sweden and
Finland respectively. Finland arranged the latest conference in October
2004. Representatives from Norway also participated in the seminar.
Discussions are now under way about staging the next seminar in
Norway.
Cooperation on Roma issues takes place within the framework of the
Council of Europe, the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and the European Union.
The Council of Europe has initiated a European NGO for Roma issues,
the European Roma and Travellers Forum (ERTF). The ERTF is an
autonomous organisation, but with close ties with the Council of
Europe, which aims to give Roma in Europe the opportunity to influence
decision-making in issues that concern them. The Roma minority in
Sweden is represented in the ERTF with one permanent member and
three alternates.
Article 7.2 – Prohibitions, unjustified distinctions, exclusions,
restrictions or preferences applying to the use of regional or minority
languages
Neither in Swedish law nor in practice is there anything to support
prohibitions, unjustified distinctions, exclusions, restrictions or
preferences relating to the use of any regional or minority language that
aims to discourage or endanger its continuation or development.
Article 7.3 – Promote mutual understanding between all linguistic
groups in the country
An important part in the work to promote mutual understanding
between all linguistic groups in Sweden and particularly to work for
respect, understanding and tolerance is the work to raise the level of
knowledge. The Government has therefore taken several measures to
promote respect and understanding and to raise people’s awareness of
the national minorities.

58

Education
It is important that all children and pupils in the school, irrespective of
whether they belong to a minority or the majority, are given knowledge
about the national minorities’ history in Sweden and their culture,
language and religion. The curricula for nine-year compulsory school and
upper secondary school have not been changed since Sweden submitted
its second report about the implementation of the European Charter on
Regional or Minority Languages to the Council of Europe. From the
curricula it is therefore still evident that:
“the school is responsible for ensuring that every pupil after completing nine-year compulsory
school has knowledge about the national minorities’ culture, language, religion and history”
Responsibility for ensuring that the teaching media used by schools
satisfy the standards laid down in the curricula rests with the
municipalities and those responsible for the independent schools. The
Swedish National Agency for School Improvement supports the
municipalities in this responsibility. Teaching in Swedish schools is
nevertheless not tied to individual teaching materials and it is up to the
teacher, on the basis of wordings in the curricula, to make an
independent choice as regards which teaching media are to be used, for
example whether supplementary use may be made of the internet. In
this respect the Mother Tongue Theme website therefore plays an
important part.
As also pointed out by the Council of Europe in its report on Sweden,
the Swedish National Agency for Education has stated in a report in
2005 (Report 2005:498), which is also discussed under Part II, Article
7.1.f, that:“The objective of spreading knowledge about the national
minorities appears according to the results of this study not to have been
achieved by all municipalities. One of the reasons why knowledge about
the national minorities is not disseminated may be that individual
teachers themselves lack the knowledge that they are supposed to
communicate”.
Against that background and the views advanced by the Council of
Europe the Swedish National Agency for Education produced
information material in the spring of 2007 about the national minorities
and their rights at school. The information pack will be distributed to
municipalities and schools during the spring and at the beginning of the
autumn 2007.

Information
Information and awareness about the Sami

59
In December 2000, the Government launched a national information
initiative on the Sami as Sweden’s indigenous people and Sami culture, of
which the language forms an essential part. The aim was to increase
awareness of the Sami as Sweden’s indigenous people and of Sami culture
in Sweden. Another aim was to prevent and combat discrimination.
Between 2001 and 2004, the Government made a total of SEK 20 million
available for the information initiative. Within the framework of the
initiative, the Government granted project funding to around thirty local
and regional projects. Education issues were given high priority.
In 2002 and as part of the same information initiative, the Government
gave the Same Parliament the task of establishing a Sami information
centre. This centre and its web-portal www.samer.se were opened in
2005. The information centre and its web-portal are seen as playing an
important role in the efforts to create greater understanding for the Sami
whilst at the same time helping to safeguard and increase the availability
of relevant and trustworthy information about them. The information
centre’s website had 128 900 visitors per month on average in 2006.
At the beginning of 2000 and as part of the information initiative, the
Government commissioned a survey of Swedish people’s awareness of
and attitudes to the Sami. The survey showed that the majority of those
asked saw the Sami in a positive light. The 1001 people asked also had a
general awareness of the Sami people. This awareness is on a rather low
level, however, providing justification for further information initiatives
on the Sami, their culture and history. Another reason why further
efforts should be made in this area is that a large number of those asked
showed a keen interest and would like to know more about the Sami,
their culture, history and society.
Living History Forum
In light of the information project “Living History Forum” [Forum för
levande historia] which was established on the initiative of the
Government in 1997, a new agency was established in Stockholm for
issues concerning democracy, tolerance and human rights based on the
Holocaust. The agency was given the name Living History Forum. Its
activities should aim to strengthen people’s will to work actively for the
concept of the equal value of all people. Combating antisemitism and
antiziganism is central to the agency’s mission. In partnership with the
National Council for Crime Prevention, the agency carried out a survey
of young people’s attitudes to e.g. anti-Semitism. A total of 10 600
young people took part in the survey, which has been followed up in
several more in-depth studies. On 14 March 2006, the Agency presented
a report on antisemitism, Antisemitic images and attitudes in Sweden
[Antisemistiska attityder och föreställningar i Sverige]. The aim of this indepth study was to identify and thereby increase awareness both about
prejudice against Jews and the forms and incidences of anti-Semitism
among the Swedish population.

60

Living History Forum has launched a special Roma initiative, aimed at
disseminating knowledge about the Roma, their history and situation in
Sweden. Part of this work has been to compile the anthology A
banished people - oppression and discrimination of
Roma/gypsies/travellers [Ett fördrivet folk - om förtryck och
diskriminering av romer/zigenare/resande].
The above are examples of how the Government’s policy highlights and
conveys knowledge about the national minorities and their languages in
order to e.g. combat prejudice and foster respect and understanding.
The national action plan for human rights
At the UN World Conference on Human Rights that took place in
Vienna in 1993, all states were urged to consider drawing up national
action plans in order to identify measures to improve the promotion and
protection of human rights. The Swedish Government put forward its
first national human rights action plan in 2002 in the form of a written
communication (Government Communication 2001/02:83). This action
plan, which covered the period 2002-2004, has been subsequently
monitored and evaluated. Due to overwhelmingly positive experience
gained from drawing up the action plan, a new one has now been drafted.
The new action plan, A National Human Rights Action Plan 2006–2009
[En nationell handlingsplan för de mänskliga rättigheterna]
- (Government Communication 2005/06:95), was adopted by the
Government and submitted to the Riksdag in March 2006. The Riksdag
has now finished discussing the plan and put it aside.
The Government’s long-term objective, as it is expressed in the
communication, is to guarantee full respect for human rights in Sweden.
In other words, human rights, as they are stipulated in Sweden’s
international undertakings, must not be violated. The Swedish judicial
system shall be in line with the international human rights conventions
to which Sweden is a signatory. These conventions shall be followed
both on the central and the local level. In order to achieve the objective
of full respect for human rights, it is important to perform a regular
review of the problems that may occur regarding the protection of
various rights in Sweden. Another central issue is increasing knowledge
and raising awareness about human rights. Furthermore, it is important
for the efforts to protect and promote human rights are well
coordinated. As a result of its national action plan, the Government is
taking a cohesive approach to human rights issues in Sweden, both as
regards specific rights issues and awareness, information and
organisation issues.

61
The communication is split into two parts. Part I outlines a human rights
action plan for the period 2006-2009, and part II is a survey of the
human rights situation in Sweden in 2005. The aim of the survey is to
highlight the possible shortcomings as regards the protection and
promotion of human rights in Sweden. Based on the survey, measures
are announced in the action plan aimed at strengthening a number of
rights. The focus of the action plan is on protection against
discrimination. Other issues discussed include the right to employment,
housing, health and education, political rights, the rule of law and asylum
and migration issues.
The rights of the Sami and other national minorities are discussed in a
special section both in the action plan and in the survey. Several
measures are announced in this area, including measures to improve the
situation for the Roma, better consultation with the national minorities
and the establishment of a strategy for the implementation of the
minorities policy in society.
The action plan also contains measures aimed at increasing awareness and
information about human rights, within the education system, in the
public sector and among the general public. Finally, issues relating to
how human rights promotion is organised, the methods to be used and
how to monitor and evaluation of the action plan are also discussed. This
includes issues relating to public administration management of human
rights and to the responsibility resting with the municipalities and
county councils in these issues.
The choice of human rights issues to be discussed in the survey and the
action plan was based on a considerable amount of material. This
included opinions and criticism from international bodies tasked with
reviewing the compliance of nation states with human rights
conventions, as well as the comments made in conjunction with the
evaluation of the first action plan. In addition, opinions and proposals on
what should be included in the survey and action plan were gathered
from a large number of societal actors, such as parliamentary parties,
central agencies, municipalities and county councils, universities and
NGOs, including those representing the national minorities. Opinions
and proposals were collected via reference group meetings and written
statements. A summary of the opinions of the national minority
organisations is presented in Appendix 3 of this report.

The Swedish Human Rights Delegation

62
At the same time as it adopted the national human rights action plan for
2006-2009, the Government also took the decision to establish the
Swedish Human Rights Delegation. Based on the action plan, the
Delegation’s task is to support the long-term efforts to ensure full
respect for human rights in Sweden. Within the framework of its terms
of reference the delegation is to:
- support central agencies, municipalities and county councils in their
efforts to ensure full respect for human rights in their activities,
– draw up and implement strategies for better information and
knowledge about human rights among various target groups in society,
– stimulate public debate on human rights, and,
– submit proposals for how support for the efforts to ensure full respect
for human rights in Sweden can be continued after the Delegation has
concluded its assignment.
The Delegation consists of a chairperson and a number of members with
varying types of skills within the area of human rights as well as other
experts. The Delegation will have an associated reference group
comprising representatives from Swedish public life. The Delegation also
has a secretariat with three full-time secretaries. The Delegation is to
present its final report to the Government no later than 31 March 2010.
The media
Under Chapter 6, Section 1 of the Radio and TV Act (1996:844), those
broadcasting TV or sound radio programmes under licence from the
Government must ensure that programme activity as a whole is
characterised by the democratic form of state’s basic ideas and principles
about the equal value of all human beings and the individual human
being’s liberty and worth.
As mentioned earlier in the report (refer to Part II, Article 7.1.f.), the
public service companies Sveriges Radio AB (SR), Sveriges Television
AB (SVT) and Sveriges Utbildningsradio AB (UR) must under the
current licences for the period 2007–2009, take into account the interests
of linguistic and ethnic minorities. This activity must remain a future
priority area and accessibility must continue to be improved.
Article 7.4 – Participation and influence
Language laws
In its second report about Sweden’s implementation of the Minority
Languages Charter, the Committee of Experts has pointed out that there
is no authority that exercises supervision over the special laws that apply
in the language administrative districts for Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli.
As stated above, the Norrbotten County Administrative Board has

63
responsibility for enforcement of these laws. For further information on
this, refer to Part I, Point 4.
Participation in cultural life
The national minorities all have rich cultures of their own, which often
find expression in a wide variety of artistic activities. These not only
contribute to the preservation and development of minority cultures, but
also enrich Swedish cultural life as a whole. As mentioned above, under
Part II, Article 7.1.c., consultation takes place in the cultural field. For
further information about this consultation, refer to the relevant section.
Participation in economic life
The economic tasks of the Same Parliament
Since its establishment in 1993, the Same Parliament has helped provide a
more comprehensive picture of Sami business and industry, Sami culture
and the Sami language. This has been brought about by participation in
various contexts with the aim of strengthening the position of the Sami
in society, by active efforts to disseminate information and the
distribution of financial support to Sami culture and Sami business and
industry. For example, annual multi-million kronor grants have been
allocated to Sami culture aimed at preserving, strengthening and
disseminating knowledge on Sami culture and cultural heritage.
As part of the development of the Same Parliament, an investigator was
appointed in 2000 to perform a review of its organisation. The
investigator’s proposals have resulted in a number of changes, e.g. with
the intention of creating both a clear dividing line between the political
body on the one hand and the administration on the other, and a clearer
organisational structure. Both these changes will be significant as regards
the Government’s intention to gradually increase the influence of the
Same Parliament over Sami-related issues.
Participation in public life
The Same Parliament
The democratically elected body, the Same Parliament, is of considerable
importance to the Sami, both to make themselves heard and as a symbol
for the Sami people. Over the years since its establishment, the body’s
activities have gradually grown and in the autumn of 2004, the
Government tasked the National Property Board to look into the
construction of a parliament building for the Same Parliament in Kiruna.
According to the proposal, the parliament building would not only
accommodate party offices, but could also be used for official

64
engagements and plenary sessions of the Same Parliament. The issue of a
parliament building is currently being discussed in the Swedish
Government Offices.
The Government’s aim is that attempts should be made in stages to
extend Sami influence within the sectors where that is possible, taking
account of results of the studies that have been completed. As a stage in
this work, in 2005 the Government transferred to the administration of
reindeer husbandry from the county administrative boards and the
Swedish Board of Agriculture to the Same Parliament. In May 2006, the
Riksdag adopted the Bill Ett ökat samiskt inflytande (2005/06:86)
[Increased Sami influence], which has entailed the transfer of working
tasks and responsibility to the Same Parliament beginning with effect
from January 2007.
The Delegation for Roma Issues
For further information about the Delegation for Roma Issues, refer to
the Introduction, Point 5.
Activities in the Government Offices linked with national minority
groups
The Delegation for Roma Issues
In its second report about Sweden’s implementation of the minority
language convention, the Committee of Experts expressed a wish to
receive further information about the Council for Roma Affairs. The
Council for Roma Affairs, which at the end of 2006 was replaced by the
Delegation for Roma Issues, was formed in 2002 and was an advisory
body for the Government. The chairman of the Council was the Minister
who had responsibility for minorities policy. The Council included
representatives of Roma organisations and also representatives of the
Ombudsman against Ethnic Discrimination (DO), the Swedish
Integration Agency, the Forum for Living History and the Swedish
Association of Local Authorities and Regions. A number of sectors were
highlighted in the Council’s plan of work as being particularly important.
These sectors were to draw attention to the Roma group, discrimination
and human rights, education questions, culture and mass media, social
questions and international cooperation. During the period when the
Council for Roma Affairs was operative, the Roma representatives
repeatedly argued that there was a need to combine all existing
information about Roma in Sweden and, with that as a basis, to work in a
more outward-looking and operational fashion. A new arrangement was
therefore seen to be needed since the Council’s remit was to be advisory,
not executive. In light of this, the Government appointed a Delegation
for Roma Issues and the mandate of the Council, which expired at the
end of 2006, was not extended. It should, however, be mentioned that
the organisations represented in the Council are today represented in a

65
reference group for the Delegation. It should also be mentioned that the
Roma Group’s dialogue direct with the Minister with responsibility for
minorities policy has continued, but now within the ordinary conduct of
consultation. For further information about the Delegation for Roma
Issues, refer to the Introduction, Point 5.
The Indigenous People’s Delegation
In December 1993 the United Nations declared an International Decade
of the World’s Indigenous Peoples, beginning on 10 December, 1994.
The Swedish Government therefore appointed a special delegation, the
Indigenous People’s Delegation. This delegation consisted of individual
Sami and experts from cultural life, the research world and the
Government Offices and was placed under the Ministry of Agriculture.
The delegation’s objective was both to follow up the targets that affect
Sweden in the Indigenous People’s Decade declared by the United
Nations and to contribute to an increased self-determination for the
Sami, as well as to increase participation by Sami in political life,
encourage Sami culture and language, and contribute to an increase in
public awareness of the Sami cultural heritage. During the 10 years that
the delegation operated, 1994 – 2004, projects have been carried out at
both the regional and national level as well as internationally, to convey
information about and reinforce the Sami’s position as an indigenous
people and a national minority.
Information efforts about the Sami
The Government decided in December 2000 on a national information
effort about Sami in Sweden and Sami culture, in which the language
constitutes an important part. The Government’s information effort
about the Sami as Sweden’s indigenous people and about Sami culture,
2001–2004, is, like the Indigenous People’s delegation, an activity
conducted by the Government Offices. More information about this
effort is to be found under Part II, Article 7.3.
Consultation meetings
Since 2000 in Government has convened an annual consultation meeting
with representatives of organisations that represent the national
minorities. The purpose is to increase the minorities’ influence in the
Government’s work on minorities. This dialogue has now been assessed.
In the assessment the Council of Europe’s recommendations that
consultation with minority groups should be developed and given more
concrete form have been taken into account. The assessment shows that
the annual consultation meeting with representatives of all national
minorities should be complemented by a series of meetings between
representatives of the Government and the respective national minority
groups. That gives a greater opportunity for dialogue both about
questions which affect only an individual group as well as about
questions affecting all of them. A new arrangement for dialogue which

66
takes into account what has emerged through this assessment applies as
from 2006.
The Government considers that it is important for the national
minorities to participate in issues that affect them. As transpires from
several passages in the report, the Government therefore states, when
remits are given to authorities on matters affecting the national
minorities, that they must be implemented in consultation with the
minorities.
The Government also intends, as likewise emerges from the national
action plan for human rights, to strengthen consultation further. It is
important for the national minorities to participate in the collection of
material for Sweden’s reports to the Council of Europe, as well as in the
follow-up to the criticisms and recommendations that are received. The
Government’s intention is therefore that representatives of the national
minorities must be invited to meetings in connection with Swedish
reports to the Council of Europe about implementation of the European
Charter on Regional or Minority Languages and the Framework
Convention for the Protection of National Minorities. That has been
done in the preparation for the drafting of this present report.
Representatives from the national minority organisations took part in a
meeting together with officials from the Swedish Government Offices.
During the meetings they were given information about the views put
forward by the Council of Europe as regards Sweden’s implementation
of the Minority Language Charter and the principal content of Sweden’s
third report to the Council of Europe. Representatives from the national
minority organisations were given an opportunity to put forward views,
both as regards the content of Sweden’s third report and about
minorities policy in general, which as far as possible have been taken into
account in the drafting of this report. A similar consultation meeting was
also held in connection with the drafting of Sweden’s second report to
the Council of Europe about the implementation of the Framework
Convention for the Protection of National Minorities.
The Same Parliament and the Government have regular contact to
discuss current issues. This contact takes the form of both routine
contact with the Government Offices and an annual dialogue in which
issues relating to finance, staff, organisation and working tasks are
discussed. In addition, the Minister responsible for Sami policy and
representatives of the parties in the Same Parliament have annual
discussions about current questions.

Participation in political life
Political elections to the Same Parliament

67
As for others in society, it is important that the Sami have an
opportunity for real participation so that they have the possibility to
influence both social development and their own culture and language.
This was one of the reasons why the democratically elected Same
Parliament was established in 1993. Election turn-out at Same Parliament
elections indicates, as is the case with other elections, the degree of
legitimacy in the political system. In order to be able to vote, a person
must be enrolled in the Same Parliament electoral register. Election
turn-out increased to 66 per cent in the latest election in 2005, but has
fallen overall by 6 per cent since the first election in 1993. The
development in the number of persons entered on the electoral register
nonetheless indicates that the Same Parliament’s legitimacy among the
Sami people has gradually increased. Election turn-out has increased in
terms of actual numbers as a result of an increasing number of Sami
enrolling in the electoral register. The trend also points to greater trust
being shown in the Same Parliament and its efforts to promote Sami
culture and Sami business and industry.
Participation in the political process
In the run-up to the general election in 2006, the previous Government
allocated SEK 26 million for a special project on democracy. This
democracy initiative - which has been given the name Participating
Sweden (Delaktiga Sverige) - is a programme of measures aimed at
combating exclusion and increase people’s participation in Swedish
society. The programme will run between 2006 and 2009 and is divided
into different activities aimed at strengthening political participation,
combating discrimination and gathering more knowledge about the
obstacles to and opportunities for participation both in everyday life and
public life in general. Some of these activities are aimed in particular at
the national minorities. The consultations/meetings between citizens and
representatives of the public authorities on issues regarding participation
and influence, etc., are one such activity that was conducted prior to the
general election in 2006.
Article 7.5 – Non-territorial languages
There are two languages in Sweden which correspond to the definition of
non-territorial languages in the European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages. They are Romani Chib and Yiddish. With the
exception of the special regional measures applied in Sweden’s seven
northernmost municipalities with reference to the language
administrative areas, these languages are largely treated in the same way
as the territorial languages in Sweden’s policy on national minorities.
The needs and preconditions for the five national minority languages
differ greatly from one another. Significant differences between the
various groups are the number of speakers, the level of education in the

68
respective groups, the existence of a written language, and so on. Since
the needs of the different groups differ from one another it is important
that those affected by the minorities policy can put forward their views
and wishes before decisions are taken. One way for the Roma group to
exert influence is through activities in the Delegation for Roma Issues.
The measures taken by the Government are governed primarily by the
needs and wishes that the national minorities put forward, as well as by
the views advanced by the Council of Europe. Another method is
through the regular consultation mentioned above. It should also be
mentioned that, on several occasions when Roma issues have been
examined, representatives from the group have participated in the work,
for example as regards the above-mentioned report from the National
Agency for Education.
For further information about the Delegation for Roma Issues, refer to
the Introduction, Point 5.

69

PART III

For each regional or minority language chosen at the moment of
ratification, as follows from paragraph 2 of Article 2 of the Charter, please
indicate in which way the paragraphs and/or sub-paragraphs5 have been
implemented.
When indicating the measures taken in order to implement each paragraph
or sub-paragraph chosen, please specify the relevant legal provision and the
territory where they are applicable.

Language: SAMI

Article 8 – Education
Sweden has undertaken to provide education in Sami as follows:
1. With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used, according to the situation of each of these
languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s)
of the State:
a.iii) to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least
to those pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered
sufficient; or
b.iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least
to those pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered
sufficient
c.iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least
to those pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a
number considered sufficient
d.iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least
to those pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a
number considered sufficient;
e.iii) if, by reason of the role of the State in relation to higher education
institutions, sub-paragraphs i and ii cannot be applied, to encourage and/or
5

For an index of the paragraphs and sub-paragraphs Sweden has ratified, please refer to
appendix 2.

70
allow the provision of university or other forms of higher education in
regional or minority languages or of facilities for the study of these
languages as university or higher education subjects;
f.iii) if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult
education, to favour and/or encourage the offering of such languages as
subjects of adult and continuing education;
g. to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the
culture which is reflected by the regional or minority language;
h. to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to
implement those of paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;
i. to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the
measures taken and progress achieved in establishing or developing the
teaching of regional or minority languages and for drawing up periodic
reports of their findings, which will be made public.
2. With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in
which the regional or minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties
undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language
justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the regional or
minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.
Article 8.1.a.iii –Pre-school activities
There is no legislation in Sweden that specifically relates to pre-school
activities for the national minorities. The Act (1999:1175) concerning
the right to use the Sami language in dealings with public authorities and
courts does cover the situation of pre-school children, however. Under
Article 8 of this act, the municipalities within the administrative districts
for Sami must give parents or guardians the option of placing their
children in pre-schools where all or some of the activities are conducted
in Sami. The administrative districts for Sami cover the municipalities of
Arjeplog, Gällivare, Jokkmokk and Kiruna.
There are pre-schools connected to four of the Sami schools and the
number of children attending them has risen in recent years. Since 2005,
the number of children has gone up by 16 and now totals 107. The
number of children in 2004 was 73.
For further information on pre-school activities, refer to Part II, Article
7.1.f.

71
Article 8.1.b.iv – Nine-year compulsory school education
Sami School
Under Chapter 8, Article 3 of the Swedish Education Act (SFS
1985:1100), Sami children, as well as other children if there are special
reasons, may complete their compulsory schooling in grades 1-6 in Sami
School (Sameskolan). Sami School must provide tuition in Swedish and
Sami and Sami as a subject must be studied in all grades, refer to Chapter
3, Article 2 of the Sami School Ordinance (SFS 1995:205). According to
the school curriculum (Lpo 94), Sami School, in addition to the general
requirements placed on compulsory schools, has a responsibility to
ensure that all pupils are familiar with the Sami heritage and can speak,
read and write Sami when they leave school. The compulsory school
syllabi established by the Government also apply to Sami School.
Furthermore, the National Agency for Education has established a
special syllabus for Sami tuition in the Same School. This syllabus can
also be used for mother tongue tuition in Sami in other compulsory
schools, refer to Chapter 3 Article 6 of the Sami School Ordinance. The
provisions in the Compulsory School Ordinance governing mother
tongue tuition and tuition in Swedish as a second language apply in
relevant parts of Sami School, refer to Chapter 3, Article 9a of the Sami
School Ordinance.
There were six Sami schools with a total of 163 pupils in pre-school class
and grades 1-6 in 2006. Sami as both a first and second language and
Swedish as a first and second language are taught at most of the Sami
schools.
After grade 6, Sami school pupils transfer to ordinary compulsory school
and, if they wish, can then continue to receive mother tongue tuition in
Sami. As stipulated under Part II, Article 7.1.f above, pupils have the
option of receiving distance mother tongue tuition via the Mother
Tongue Theme website from grade 6 onwards.
Integrated Sami tuition is provided and regulated by agreements between
the Sami Education Board and each municipality respectively.
Sami pupils attend the compulsory school but are taught the Sami
language, Sami culture and the Sami way of life. The most common
subjects are the Sami language, Sami handicraft and social science
subjects. There is integrated Sami tuition at 16 schools in 10
municipalities with a total of 154 pupils.
Mother tongue tuition in primary schools
Refer to Part II, Article 7.1.f and for information given to parents,
municipalities and schools regarding the right to mother tongue tuition,
refer to Part I, Point 4.

72
Bilingual education
Refer to Part II, Article 7.1.f.
Study guidance
Refer to Part II, Article 7.1.f.
Independent schools
Refer to Part II, Article 7.1.f.
Article 8.1.c.iv – Upper secondary school education
Upper secondary education with a Sami specialisation, in the form of
language, handicraft and culture courses, has been available at the
municipal Bokenskolan Secondary School in the municipality of
Jokkmokk since 1999. This is a specially designed Sami programme with
admissions from all over the country. On completion of the programme,
students are eligible for higher education.
In its second report in Sweden, the Council of Europe’s Committee of
Experts points out that there should be upper secondary education in
Sami at other schools as well as at the school in Jokkmokk and that
Sweden should consider extending the remit of the Sami Education
Board to include upper secondary education. In light of this, Sweden
wishes to point out that the Sami Education Centre can offer distance
education in Sami for compulsory and upper secondary school pupils. As
regards the remit of the Sami Education Board, Sweden wishes to state
the following: The Government has appointed a special investigator to
carry out a review of the structure of the Swedish education system (dir.
2007:28). The Sami Education Board will be included in this
investigation. One focus of the investigation will be the possibility of
accommodating the activities conducted by the Sami Education Board
within the Same Parliament in order to bring the responsibility for issues
of special significance to the Sami population under the same roof. A
proposal for a new structure is to be presented no later than 1 November
2007.
Refer also to Part II, Article 7.1.f.
Article 8.1.d.iv –Technical and vocational training
Some vocational education is provided at Bokenskolan in Jokkmokk
through the special Sami programme mentioned above under Part III,
Article 8.1.c.iv regarding Sami.

73
Some technical and vocational training is also available at the Sami
Education Centre in Jokkmokk, see below under Part III, Article 8.1.f.iii
regarding Sami.

Article 8.1.e.iii –University education
In its report on Sweden, the Council of Europe has asked which
universities are responsible for education in Sami. The rule of thumb in
Sweden as far as higher education is concerned is that all
universities/university colleges are free to offer education within the
framework set by their authorisation to issue degrees. As regards the
Sami language, however, Umeå University and Luleå University of
Technology have a special responsibility. Umeå University must offer
education in Sami every academic year. Luleå University of Technology
must offer teacher education for lower and upper compulsory school
teachers with a Sami specialisation every academic year.
The possibility to study and research Sami is provided at Uppsala
University, Umeå University and Luleå University of Technology.
Furthermore, an interpreters’ course specialising in Sami was started at
Luleå University of Technology in the 2003/2004 academic year.
Umeå University is arranging part-time courses in South Sami, making it
easier for students who want to combine language studies with other
studies.
In 2006, the Government gave the Nordic Sami Institute a special grant
worth SEK 880 000 for studies and research in Sami.
Refer also to Part II, Article 7.1.f and Article 7.i.h.
Article 8.1.f.iii –Adult and continuing education
Sami for adults
During 2006, the option for adult Sami, who speak the language but have
never learnt how to read or write it, to receive “short-term study grants”
to study Sami was introduced. These studies can be done in a study
circle, at a folk high school or within the adult secondary education
system. The grant can also be disbursed for residential education and will
be administrated by the Same Parliament.
Government grants are awarded every year to the Sami Education Centre
for inter alia language tuition in Sami. These courses often continue for
one or two years. There is also technical and vocational training given at
the Sami Education Centre in e.g. Sami handicraft, Sami
entrepreneurship, Sami tourism and Sami culture. In cooperation with

74
Sveriges utbildningsradio (Swedish Educational Broadcasting Company UR), the Centre has also produced a multimedia educational programme
in Lule Sami. A similar package is being put together for North Sami.
Studies at the Centre are also available for non-Sami people.
The Sami language can also be studied at a number of study organisations
around the country. These study organisations receive state subsidies for
these activities.
In 2006, the Government gave the Sami Education Centre SEK 1 million
to develop teaching media for adults in South Sami.
Article 8.1.g –Teaching of history and culture
Refer to Part II, Article 7.3
Article 8.1.h –Teacher training
All universities and university colleges in Sweden are free to arrange
education programmes in subjects for which they are authorised to issue
degrees. This means that it is also possible to study Sami, Meänkieli and
Finnish as a distance learning option and then count these subjects
towards a teaching degree. The courses are easy to look for via the
website at www.netuniversity.se. Several of these courses are also run on
a part-time basis. The built-in flexibility of the Swedish higher education
system provides students with plenty of options to study e.g. minority
languages at university level or do teacher training irrespective of where
they live and what other undertakings they have.
Recent developments in distance learning have shown that it provides
good opportunities for more groups to study at university level. Parttime studies (either on campus or at a distance) give already employed
people or those who for some reason or other do not wish to study fulltime the option of studying at university regardless of whether they
already have a university education or not. This means, for example, that
a student reading Finnish at Mälardalen University in central Sweden can
combine his or her language studies with distance teacher training and
then have the chance to become an authorised Finnish teacher.
In its appropriation directions, the Government has given Luleå
University of Technology a special obligation to offer teacher training
for lower and upper compulsory school teachers every academic year,
with a focus on Sami, Meänkieli and Finnish. This means that the
Government has gone further than usual and decided that this education
in particular is especially important. The Ministry of Education and

75
Science monitors the issue by means of an annual dialogue with Luleå
University of Technology.
The Government’s strategy as regards teacher training at Luleå
University of Technology is that continued flexibility in higher
education provides the best prerequisites for more people to become
authorised to work as teachers specialising in Sami, Finnish and
Meänkieli.
Refer also to Part III, Article 8.1.e.iii regarding Sami for more
information about the options of combining studies in South Sami with
other subjects.
For further information on teacher training and teaching skills
development, refer to Part II, Article 7.1.f.
Article 8.1.i –Supervision
As part of its supervisory role, the National Agency for Education
exercises supervision over the state education system and independent
schools. This also includes supervising the development of bilingual
education and mother tongue tuition for the national minorities.
The Sami Education Board is responsible for the supervision of the Sami
schools (and connected pre-schools) and integrated Sami education. The
Sami Education Board is responsible for both the political and the
financial management of these. Furthermore, the Sami Education Board
is to promote and develop Sami tuition as part of the state education
system for children and young people. Between 2008 and 2011, the Sami
Education Board will carry out a new survey on the need for teaching
media.
The Government has appointed a commission to examine changes in
school inspection procedures. The commission will present its final
report no later than 15 December 2007.
As already mentioned under Part I, Point 4, a special working group has
been established by the Norrbotten County Administrative Board to
ensure that the minorities policy is implemented at the local level. The
working group consists of e.g. local authorities and representatives of the
national minorities. The working group reports to the Government once
a year.

76
Article 8.2 –Education outside the administrative districts
Mother tongue tuition in Sami is also given in areas outside the
administrative districts. Furthermore, distance mother tongue tuition is
also offered via the Mother Tongue Theme website. For more further
information, refer to Part II, Article 7.1.f.
The Government is aware of the problem of a lack of knowledge among
municipalities, schools and parents as to their rights and obligations with
regard to mother tongue tuition - a problem highlighted by the
Committee of Experts in its report on Sweden. As a result, the
Government, National Agency for Education, National Agency for
School Improvement and the Norrbotten County Administrative Board
have taken measures to increase knowledge and awareness of the rights
and obligations associated with mother tongue tuition for the national
minorities. Refer also to Part II, Article 7.3 and Part I, Point 4.
As mentioned above under e.g. Part III, Article 8.1.e.iii regarding Sami, it
is possible to study and conduct research in Sami at Uppsala University,
which is outside the administrative district.
Several of the study organisations that receive government subsidies for
teaching in Sami are outside the Sami administrative district.

Article 9 – Judicial authorities
Sweden has undertaken to ensure the use of Sami before judicial authorities as
follows:
1. The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the
number of residents using the regional or minority languages justifies the
measures specified below, according to the situation of each of these
languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the
present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper
administration of justice
a. in criminal proceedings:
ii) to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or minority
language; and/or
iii) to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not
be considered inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a regional
or minority language; and/or
iv) to produce, on request, documents connected with legal proceedings in
the relevant regional or minority language, if necessary by the use of
interpreters and translations involving no extra expense for the persons
concerned

77
b. in civil proceedings:
ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that
he or she may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby
incurring additional expense; and/or
iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or
minority languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations
c. in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that
he or she may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby
incurring additional expense; and/or
iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or
minority languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations
d. to take steps to ensure that the application of sub-paragraphs i and iii of
paragraphs b and c above and any necessary use of interpreters and
translations does not involve extra expense for the persons concerned
2. The Parties undertake:
a. not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State
solely because they are drafted in a regional or minority language; or
3. The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or minority
languages the most important national statutory texts and those relating
particularly to users of these languages, unless they are otherwise provided.
Article 9.1 –The right to use Sami in criminal proceedings, civil
proceedings and proceedings in the administrative courts
Applicable legislation
Under Section 4 of the Act (1999:1175) concerning the right to use the
Sami language in dealings with public authorities and courts, anyone who
is a party or party representative in a case before a court of law is entitled
to use Sami in the proceedings provided that the case has a connection to
the administrative district for Sami. This right applies to district and city
courts, county administrative courts, certain special courts and the appeal
courts.
The right to use the Sami language in court cases or matters, in
accordance with the abovementioned section, includes the right to
submit documents and written evidence in Sami, the right to have
documents pertaining to the case or matter orally translated and the right
to speak Sami in oral hearings before the court. The court shall translate
documents and written evidence into Swedish unless this is clearly
unnecessary (Section 5).
Persons wishing to use Sami during the court processing of a case or
matter in accordance with Section 4, shall so request in connection with

78
the opening of the case or matter or the first time the party is to make a
statement in the case or matter. If a request to use Sami is presented
later, it may be rejected. A request to use Sami may also be rejected if it
is manifestly for an unwarranted purpose (Section 6).
In connection with the Committee of Experts request for qualification
of the concept of “improper purpose” in Section 6, Sweden would like to
state the following: This provision is an exception to the rule and shall,
in accordance with the preparatory works (Government Bill
1998/99:143, p. 81 and 86), be applied very restrictively, but can be used
“for example when it is obvious the request has been made in order to
delay the court proceedings”.
The abovementioned rights to use Sami are not associated with any costs
for defendants in criminal cases or respondents in civil
cases/administrative court matters.
Courts
Translation and interpretation do not involve any extra costs to anyone
who is a party in the case. These costs are met by the court. The National
Courts Administration (NCA) has been allocated extra funds by the
Government to be able to meet such costs. NCA does not, however,
report its costs for regional language translation separately.
The court assesses from case to case whether a document is to be
translated or read out by an interpreter. As a example, the courts have
stated that any document handed in before the proceedings take place
will be translated. If a document is handed in during the proceedings, it
may be sufficient for the interpreter to read it out. The administrative
courts of appeal have stated that documents will be translated unless this
is quite obviously unnecessary. No party has, however, ever invoked any
of the minority language acts - a fact that may seem strange, according to
the administrative courts of appeal in the administrative district for Sami,
since many cases are brought before the courts concerning the Reindeer
Husbandry Act of 1971 (SFS 1971:437).
As mentioned earlier in this report, refer to e.g. Part II, Article 7.1.d,
there has been no major increase in the demand for using regional
languages in dealings with public authorities and courts since the acts
came into force. This does not mean, however, that it is not possible to
use regional languages in dealings with public authorities and courts. It is
however the individual who decides him or herself which language he or
she wishes to use when visiting or telephoning the authorities.
A representative of the courts has been a member of the working group
mentioned above in Part I, Point 4 and convened by the Norrbotten
County Administrative Board as part of the courts’ supervisory
responsibility. One the working group’s tasks has been to evaluate and

79
inform about the minority language legislation. Representatives of courts
in the administrative district have participated in seminars and
conferences organised by the County Administrative Board.
NCA advertisements for new recording clerks or judges make no
mention of minority languages when recruiting personnel for the courts
covered by the legislation. The Norrbotten County Administrative
Board states that knowledge of minority languages is an asset but at the
same time of such marginal significance that it does not warrant a
mention in job advertisements.
Representation
The Swedish Bar Association (SBA) has compiled a directory of all law
firms in the country (lawyers and lawyers’ assistants). When a law firm
submits its details to the directory, it is asked to specify which languages
are spoken among its staff. The directory is available on the SBA website.
www.advokatsamfundet.se.
When providing details to the directory, not one law firm in the country
has specified Sami as one of its spoken language.
Swedish Prosecution Authority
The Public Prosecutor’s Office in Luleå is based in Luleå but also has
two local branches, one in Haparanda and one in Gällivare.
The Public Prosecutor’s Office in Luleå currently has no Sami-speaking
members of staff. This does not prevent communication in Sami, which
takes place when necessary with the help of interpreters and translation.
If anyone were to ask to use Sami during pre-trial hearings, an interpreter
would be brought in.
Article 9.2 – Validity of legal documents
As Sweden has stated in its previous reports concerning the
implementation of the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages, the validity of a document may not by law be questioned
simply because it has been drawn up in a regional or minority language.
There has been no change in this respect.
Article 9.3 –Important national statutory texts
As Sweden has stated in its previous reports concerning the
implementation of the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages, the Act (1999:1175) concerning the right to use the Sami
language in dealings with public authorities and courts has been
translated into North, Lule and South Sami and made available to the

80
general public in the form of a free brochure. The National Courts
Administration has also translated information about the Act into
North, Lule and South Sami for the benefit of the courts. This
information is available via the National Courts Administration website
at: www.dom.se. The police have also translated information into North,
Lule and South Sami, refer to Part II, Article 7.1.d
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
Sweden has undertaken to ensure the use of Sami before administrative
authorities and public services as follows:
1. Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of
residents who are users of regional or minority languages justifies the
measures specified below and according to the situation of each language,
the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
a.iii) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral
or written applications and receive a reply in these languages;
a.v) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly
submit a document in these languages
c) to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in a regional
or minority language
2.b the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral
or written applications in these languages
2.c the publication by regional authorities of their official documents also
in the relevant regional or minority languages
2.d the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in
the relevant regional or minority languages
2.g the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the
official language(s), of traditional and correct forms of place-names in
regional or minority languages
4. With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and
3 accepted by them, the Parties undertake to take one or more of the
following measures
a. translation or interpretation as may be required
5. The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in
the regional or minority languages, at the request of those concerned

81
Article 10.1.a.iii, 10.1.a.v, 10.1.c,10.2.b 10.2.c, 10.2.d and 10.4.a –Use
of spoken and written Sami
Applicable legislation
Under Section 2 of the Act (1999:1175) concerning the right to use the
Sami language in dealings with public authorities and courts, every
individual is entitled to use Sami in his or her oral or written contacts
with a public authority in matters concerning the exercise of public
authority in relation to him or her, provided the matter is connected to
the administrative district. If the private individual uses the Sami
language in such a matter, the authority is obliged to give an oral answer
in Sami. A decision in writing in such a matter shall contain information
in Sami that the decision may be orally translated into Sami by the
authority at the request of the individual. The act also states that the
authority shall strive to use the Sami language with Sami speakers. The
public authorities may determine special times and a special place for the
visits and telephone calls of Sami speakers.
These rights apply to contacts with municipal, central government,
regional and local public authorities, including county administrative
boards, public prosecutors, the police and employment agencies.
The Government Bill “National minorities in Sweden” (Government Bill
1998/99:143) states that statutory texts that are of special significance
for the national minorities must be translated into Sami (all varieties),
Finnish and Meänkieli. The Act (1999:1175) concerning the right to use
Sami in dealings with public authorities and courts has been translated
into Sami and is available to the general public in the form of a free
brochure.
Concerning issues relating to the translation of documents and access to
interpreters, municipal, central government, regional and local public
authorities, such as county administrative boards, public prosecutors, the
police and employment agencies, must supply translations or interpreters
that may be needed to fulfil the requirements laid down in the Act. A
government subsidy, administrated by the Norrbotten County
Administrative Board, is available for this.
The police
In the course of their daily work, police officers meet many people of
different ethnic, cultural or linguistic background and adapt their
working methods to the needs of these people. The tools used include
printed material in the relevant languages (see i.a. Part II, Article 7.1.d),
online websites, interpreters as well as members of their own staff who
are proficient in the relevant languages.
The police try to be responsive to the needs of different minorities and
since several of the minority populations can be found within delimited

82
geographical areas in the country, it is primarily up to the local police
authority to adapt its working methods to meet the needs of different
groups. The National Police Board does though offer different kinds of
support: IT-support, translations, website development, etc. The
National Police Board also works together with other agencies, including
the Office of the Ombudsman against Ethnic Discrimination (DO), to
be able to incorporate the needs of different minority groups and to
ensure that the human rights of these groups are observed and respected.
The police also welcome training academy applicants from the national
minorities and other groups with non-Swedish ethnic backgrounds and
run special information campaigns targeted at such groups. In this way,
the national minorities can exert more influence, whilst the police can be
more successful in their work and guarantee the national minorities their
statutory right to use regional or minority languages in their dealings
with public authorities.
The police authority in Norrbotten employ around 10 police officers
who come from the national minority groups. They speak several
minority languages: Sami, Tornedal Finnish and Meänkieli. Some of
these officers are also reindeer-herding Sami and are reindeer herders in
the spare time. The police authority also tries to timetable its work so
that police matters in Sami villages are taken care of by Sami-speaking
police officers.
As regards the use of interpreters, the police should hire them in their
dealings with people who do not have a command of the Swedish
language, pursuant to Section 8 of the Administrative Procedure Act
(SFS 1998:386). This provision is applied by the Swedish Police as a
matter of course.
Swedish Prosecution Authority
Refer to Part III, Article 9 regarding Sami.
Employment agencies
The employment agencies in Norrbotten County have no systematically
acquired skills in the Sami language among their own staff, but they do
have a structured network together with other authorities and
municipalities in the county, enabling them to offer services in Sami. The
spontaneous demand for employment agency services in Sami is very
limited, but the agencies feel it is important that Sami remains a living
language in their exercise of public authority.
Norrbotten County Administrative Board
The Norrbotten County Administrative Board, whose tasks include the
supervision of the special language legislation that applies within the
various administrative districts, has provided funding for an extra
temporary member of staff to work with national minority issues at the

83
Norrbotten Branch of the Swedish Association of Local Authorities in
order to increase the Association’s commitment to supporting and
coordinating the work of the municipalities in minority language issues.
Luleå University of Technology has been tasked by the County
Administrative Board working group (see Part I, Point 4 for more
information about the working group) to perform a study based on the
individual user of minority languages. This study was presented in a
report containing valuable information on existing problems and
obstacles facing users of minority languages in their dealings with public
authorities and courts.
Although the County Administrative Board working group has
highlighted several different contributory factors for why there has been
no actual increase in the use of minority languages in dealings with
public authorities and courts, the Norrbotten County Administrative
Board nevertheless proposed a number of measures in light of the report.
The ongoing work with the proposed measures differs from one
municipality to the next, depending in part on the different prevailing
conditions in the various municipalities. To encourage oral and written
use of Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli in dealings with public authorities
and courts, the municipalities of Arjeplog, Gällivare and Haparanda have
adopted minorities policy action plans. A similar plan is being developed
in the municipality of Övertorneå.
Furthermore, in the municipality of Jokkmokk, a minority languages
working group, appointed by the Jokkmokk Municipal Executive Board
and consisting of elected politicians, has been preparing issues for
discussion in the Board since 2003. This work is being pursued in a longterm perspective and is essentially the same as a minorities policy action
plan.
The municipality of Kiruna has implemented a number of measures in
recent years, primarily in its Childcare and Education Office.
For further information on inter alia the conclusions of the
abovementioned report, refer to Part 1, Point 4.
Elderly care
Refer to Part II, Article 7.1.d.
Article 10.g – Place names
Even before Sweden ratified the Framework Convention for the
Protection of National Minorities and the European Charter for
Regional or Minority Languages, the Riksdag decided that great
attention must be paid to the Sami and Finnish minorities in northern

84
Sweden when establishing place names on maps and when raising road
signs, etc. 6
the Heritage Conservation Act (1988:950) regulates the designation of
place names. When place names are to be established in multilingual
areas, they must be produced in the languages spoken in the region. The
minorities’ way of spelling should also be adopted. Even though the
minority language Meänkieli is not explicitly mentioned in the wording
of the Act, the good place name practice prescribed in the Act implies
that in regions where Meänkieli is traditionally spoken, signs shall be
erected in Meänkieli. Something which has also been carried out.
Sami is traditionally spoken in large parts of the Swedish forest and
mountain areas. Within this region, there are considerable differences in
pronunciation, grammar and vocabulary, which is why the varieties of
Sami spoken in Sweden are divided into North Sami, Lule Sami and
South Sami.
As a result, Sami names are written differently in different parts of the
region. A project has been going on for a number of years to insert the
correct Sami place names on maps and to erect signs with the Sami
names of places along the roads in different parts of Sápmi, Sameland.
Place names are nowadays written according to Sami spelling rules, in
accordance with a UN recommendation on minority names from 1972.
The spelling has also varied over time. For example, the Sami word for
mountain was previously spelt varre or vare, but today it is spelt várri in
North Sami, várre in Lule Sami and vaerie in South Sami.
Finnish and Meänkieli, like Sami, have a long history in northern
Sweden. Place names in Finnish and Meänkieli can primarily be seen in
Tornedalen and adjoining rural districts and are spelt in accordance with
Finnish and Meänkieli spelling rules. In the extreme north of Sweden, it
is not uncommon to have mixed names, with a Finnish part, Meänkieli
part and Sami part.
Article 10.5 –Family names
There is nothing in Swedish legislation that prevents individuals from
using or adopting Sami family names or surnames.
The Names Act (SFS 1982:670) contains provisions on how surnames
are acquired. Under Section 12, paragraph 1 of the Names Act, a newly
created surname must have a pronunciation, spelling and linguistic
correctness that make it suitable as a surname in Sweden. The Swedish
Patent and Registration Office deals with applications for amendments
6

Government Bill 1984/85:100

85
to and changes of names. When considering a name’s appropriateness,
Sami and Finnish language usage are considered to comprise national
parlance. Established practice after decisions made by the Court of
Patent Appeals gives inter alia national minorities the option of changing
to reverting to previous forms of names and Swedish pronunciation and
spelling requirements are waived. Each case is assessed on its own merit.
For technical reasons, however, the ability of different authorities to
handle special Sami characters may vary and may result in first names and
surnames not being properly dealt with.

Article 11 – Media
Sweden has undertaken to ensure the use of Sami in the media as follows:
1. The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority
languages within the territories in which those languages are spoken,
according to the situation of each language, to the extent that the public
authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role
in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence and
autonomy of the media:
a.iii) to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer programmes in
the regional or minority languages
d) to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio
and audiovisual works in the regional or minority languages
e.i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at
least one newspaper in the regional or minority languages
f.ii) to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual
productions in the regional or minority languages
2. The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio
and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in
identical or similar form to a regional or minority language, and not to
oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from
neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to ensure
that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and free
circulation of information in the written press in a language used in identical
or similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of the abovementioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may
be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are
prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests
of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention
of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection
of the reputation or rights of others, for preventing disclosure of information
received in confidence, or for maintaining the authority and impartiality of
the judiciary

86

Article 11.1.a.iii –broadcasting licenses for public service companies
In accordance with the broadcasting licenses for 2007-2009, public
service companies in Sweden shall consider the interests of linguistic and
ethnic minorities. The minority language of Sami shall, for example, be
given special status. Within the framework of the general terms of the
broadcasting licenses, the public service companies design their
programme offerings independently.
Sveriges Television (SVT) broadcasted a total of 67 hours of Sami
programmes in 2005 and 59 hours in 2006, including the news
programme Ođđasat.
Swedish Radio (SR) broadcasted a total of 467 hours or programmes in
Sami in 2005 and 666 hours in 2006.
SR Sameradion (Sami radio) broadcasts programmes in North, South
and Lule Sami as well as in Swedish.
Sveriges Utbildningsradio (Educational broadcasting arm of SR)
broadcasted programmes in Sami on both the radio and television in
2005 and 2006. It broadcasted a total of 8 hours television in Sami in
2005. The programmes were aimed at children, young people and adults.
The majority of the programmes were society-oriented programmes for
children and young people. Sveriges Utbildningsradio has also
broadcasted a course in North Sami on the radio.
Refer also to Part II, Article 7.1.d.
Article 11.1.d – Encouragement and/or facilitation of production and
distribution
In its report on Sweden, the Committee of Experts has asked whether
Filmpool Nord has an obligation to produce films in Sami. Filmpool
Nord has no such obligation. For further information on Filmpool
Nord, refer to Part II, Article 7.1.d.
For further information on encouragement and/or facilitation of
production and distribution, refer to Part III, Article 11.1.a.iii and
11.1.f.ii regarding Sami.

87
Article 11.1.e.i –Encourage and/or facilitate conditions for
newspapers
Adequate support for newspapers in minority languages is also essential
to their preservation and development. The terms and conditions
governing public press subsidies include special rules on the allocation of
funds to newspapers that address minorities in their own languages. In
October 2004, the Government decided to appoint a parliamentary
committee to analyse the need for press subsidies to newspapers aimed at
immigrants and national minorities. As the Committee of Experts noted
in its report in Sweden, this parliamentary committee submitted its final
report, entitled Diversity and Scope (Official Government Report
2006:8), in February 2006. In the report, the committee submitted
proposals for how to facilitate the establishment of newspapers in Sami
and Meänkieli respectively. These proposals are currently being discussed
within the Government Offices.
For information on the Swedish Press Committee, refer to Part I, Point
5, Committee of Ministers’ Recommendation 6.
Article 11.1.f.ii –Financial support to TV programmes in Sami
The Council of Europe’s Committee of Experts has asked whether
Sweden has given any special support to the production of TV
programmes in Sami. No special government support for the production
of TV programmes, regardless of language, has been given.
Article 11.2 – Right to reception of radio and TV broadcasts from
other countries
There are no restrictions either on the freedom of direct reception of
radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a
language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority
language or on the rebroadcasting of radio and television programmes
from neighbouring countries in such a language.

Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Sweden has undertaken to ensure the use of Sami in cultural activities
and facilities as follows:
1. With regard to cultural activities and facilities - especially libraries, video
libraries, cultural centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and
cinemas, as well as literary work and film production, vernacular forms of

88
cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries, including inter alia
the use of new technologies - the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities
are competent, have power or play a role in this field:
a) to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or
minority languages and foster the different means of access to works
produced in these languages
b) to foster the different means of access in other languages to works
produced in regional or minority languages by aiding and developing
translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities
c) to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in
other languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, postsynchronisation and subtitling activities;
d) to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting
cultural activities of various kinds make appropriate allowance for
incorporating the knowledge and use of regional or minority languages and
cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for which they provide
backing;
e) to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising
or supporting cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full
command of the regional or minority language concerned, as well as of the
language(s) of the rest of the population
f) to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a
given regional or minority language in providing facilities and planning
cultural activities
g) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies
responsible for collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing
works produced in the regional or minority languages
h) if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and
terminological research services, particularly with a view to maintaining
and developing appropriate administrative, commercial, economic, social,
technical or legal terminology in each regional or minority language
2. In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or
minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the
number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow,
encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in
accordance with the preceding paragraph
Article 12.1.a -Encouragement of cultural activities
Since 1993, support has been disbursed from the culture budget to the
Same Parliament to finance subsidies to Sami NGOs on the local and
national level. This support has gone to education and research initiatives

89
as well as to projects focusing on Sami culture. The Same Parliament
Council for Cultural Affairs decides independently, in accordance with
established criteria and methods for awarding subsidies, on how
government subsidies are to be allocated to Sami culture and Sami
organisations. The support currently amounts to about SEK 14.5 million
per year. In addition to government cultural funding, there is also SEK 5
million from the Sami Foundation. SEK 2 million of this goes to
woodwork and handicraft, the same amount to Sami newspapers and
SEK 700 000 to library facilities. SEK 5.5 million goes to dramatic and
narrative art. This funding is earmarked for the Sami theatre in Sweden,
Sámi Theáter, which is to perform Sami dramatic art as well as safeguard
and promote the Sami language and Sami heritage. Sámi Theáter has
received government support since 2001. Sámi Theáter can be found in
both Kiruna and Tärnaby but its main base is in Kiruna. Sámi Theáter’s
goal is to stimulate renewal and development, whilst at the same time
safeguarding and promoting the Sami language. During the 2004/2005
season and in cooperation with the Nordic Sami Theatre, it has
performed two works by Shakespeare in Sami, Hamlet and Macbeth, at
the Ice Globe Theatre in Jukkasjärvi. Among the subsidy recipients are
also the Sami Handicraft Foundation (Sameslöjdstiftelsen) and the
Samefolket newspaper.
The Same Parliament, which is itself responsible for Sami language
planning, adopted its own action plan for a proactive language policy. As
a result of this, the Same Parliament has also worked to integrate this aim
into its subsidy allocation to projects and to distinguish projects that
give this issue high priority. As regards the media, it has been a question
of requiring a certain percentage of the editorial content to be written in
Sami. This prioritisation of language policy will, in accordance with Same
Parliament decisions, continue in the future. Among other things, a
requirement for every nationwide organisation awarded a subsidy to
produce a written report on its efforts with Sami language development
will be introduced.
Refer also to Part II, Article 7.1.c.
Article 12.1.b –Foster access in other languages to works produced in
regional or minority language
As part of the subsidies given by the Swedish Arts Council to national
minority cultures, subsidies are given to projects that involve translation
between majority and minority languages. A case in point is the
publication support which has had such a focus. With the support from
the Swedish Arts Council to national minority culture, language and
literature having the focus, the undertaking to promote translation in
different directions can be said to have been fulfilled.

90
Refer also to Part II, Article 7.1.c.
Article 12.1.c –Foster access in regional or minority languages to
works produced in other languages
Refer to Part III, Article 12.1.b regarding Sami and Part II, Article 7.1.c.
Article 12.1.d –Allowance for incorporating knowledge and use of
regional or minority languages and cultures in productions
The Film Institute has supported Filmpool Nord, a regional resource
centre for film and video production in the county of Norrbotten.
Within the framework of the Centre’s activities, short films and
documentaries with a Sami culture theme are produced by Sami and
other Swedes. Film education programmes in which Sami have
participated have been run at the Centre. This focus is Filmpool Nord’s
own initiative and no particular restrictions are linked to the financial
support in this respect. It is also worth mentioning that this type of
production has often taken the form of a transnational coproduction.
Refer to Part II, Article 7.1.c regarding the Swedish Arts Council, The
National Archives and the Film Institute. Refer also to Part III, Article
12.1.a regarding Sami.
Article 12.1.e –Staff who have a full command of the regional or
minority languages concerned
The Same Parliament has a Council for Cultural Affairs that handles
most of the issues related to Sami cultural activities. The Same
Parliament is both a public authority and a representative body for the
Sami. Several of the staff at the Same Parliament have a command of
both Sami and Swedish. Several of the employees also have knowledge of
the minority languages Finnish and Meänkieli.
The Swedish Arts Council, which cooperates with SWEBLUL as regards
the processing of project subsidy applications, has, as a result, also been
able to utilise the language skills the council possesses. Refer also to Part
III, 12.1.f and Part II, Article 7.1.c.
Article 12.1.f –Participation of regional or minority language speakers
In its work with the cultures of the national minorities, the Swedish Arts
Council has continually consulted the groups concerned. The Council
has worked in particular with the Swedish Bureau for Lesser Used

91
Languages (SWEBLUL). The Council has recently initiated a review of
these forms of cooperation in order to find a model in which the
strategic work can be intensified and information on available funding
can be disseminated to the groups concerned in a better way. This review
has also been started in response to the comments and recommendations
outlined in the Committee of Experts previous review. Accordingly,
round-table discussions have been held with representatives of the
various organisations representing the national minorities. The idea is to
find a model which involves several parties in the processing of
applications so as to encourage more people to participate in cultural
work. SWEBLUL and the skills it possesses will, however, continue to be
a resource in this procedure.
The Sami have a far-reaching autonomy in the cultural field thanks to the
Same Parliament. The Same Parliament receives government support for
cultural activities, which is distributed by the Council for Cultural
Affairs within the Same Parliament. The Same Parliament may put
forward proposals in any area which the Sami themselves deem to be of
special interest to a robust Sami culture. The Sami Council, an NGO, is
also a forum in which the Sami can influence issues that concern them
Refer also to Part II, Article 7.1.c and Article 7.i.e.
Article 12.1.g –Archives
The Same Parliament has employed a special library advisor. This advisor
administrates the Sami Library, which also functions as a depository
library for loans to other libraries, schools and associations. The Library
is located at the same place as the Ájttes Library in Jokkmokk and has
collections of literature on the Sami written in the various Sami dialects
and by Sami authors. There is fiction, non-fiction, child fiction, poetry
and reference books, such as dictionaries, written in Sami. There are also
archives at Ájtte which collect material in Sami and about Sami issues.
It is also worth mentioning the archives at the Swedish Institute for
Dialectology, Onomastics and Folklore Research which are important
for the heritage of the national minority, including the Sami language.
For further information on e.g. archives, refer to Part II, Article 7.1.c.
Article 12.1.h -Language conservation
According to the Sami Parliament Act (SFS 1992:1433), it is one of the
Same Parliament’s main tasks to manage Sami language conservation and
development. The Same Parliament has elected to establish the Sami
Language Council and cooperate with the other Nordic countries. The

92
action plan Start for a proactive language policy (Start för en offensiv
språkpolitik) was adopted in a Same Parliament plenary session in
February 2004. In accordance with the programme, it was decided at that
time to suspend the Sami Language Council until further notice. At the
same time, however, it was also established that the Sami Language
Committee (Samisk språknämnd), the joint language body of the three
Nordic Sami parliaments, would have a greater role in joint language
planning and development. The Department of Language and Cultural
Work at the Same Parliament provides more day-to-day language
services.
The Swedish Institute for Dialectology, Onomastics and Folklore
Research, and in particular the Department of Dialectology, Onomastics
and Folklore Research in Umeå (DAUM) are also tasked with focusing
on the Sami language.
Refer also to Part II, Article 7.1.c.
Article 12.2 – Cultural activities outside the administrative districts
One of the aims of the Swedish Arts Council is to support cultural
diversity and exchange among different cultures throughout the country
(Government Bill 1996/97:3; Committee Report 1996/97:KrU2 and
Government Communication 1996/97:129). Accordingly, the forms of
support that are relevant to the national minority languages are also
aimed at the users of these languages outside their traditional areas of
use. The same applies to most other forms of relevant government
support for cultural activities.

Article 13 – Economic and social life
Sweden has undertaken to ensure the use of Sami in economic and social life as
follows:
1. With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake,
within the whole country:
a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting
without justifiable reasons the use of regional or minority languages in
documents relating to economic or social life, particularly contracts of
employment, and in technical documents such as instructions for the use of
products or installations

93
There is no legislation in Sweden that prohibits or limits the use of regional or
minority languages in documents relating to economic or social life.

Article 14 – Transfrontier exchange
Sweden has undertaken:
a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them
with the States in which the same language is used in identical or similar
form, or if necessary to seek to conclude such agreements, in such a way as
to foster contacts between the users of the same language in the States
concerned in the fields of culture, education, information, vocational
training and permanent education
b) for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or
promote cooperation across borders, in particular between regional or local
authorities in whose territory the same language is used in identical or
similar form.
Transfrontier exchange
Transfrontier exchange is common among the Sami, especially in the
border districts between Finland, Sweden and Norway, where Sami is
spoken. The Sami parliaments in Finland, Sweden and Norway work
together in most areas through e.g. the Sami Parliament Council. The
Sami in Russia participate as observers. The Council shall consider the
transfrontier interests of the Sami. One common issue is language work.
Together with the Sami in Russia, the parliaments cooperate in the joint
Sami Language Council. An important task of the Language Council is
to develop common standards for the Sami language in Sápmi, e.g. to
harmonise the varieties spoken in the different countries and the
terminology as well as to establish word data banks.
Other fora for transfrontier cooperation include the NGOs, the Sami
Council and the Nordic Sami Institute (Nordiskt Samiskt Institut). The
activities of the Sami Council are financed by the Nordic Council of
Ministers. The Council is a common NGO for the Sami in Finland,
Norway, Russia and Sweden and its task is to safeguard the Sami’s
interests in economic, social and cultural matters. The Sami Council is
represented in the Arctic Council as an NGO and the Swedish Ministry
for Foreign Affairs finances the Swedish part of it. One of the tasks of
the Nordic Sami Institute is to improve the situation for the Sami
population socially, judicially and economically through research and
information.

94
The Nordic countries have agreed to cooperate on radio broadcasting
and television programme production in Sami.
In Sweden at the Sami Education Centre in Jokkmokk and in Finland at
Sámi allaskuvla in Kautokeino, Sami students from Sweden, Norway and
Finland can read North, Lule and South Sami. This enables students who
e.g. speak South Sami in Norway to read the language at the Sami
Education Centre in Sweden
In Sweden and Norway there is also exchange in the form of two mobile
libraries that regularly travel back and forth across the border between
the two countries to Sami-speaking regions. Visitors to the libraries can
borrow books in Sami and books written by Sami authors. The libraries
are primarily financed by the Norwegian Same Parliament with help
from some municipalities in Sweden.
To promote, develop and preserve the Sami language, the Sami ministers
and the Same Parliament presidents in Norway, Finland and Sweden
have established a Nordic Sami Language Prize, Gollegiella, which means
“golden language”. The language prize is awarded every other year, as
from 2004, and given to individuals or organisations who have made
invaluable efforts to promote the Sami language.
A Nordic official body for Sami issues, the Nordic Sami Council, has
been established to promote more regular contact between Nordic
countries that have Sami populations. The Council has representatives
on the civil servant level from the Nordic countries as well as from the
Sami Parliaments and the ministries. The body meets twice a year.
During 2000, Sweden, Norway and Finland began to cooperate more
closely on issues relating to the Sami people. The ministers responsible
for Sami issues and the Presidents of the Sami Parliaments meet once a
year to discuss issues that concern the Sami from a Nordic perspective.
In 2002, the Nordic ministers responsible for Sami issues and the Nordic
Presidents of the Sami Parliaments appointed a group of experts with the
task of drawing up a draft Nordic Sami convention. The group presented
its proposal in November 2005. The expert group’s draft convention is
currently being discussed in the three countries.
In addition to the work with the draft convention, Sweden is also
negotiating with Norway on a new convention that will regulate the
cross-border Sami reindeer herding.
Work to draw up a declaration on the rights of indigenous peoples has
been ongoing within the UN for about ten years. A working group
under the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights completed its
work in February 2006. A report containing a draft wording of the
declaration will probably be submitted to the newly established UN

95
Human Rights Council later this year, to be subsequently adopted by the
UN General Assembly in the autumn. The draft declaration makes
reference to e.g. the right of indigenous peoples to self-determination
and land. Sweden and the Nordic countries have taken a leading role in
the establishment of the declaration.
For information on joint transfrontier cooperation for all the national
minorities, refer to Part II, Article 7.1.i.

96

Language: FINNISH

Article 8 – Education
Sweden has undertaken to provide education in Finnish as follows:
1.With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used, according to the situation of each of these
languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s)
of the State:
a.iii) to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least
to those pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered
sufficient; or
b.iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least
to those pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered
sufficient
c.iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least
to those pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a
number considered sufficient
d.iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least
to those pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a
number considered sufficient;
f.iii) if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult
education, to favour and/or encourage the offering of such languages as
subjects of adult and continuing education;
g. to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the
culture, which is reflected by the regional or minority language;
h. to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to
implement those of paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;
i. to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the
measures taken and progress achieved in establishing or developing the
teaching of regional or minority languages and for drawing up periodic
reports of their findings, which will be made public.
2. With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in
which the regional or minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties
undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language
justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the regional or
minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.

97
Article 8.1.a.iii –Pre-school activities
Sweden has no legislation that specifically relates to pre-school activities
for the national minorities. The Act (1999:1176) on the right to use Sami
in dealings with public authorities and courts of law does cover the
situation of pre-school children, however. Under this Act, the
municipalities within the administrative districts in Norrbotten County
must give parents the opportunity to put their children in pre-schools
where all or some of the activities are conducted in Finnish or Meänkieli
(Section 8). The administrative districts for Finnish and Meänkieli are
the municipalities of Gällivare, Haparanda, Kiruna, Pajala and
Övertorneå.
Unfortunately, the Government has no statistics on the number of preschools that are either entirely or partly run in Finnish.
Article 8.1.b.iv – Nine-year compulsory school education
Mother tongue tuition in compulsory school
In the school year 2006/07, there were an estimated 9 000 pupils entitled
to mother tongue tuition, about 40 per cent of whom actually took part.
Refer also to Part II, Article 7.1.f.
Bilingual education
There are currently seven independent compulsory schools in the
country that call themselves Sweden-Finnish schools and are bilingual.
Refer also to Part II, Article 7.1.f.
Study guidance
Refer to Part II, Article 7.1.f.
Independent schools
The National Agency for Education has recently approved the SwedenFinnish School in Upplands-Väsby as an independent special school,
which is eligible to receive support from the municipality. The education
in special schools aims to give children and young people with learning
difficulties an education adapted to each pupil’s individual needs and
conditions. This education corresponds as far as possible to that offered
in ordinary compulsory and upper secondary schools. The SwedenFinnish School Foundation in Upplands-Väsby is the governor of the
school. This approval is for years 7-10 (13-16 year-olds) and applies as
from April 2006 and on condition that the school starts to take in
students no later than the beginning of the 2007/2008 school year. The
school has a bilingual profile, which means more teaching in the Finnish
language. This is both feasible and in line with the requirements for
openness as laid down in the Swedish Education Act.

98

Refer also to Part II, Article 7.1.f.
Study guidance
Refer to Part II, Article 7.1.f.
Article 8.1.c.iv – Upper secondary school education
Refer to Part II, Article 7.1.f.
Article 8.1.d.iv –Technical and vocational training
Access to different forms of education is strongly linked to demand.
During the 1990s in Botkyrka Municipality close to Stockholm, a
programme offering vocational education at upper secondary level in
Finnish was run. The demand for this programme was very low,
however, resulting in it being discontinued after only a few years.
Today, there are technical and vocational education programmes for
school recreation leaders, computer operators and bilingual personal
assistants at Axevalla Folk High School.
Refer also to Part II, Article 7.1.f.
Article 8.1.e.iii –University education
Finnish can be studied at several universities in Sweden. Studies in the
Finnish language are offered at Uppsala University, Lund University,
Umeå University and Stockholm University. Some of these universities
have extensive exchange programmes with universities in Finland. It is
also possible to study Finnish regardless of place of residence as there is
a large range of distance learning programmes available.
The Government feels that it is important for Sweden to have welldeveloped and well-functioning education and research in the Finnish
language. Since there is a large Sweden-Finnish minority in Mälardalen,
an education initiative is needed at Mälardalen University. The
Government has therefore given Mälardalen University financial support
to be able to build up a centre for Finnish language and culture with the
aim of strengthening the Finnish language and the position of the
Sweden-Finnish minority in Mälardalen. The centre was established in
2002 and primarily focuses on education and research in Finnish and
Sweden-Finns - their culture and history in Sweden.

99
Stockholm University and Mälardalen University cooperate through
certain personal unions in the subject of Finnish. Research in Finnish can
also be conducted at Uppsala University.
Refer also to Part II, Article 7.1.f and Article 7.i.h. For information on
distance teacher training, refer also to Part III, Article 8.1.h regarding
Finnish.
Article 8.1.f.iii –Adult and continuing education
The Sweden-Finnish folk high school in Haparanda offers distance
learning in beginner’s Finnish. Axevalla Folk High School and the
Finnish Folk High School also offer general Finnish courses.
Courses in Finnish are also offered in large parts of the country through
folk high schools and study organisations.

Article 8.1.g –Education in history and culture
Refer to Part II, Article 7.3.
Article 8.1.h –Teacher training
For information in teacher training and in-service training for teachers,
refer to Part II, Article 7.1.f and Part III, Article 8.1.h regarding the Sami
language.
Article 8.1.i – Supervision
Refer to Part III, Article 8 regarding Sami.
Article 8.2 –Education outside the administrative districts
Mother tongue tuition in Finnish is also given in areas outside the
administrative districts. Refer also to Part II, Article 7.1.f for the key role
played by the Mother Tongue Theme website regarding the teaching of
Finnish.
The Government is aware of the problem of a lack of knowledge among
municipalities, schools and parents as to their rights and obligations with
regard to mother tongue tuition - a problem highlighted by the
Committee of Experts in its report on Sweden. As a result, the
Government, National Agency for Education, National Agency for

100
School Improvement and the Norrbotten County Administrative Board
have taken measures to increase knowledge and awareness of the rights
and obligations associated with mother tongue tuition for the national
minorities. Refer also to Part II, Article 7.3 and Part I, Point 4.
As mentioned above under e.g. Part III, Article 8.1.e regarding Finnish,
it is possible to study and do research in Finnish at the universities of
Lund, Stockholm and Uppsala and at Mälardalen University, all of which
are outside the administrative district for Finnish.
As mentioned under Part III, Article 8.1.f.iii regarding Finnish, it is also
possible to study at folk high schools outside the Finnish administrative
districts (Axevalla Folk High School in Skövde and the Finnish Folk
High School in Göteborg). The same is also true of the courses in
Finnish offered by the Swedish Workers’ Educational Association, ABF.

Article 9 – Judicial authorities
Sweden has undertaken to ensure the use of Finnish before judicial authorities
as follows:
1. The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the
number of residents using the regional or minority languages justifies the
measures specified below, according to the situation of each of these
languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the
present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper
administration of justice
a. in criminal proceedings:
ii) to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or minority
language; and/or
iii) to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not
be considered inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a regional
or minority language; and/or
iv) to produce, on request, documents connected with legal proceedings in
the relevant regional or minority language, if necessary by the use of
interpreters and translations involving no extra expense for the persons
concerned
b. in civil proceedings:
ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that
he or she may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby
incurring additional expense; and/or
iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or
minority languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations

101
c. in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that
he or she may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby
incurring additional expense; and/or
iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or
minority languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations
d. to take steps to ensure that the application of sub-paragraphs i and iii of
paragraphs b and c above and any necessary use of interpreters and
translations does not involve extra expense for the persons concerned
2. The Parties undertake:
a. not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State
solely because they are drafted in a regional or minority language; or
3. The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or minority
languages the most important national statutory texts and those relating
particularly to users of these languages, unless they are otherwise provided.

Article 9.1 –The right to use Finnish in criminal proceedings, civil
proceedings and proceedings in the administrative courts
Applicable legislation
Under Section 4 of the Act (1999:1176) concerning the right to use
Finnish and Meänkieli in dealings with public authorities and courts,
anyone who is a party or representative of a party in a case before a court
has the right to use Finnish if the case has a connection to the
administrative district for Finnish. This right applies to district and city
courts, county administrative courts, certain special courts and the appeal
courts.
The right to use the Sami language in court cases or matters, in
accordance with the abovementioned section, includes the right to
submit documents and written evidence in Sami, the right to have
documents pertaining to the case or matter orally translated and the right
to speak Sami in oral hearings before the court. The court shall translate
documents and written evidence into Swedish unless this is clearly
unnecessary (Section 5).
Persons wishing to use Sami during the court processing of a case or
matter in accordance with Section 4, shall so request in connection with
the opening of the case or matter or the first time the party is to make a
statement in the case or matter. If a request to use Finnish is presented
later, it may be rejected. A request to use Finnish may also be rejected if
it is manifestly for an unwarranted purpose (Section 6).

102
In connection with the Committee of Experts request for qualification
of the concept of “improper purpose” in Section 6, Sweden would like to
state the following: This provision is an exception to the rule and shall,
in accordance with the preparatory works (Government Bill
1998/99:143, p. 81 and 86), be applied very restrictively, but can be used
“for example when it is obvious the request has been made in order to
delay the court proceedings”.
The abovementioned rights to use Finnish are not associated with any
costs for defendants in criminal cases or respondents in civil
cases/administrative court matters.
Courts
The district court in Haparanda states that knowledge of Finnish is an
asset and that this is made clear in their job advertisements. More than
half the judges and court staff at the district court in Haparanda speak
Finnish.
Refer to Part III, Article 9 regarding Sami.
Representation
The Swedish Bar Association has compiled a directory of all law firms in
the country (lawyers and lawyers’ assistants). When a law firm submits
its details to the directory, it is asked to specify which languages are
spoken among its staff. The directory is available on the SBA website.
www.advokatsamfundet.se.
A total of 51 law firms (throughout the country) have specified the
Finnish language.
Swedish Prosecution Authority
The Public Prosecutor’s Office in Luleå is based in Luleå but also has
two local branches, one in Haparanda and one in Gällivare. There are two
administrators at the local prosecutor’s office in Haparanda who can
speak Meänkieli. They have also received two years’ of training in
Finnish through their employer. There is one prosecutor at the office in
Luleå who can speak Finnish. This means that the Prosecution Authority
can meet the existing need of contacts in Meänkieli and Finnish in
eastern Norrbotten.
Article 9.2 – Validity of legal documents
Refer to Part III, Article 10 regarding Sami.

103
Article 9.3 –Important national statutory texts
As Sweden has stated in its previous reports concerning the
implementation of the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages, the Act (1999:1176) on the right to use Sami in dealings with
public authorities and courts has been translated into North, Lule and
South Sami and made available to the general public in the form of a free
brochure. The National Courts Administration has also translated
information about this act into Finnish for the courts. The information
is available inter alia via the Administration’s website. www.dom.se. The
police have also translated information to Finnish, refer to Part II,
Article 7.1.d

Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
Sweden has undertaken to ensure the use of Finnish before administrative
authorities as follows:
1. Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of
residents who are users of regional or minority languages justifies the
measures specified below and according to the situation of each language,
the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
a.iii) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral
or written applications and receive a reply in these languages;
a.v) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly
submit a document in these languages
c) to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in a regional
or minority language
2.b the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral
or written applications in these languages
2.c the publication by regional authorities of their official documents also
in the relevant regional or minority languages
2.d the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in
the relevant regional or minority languages
2.g the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the
official language(s), of traditional and correct forms of place-names in
regional or minority languages
4. With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and
3 accepted by them, the Parties undertake to take one or more of the
following measures
a translation or interpretation as may be required

104
5. The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in
the regional or minority languages, at the request of those concerned

Article 10.1.a.iii, 10.1.a.v, 10.1.c, 10.2.b. 10.2.c, 0.10.2.d and 10.4.a –
Use of spoken and written Finnish
Applicable legislation
Under Section 2 of the Act (1999:1176) concerning the right to use the
Sami language in dealings with public authorities and courts, every
individual is entitled to use Sami in his or her oral or written contacts
with a public authority in matters concerning the exercise of public
authority in relation to him or her, provided the matter is connected to a
administrative district. If the individual uses Finnish in such a matter, the
authority is obliged to give an oral reply in Finnish. A decision in writing
in such a matter shall contain information in Sami that the decision may
be orally translated into Sami by the authority at the request of the
individual. The act also states that the authority shall strive to use the
Sami language with Finnish speakers. The public authorities may
determine special times and a special place for the visits and telephone
calls of Sami speakers.
These rights apply to contacts with municipal, central government,
regional and local public authorities, including county administrative
boards, public prosecutors, the police and employment agencies.
The Government Bill “National minorities in Sweden” (Government Bill
1998/99:143) states that statutory texts that are of special significance
for the national minorities must be translated into Sami (all varieties),
Finnish and Meänkieli. The Act (1999:1176) concerning the right to use
Finnish and Meänkieli in dealings with public authorities and courts has
been translated into Finnish and is available to the general public in the
form of a brochure that can be obtained free of charge.
Concerning issues relating to the translation of documents and access to
interpreters, municipal, central government, regional and local public
authorities, such as county administrative boards, public prosecutors, the
police and employment agencies, must supply translations or interpreters
that may be needed to fulfil the requirements laid down in the Act. The
Government supplies a grant for this which is administrated by the
Norrbotten County Administrative Board.
Furthermore, the municipalities in the administrative district for Finnish
are obliged to supply elderly care either entirely or partly in Finnish.
The police
Refer to Part III, Article 10 regarding Sami.

105
Swedish Prosecution Authority
Refer to Part III, Article 9 regarding Finnish.
The employment agencies
The employment agencies in Norrbotten county supply all their services
in Finnish as a matter of course. So many of the staff are bilingual that
anyone visiting an agency will always be able to find someone with a
good command of the Finnish language.
Norrbotten County Administrative Board
Refer to Part III, Article 10 regarding Sami.
Elderly care
Refer to Part II, Article 7.1.d.

Article 10.g – Place names
Refer to Part III, Article 10 concerning Sami.
Article 10.5 - Family names
Refer to Part III, Article 10 concerning Sami.

Article 11 – The media
Sweden has undertaken to ensure the use of Finnish in the media as follows:
1. The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority
languages within the territories in which those languages are spoken,
according to the situation of each language, to the extent that the public
authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role
in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence and
autonomy of the media:
a.iii) to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer programmes in
the regional or minority languages
c.i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one television
channel in the regional or minority languages; or
d. to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio
and audiovisual works in the regional or minority languages
e.i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at
least one newspaper in the regional or minority languages
f.ii) to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual
productions in the regional or minority languages

106

2. The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio
and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used
in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language, and not to
oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from
neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to
ensure that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and
free circulation of information in the written press in a language used in
identical or similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of
the above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties and
responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions
or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic
society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public
safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health
or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for
preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for
maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary
Article 11.1.a.iii – Broadcasting licenses for public service companies
In accordance with the broadcasting licenses for 2007-2009, public
service companies in Sweden shall consider the interests of linguistic and
ethnic minorities. The minority language of Finnish shall, for example,
be given special status. Within the framework of the general terms of the
broadcasting licenses, the public service companies design their
programme offerings independently.
Sveriges Television (SVT) broadcasts news, current affairs, children’s
programmes, documentaries, etc., in Finnish. The daily news programme
Uutiset highlights the conditions in Sweden and other countries from a
Sweden-Finnish perspective. SVT broadcast a total of 139 hours of
Finnish-speaking programmes in 2005 and 131 hours in 2006. Sveriges
Utbildningsradio (Educational Broadcasting Company - UR) broadcasts
television programmes in Finnish.
SR (Swedish Radio) Sisuradio is responsible for both nationwide and
regional/local broadcasts in Finnish. A central component of SR
Sisuradio’s news coverage has been to review the development of Finnish
as a national minority language in Sweden.
SR broadcast a total of 7 227 hours of Finnish programmes in 2005 and 7
225 hours in 2006. UR broadcast 36 hours of television programmes in
Finnish in 2005. The programmes were aimed at children, young people
and adults. The Finnish-speaking TV programmes discuss subjects such
as literature, health, nature and the Finnish language. They have also
broadcast a Finnish-speaking drama series for young people.

107

Refer to also Part II, Article 7.1.d.

Article 11.1.c.i – Encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least
one TV channel in the minority languages
In connection with the transition from analogue to digital terrestrial
television broadcasting in Sweden and Finland, the exchange of TV
broadcasts between Sweden and Finland has been slightly reorganised,
resulting in a strengthening of the exchange due to the broadcasting area
for both the Swedish channel in Finland and the Finnish channel in
Sweden being extended. The claim that the exchange was in danger of
disappearing is therefore unfounded.
In Sweden, a Finnish channel has been distributed in the Swedish digital
terrestrial network in Stockholm, Västerås and Uppsala since 12 March
2007. By extending the distribution area from Stockholm only to
basically the whole of Mälardalen, a considerably greater number of
Finnish-speaking households can see the channel free of charge. The
channel is also distributed in the digital cable network to a large number
(significantly more than the previous 26) of places in Sweden.
Because digital distribution is cheaper than analogue, the transition in
Sweden has meant that the same government appropriation can finance
broadcasts not just in Stockholm but also in Västerås and Uppsala. In
connection with the transition, the funding model has been changed to
give the National Association of Finns in Sweden greater responsibility
for practical issues that emerge in conjunction with the distribution of
the channel. The National Association of Finns in Sweden is therefore
allocated all the appropriation that is earmarked for the funding of a
Finnish channel in Sweden. The National Association then enters into
agreements with distributors to provide as easy access as possible to the
channel for Finnish-speaking households.
Article 11.1.d. – Encouragement and/or facilitation of production and
distribution
For information on Filmpool Nord, which has been involved in
coproductions of films in Finnish, refer to Part II, Article 7.1.d.
For information on encouragement and/or facilitation of production and
distribution, refer to Part III, Article 11.1.a.iii and 11.1.f.ii regarding
Finnish.

108
Article 11.1.e.i – Encourage and/or facilitate conditions for
newspapers
Adequate support for newspapers in minority languages is also essential
to their preservation and development. The terms and conditions
governing public press subsidies include special rules on the allocation of
funds to newspapers that address minorities in their own languages. In
October 2004, the Government decided to appoint a parliamentary
committee to analyse the need for press subsidies to newspapers aimed at
immigrants and national minorities. The committee submitted its final
report in February 2006. In the report, the committee submitted
proposals for how to facilitate the establishment of newspapers in Sami
and Meänkieli respectively. These proposals are currently being discussed
within the Government Offices.
As the Committee of Experts noted in its second report on Sweden’s
implementation of the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages (Point 212), there are two newspapers in Sweden with Finnish
content - Ruotsin Suomalainen, published once a week, and
Haparandabladet, which comes out three times a week.
For information on the Swedish Press Committee, refer to Part I, Point
5 (Recommendation 6) and for information on Committee Report
Diversity and scope (Official Government Report 2006:8), refer to Part
III, Article 11.e.i regarding Sami.
Refer also to Part III, Article 11.1.a iii and 11.1.f.ii regarding Finnish.

Article 11.1.f.ii – Financial support to TV programmes in Finnish
Refer to Part III, Article 11.1.f.ii regarding Sami.
Article 11.2 – Right to reception of radio and TV broadcasts from
other countries
Refer to Part III, Article 10 concerning Sami.

Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Sweden has undertaken to ensure the use of Finnish in cultural activities and
facilities as follows:
1. With regard to cultural activities and facilities - especially libraries, video
libraries, cultural centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and

109
cinemas, as well as literary work and film production, vernacular forms of
cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries, including inter alia
the use of new technologies - the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities
are competent, have power or play a role in this field:
a. to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or
minority languages and foster the different means of access to works
produced in these languages
b. to foster the different means of access in other languages to works
produced in regional or minority languages by aiding and developing
translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities
c. to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in
other languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, postsynchronisation and subtitling activities;
d. to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in
other languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, postsynchronisation and subtitling activities;
f. to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a
given regional or minority language in providing facilities and planning
cultural activities
g. to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies
responsible for collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing
works produced in the regional or minority languages
h. if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and
terminological research services, particularly with a view to maintaining
and developing appropriate administrative, commercial, economic, social,
technical or legal terminology in each regional or minority language
2. In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or
minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the
number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow,
encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in
accordance with the preceding paragraph.
Article 12.1.a - Encouragement of cultural activities
Uusi teatteri (The New Finnish Theatre), which is one of the most
important Sweden-Finnish cultural institutions in Sweden currently
receives SEK 2 million a year from the Swedish state. The special
Swedish-Finnish Cultural Foundation also receives government funding.
The aim of the Foundation is to promote Finnish-speaking culture in
Sweden and it has awarded grants to projects to increase mutual
linguistic comprehension.
Refer also to Part II, Article 7.1.c.

110

Article 12.1.b – Foster access in other languages to works produced in
regional or minority language
Refer to Part III, Article 12.1.b in the section on Sami and Part II,
Article 7.1.c.
Since 1961, Sweden has supported the translation to Swedish of certain
Finnish specialist literature, through an agreement with Finland. The
translation, which receives funding from the Swedish Arts Council, is
done by the Committee of Experts for the Translation of Finnish
Specialist Literature into Swedish.
Article 12.1.c – Foster access in regional or minority languages to
works produced in other languages
See Part III, Article 12.1.b regarding Sami and Part II, Article 7.1.c.
Article 12.1.d –Allowance for incorporating knowledge and use of
regional or minority languages and their culture in productions
Refer to Part II, Article 7.1.c.
Article 12.1.f – Participation of regional or minority language
speakers
See Part III, Article 12.1.f regarding Sami and SWEBLUL. Refer also to
Part II, Article 7.1.c.
Article 12.1.g –Archives
Sweden-Finns have had their own archive, the Sweden-Finns Archive
(Sverigefinländarnas arkiv) for several years. The Archive, which has
been in existence since 1977 and has its own premises and depositories at
the National Archives, receives financial support every year from the
National Archives’ Private Archives Committee. In recent years, the
Archive has received between SEK 175 000 and SEK 200 000 per year
from this source. There are also other projects that are also financed by
the Committee or the Swedish Arts Council.
The Finnish Institute in Stockholm (Finlandshuset), which is an institute
for Finnish culture, is financed by the Finnish state with contributions
from the Swedish Government. Finlandhuset has a Sweden-Finnish

111
library that has received support from the Swedish Arts Council, support
that amounted to SEK 1 million in 2006.
Swedish public libraries have extensive collections of Finnish literature.
Both the lending and purchase of Finnish books have decreased at
Swedish libraries since the mid-1980s, however. To combat this trend,
the Swedish Arts Council initiated a three-year project in 1995, the aim
of which was to develop the Finnish-speaking activities of the libraries
and to examine whether there was any connection between lending
trends and the quality of the collections. The aim of the project has also
been to find a practicable working method for future Finnish library
activities at Swedish public libraries. Swedish libraries that have
participated in the project are the county libraries in Borås, Göteborg,
Norrbotten County Library and Västmanland County Library. All the
libraries participating in the project have gone through their collections
and tried different ways of making the Finnish literature more attractive
to lenders. This also had a positive impact on lending. The project report
also proposes certain measures to further promote Finnish literature at
Swedish libraries.
See Part III, Article 12.1.g regarding Sami and the Swedish Institute for
Dialectology, Onomastics and Folklore Research and Part II, Article
7.1.c regarding the Archives Commission.
Article 12.1.h - Language conservation
The Language Council of the Finnish Language in Sweden that has had
the task of safeguarding and promoting the Finnish language in Sweden
since 1975, was integrated into the new Language Council at the Swedish
Institute for Dialectology, Onomastics and Folklore Research. Work
with the Finnish language in Sweden is continuing unabatedly within this
new framework. Furthermore, the idea, as previously mentioned in this
report, has been to strengthen the work with minority languages through
an overarching Swedish language policy.
Refer also to Part II, Article 7.1.c.
Article 12.2 – Cultural activities outside the administrative districts
Refer to Part III, Article 12.2 regarding Sami and Part II, Article 7.1.c.

112
Article 13 – Economic and social life
Sweden has undertaken to ensure the use of Finnish in economic and social
life as follows:
1. With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake,
within the whole country:
a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting
without justifiable reasons the use of regional or minority languages in
documents relating to economic or social life, particularly contracts of
employment, and in technical documents such as instructions for the use of
products or installations
There is no legislation in Sweden that prohibits or limits the use of regional or
minority languages in documents relating to economic or social life.

Article 14 – Transfrontier exchange
Sweden has undertaken:
a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them
with the States in which the same language is used in identical or similar
form, or if necessary to seek to conclude such agreements, in such a way as
to foster contacts between the users of the same language in the States
concerned in the fields of culture, education, information, vocational
training and permanent education
b) for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or
promote cooperation across borders, in particular between regional or local
authorities in whose territory the same language is used in identical or
similar form.
Transfrontier exchange
Finland and Sweden have a long common history. The two countries
were one and the same state from the 12th century until 1809. The
countries also have common languages. Swedish is an official language in
Finland and Finnish is a minority language in Sweden. Therefore, it is
natural that the language councils in both countries cooperate with each
other.
The Finnish-Swedish Education Council has been assigned the task of
facilitating the educational situation for the Finnish minority in Sweden

113
and promoting increased knowledge and understanding of the common
history and heritage of Finland and Sweden.
Cooperation is also ongoing between the Swedish and Finnish
Government Offices in the form of a Finnish-Swedish working group at
senior official level. The focus of the working group is on the situation
for the Finnish language in Sweden and for the Swedish language in
Finland as well as other issues of common interest to the national
minorities.
Transfrontier cooperation has been ongoing for decades between
Sweden-Finnish organisations in Sweden and organisations in Finland,
such as the Central Association for Nordic Citizen Cooperation
(Pohjola - Norden), Finlandssamfundet (the Finland Society) and the
Swedish Assembly of Finland (Svenska Finlands folkting). Such
cooperation is important for the Sweden-Finnish minority in Sweden to
preserve and develop their language and culture.
For information on transfrontier cooperation that is carried out jointly
for the national minorities, refer to Part II, Article 7.1.i.

114

Language: MEÄNKIELI

Article 8 – Education
Sweden has undertaken to provide education in Meänkieli as follows:
1. With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used, according to the situation of each of these
languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the official language(s)
of the State:
a.iii) to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least
to those pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered
sufficient; or
b.iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least
to those pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered
sufficient
c.iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least
to those pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a
number considered sufficient
d.iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least
to those pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a
number considered sufficient;
f.iii) if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult
education, to favour and/or encourage the offering of such languages as
subjects of adult and continuing education;
g. to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the
culture which is reflected by the regional or minority language;
h. to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to
implement those of paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;
i. to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the
measures taken and progress achieved in establishing or developing the
teaching of regional or minority languages and for drawing up periodic
reports of their findings, which will be made public.
2. With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in
which the regional or minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties
undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language
justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the regional or
minority language at all the appropriate stages of education.

115

Article 8.1.a.iii – Pre-school activities
The Norrbotten County Administrative Board has allocated special
support to Pajala Municipality to enable experiences from implemented
development projects on pre-school activities in Meänkieli to be
disseminated as best practice to other schools in the county.
Refer also to Part II, Article 7.1.f and Part III, Article 8.1.a iii regarding
Finnish.
Article 8.1.b.iv – Primary school education
Mother tongue tuition in primary school
Mother tongue tuition in Meänkieli is offered at three out of five
municipalities in the administrative district for Meänkieli. One of the
municipalities has said that there is no demand for mother tongue tuition
in Meänkieli.
Refer also to Part II, Article 7.1.f.
Bilingual education
Refer to Part II, Article 7.1.f.
Study guidance
Refer to Part II, Article 7.1.f.
Independent schools
Refer to Part II, Article 7.1.f.
Study guidance
Refer to Part II, Article 7.1.f.
Article 8.1.c.iv – Upper secondary school education
In 2004, mother tongue tuition was given in Meänkieli to two upper
secondary school pupils in two different municipalities (Pajala and
Övertorneå) within the administrative district for Meänkieli. One
student has received a grade in Meänkieli during the 2006/07 school year.
Refer also to Part II, Article 7.1.f.

Article 8.1.d.iv – Technical and vocational training

116

Refer to Part II, Article 7.1.f.
Article 8.1.e.iii – University education
Within the framework of the initiative carried out by the Swedish
Research Council between 2002 and 2005, and which is mentioned under
Part II, Article 7.1.h, Stockholm University was awarded funding for
special initiatives in e.g. Meänkieli. For information on the education of
the Tornedalers as a national minority in Sweden, see Part II, Article
7.1.h.
In the autumn of 2007, there are courses in Meänkieli at Luleå University
of Technology (flexibly in consultation with teachers) and at Stockholm
University (evenings). During the spring term of 2008 (as in the summer
of 2007), it will be possible to study Meänkieli at a distance (Umeå
University). Distance learning makes people’s place of residence
irrelevant.
Studies in Meänkieli are also an integral part of studies in Finnish at
some of the universities that offer courses in Finnish. Luleå University
of Technology, for example, has had courses in Meänkieli lasting
between five and twenty weeks. Refer also to Part III, Article 8.1.e.iii
regarding Finnish.
Refer also to Part II, Article 7.1.f and Article 7.i.h.
Article 8.1.f.iii –Adult and continuing education
Tornedalen Folk High School cooperates closely with Meänkielispeakers in Tornedalen.
Some study organisations offer courses in Meänkieli.
The organisation Meän Akateemi/Academia Tornedaliensis offers
language courses in Meänkieli throughout Arctic Scandinavia.

Article 8.1.g. – Education in history and culture
For further information, refer to Part II, Article 7.3

Article 8.1.h – Teacher training

117

At Luleå University of Technology, teachers from e.g. Övertorneå have
undergone a ten-week course in Meänkieli.
For further information about teacher training and in-service training for
teachers, refer to Part II, Article 7.1.f and Part III, Article 8.1.h
regarding the Sami language.
Article 8.1.i. – Supervision
Refer to Part III, Article 8 concerning Sami.
Article 8.2 – Education outside the administrative districts
There is little demand for tuition in Meänkieli outside the administrative
district for Meänkieli. The reason for this may be that Meänkielispeakers mainly live in the administrative district for Meänkieli.
Via the Mother Tongue Theme website, it is possible to obtain distance
mother tongue tuition in Meänkieli. Regarding the significance of the
Mother Tongue Theme website for mother tongue tuition in Meänkieli,
refer to Part II, Article 7.1.f.
Adult education associations have sometimes arranged courses in
Meänkieli outside the administrative district.
The organisation Meän Akateemi/Academia Tornedaliensis offers
language courses in Meänkieli throughout Arctic Scandinavia.
Refer also to Part I, Point 4, Part II, Article 7.3 and Part III, Article 8.2
regarding Sami.
As mentioned above under e.g. Part III, Article 8.1.e.iii regarding
Meänkieli, it is possible to study and conducted research in Meänkieli at
Stockholm University. Refer also to Part III, Article 8.1.e.iii regarding
Finnish since several universities that offer tuition in Finnish also teach
in Meänkieli as an integral part of their Finnish programmes.

Article 9 – Judicial authorities
Sweden has undertaken to ensure the use of Meänkieli before judicial
authorities as follows:

118
1. The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the
number of residents using the regional or minority languages justifies the
measures specified below, according to the situation of each of these
languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the
present paragraph is not considered by the judge to hamper the proper
administration of justice
a. in criminal proceedings:
ii) to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or minority
language; and/or
iii) to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not
be considered inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a regional
or minority language; and/or
iv) to produce, on request, documents connected with legal proceedings in
the relevant regional or minority language, if necessary by the use of
interpreters and translations involving no extra expense for the persons
concerned
b. in civil proceedings:
ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that
he or she may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby
incurring additional expense; and/or
iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or
minority languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations
c. in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that
he or she may use his or her regional or minority language without thereby
incurring additional expense; and/or
iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or
minority languages, if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations
d. to take steps to ensure that the application of sub-paragraphs i and iii of
paragraphs b and c above and any necessary use of interpreters and
translations does not involve extra expense for the persons concerned
2. The Parties undertake:
a. not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State
solely because they are drafted in a regional or minority language; or
3. The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or minority
languages the most important national statutory texts and those relating
particularly to users of these languages, unless they are otherwise provided.

119
Article 9.1 –The right to use Meänkieli in criminal proceedings, civil
proceedings and proceedings in the administrative courts
Applicable legislation
Refer to Part III, Article 9 regarding Finnish. The information given
under the heading “Applicable legislation” also applies to Meänkieli.
Courts
Refer to Part III, Article 9 regarding Finnish. The information given
under the heading “Courts” also applies to Meänkieli.
Representation
The Swedish Bar Association has compiled a directory of all law firms in
the country (lawyers and lawyers’ assistants). When a law firm submits
its details to the directory, it is asked to specify which languages are
spoken among its staff. The directory is available on the SBA website.
www.advokatsamfundet.se.
When providing details to the directory, not one law firm in the country
has specified Meänkieli as one of its spoken language.
Swedish Prosecution Authority
The Public Prosecutor’s Office in Luleå is based in Luleå but also has
two local branches, one in Haparanda and one in Gällivare. There are two
administrators at the local prosecutor’s office in Haparanda who can
speak Meänkieli. They have also received two years’ of training in
Finnish through their employer. This means that the Prosecution
Authority can meet the existing need of contacts in Meänkieli and
Finnish in eastern Norrbotten.
Article 9.2 – Validity of legal documents
Refer to Part III, Article 10 regarding Sami.
Article 9.3 – Important national statutory texts
Refer to Part III, Article 9.3 regarding Finnish and to Part II, Article
7.1.d concerning information about the police that has been translated
into Meänkieli.

120
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
Sweden has undertaken to ensure the use of Meänkieli before administrative
authorities as follows:
1. Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of
residents who are users of regional or minority languages justifies the
measures specified below and according to the situation of each language,
the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
a.iii) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral
or written applications and receive a reply in these languages;
a.v) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly
submit a document in these languages
c) to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in a regional
or minority language
2.b the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral
or written applications in these languages
2.c the publication by regional authorities of their official documents also
in the relevant regional or minority languages
2.d the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in
the relevant regional or minority languages
2.g the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the
official language(s), of traditional and correct forms of place-names in
regional or minority languages
4. With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and
3 accepted by them, the Parties undertake to take one or more of the
following measures
a) translation or interpretation as may be required
5. The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in
the regional or minority languages, at the request of those concerned
Article 10.1.a.iii, 10.1.a.v, 10.1.c,10.2.b, 10.2.c, 10.2.d and 10.4.a –
Use of spoken and written Meänkieli
Applicable legislation
Refer to Part III, Article 10.1.a.iii, 10.1.a.v, 10.1.c,10.2.b, 10.2.c, 10.2.d
and 10.4.a regarding Finnish. The information given under the heading
“Applicable legislation” also applies to Meänkieli.
The police
Refer to Part III, Article 10 concerning Sami.

121
Swedish Prosecution Authority
Refer to Part III, Article 9 concerning Meänkieli.
The employment agencies
Meänkieli is not a problem for the employment agency in Norrbotten. In
practice, Meänkieli users speak Swedish to the agency staff, although
services in Meänkieli can be offered if necessary.
Norrbotten County Administrative Board
Refer to Part III, Article 10 regarding Sami.
Elderly care
Refer to Part II, Article 7.1.d.
Article 10.g – Place names
Refer to Part III, Article 10 regarding Sami.
Article 10.5 – Family names
Refer to Part III, Article 10 regarding Sami.

Article 11 – Media
Sweden has undertaken to ensure the use of Meänkieli in the media as follows:
1. The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority
languages within the territories in which those languages are spoken,
according to the situation of each language, to the extent that the public
authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role
in this field, and respecting the principle of the independence and
autonomy of the media:
a.iii) to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer programmes in
the regional or minority languages
d) to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio
and audiovisual works in the regional or minority languages
e.i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at
least one newspaper in the regional or minority languages
f.ii) to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual
productions in the regional or minority languages
2. The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio
and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used

122
in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language, and not to
oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from
neighbouring countries in such a language. They further undertake to
ensure that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and
free circulation of information in the written press in a language used in
identical or similar form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of
the above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with it duties and
responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions
or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic
society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public
safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health
or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for
preventing disclosure of information received in confidence, or for
maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary

Article 11.1.a.iii – Broadcasting licenses for public service companies
In accordance with the broadcasting licenses for 2007-2009, public
service companies in Sweden shall consider the interests of linguistic and
ethnic minorities. The minority language of Meänkieli shall, for example,
be given special status. Within the framework of the general terms of the
broadcasting licenses, the public service companies design their
programme offerings independently.
Sveriges Television (SVT) broadcasted documentaries and children’s
programmes in Meänkieli for a total of six hours in 2005, a figure that
rose to ten hours in 2006.
Swedish Radio (SR) broadcasted a total of 827 hours in Meänkieli in
2005, a figure that rose to 834 hours in 2006. SR Sisuradio also
broadcasts locally across Norrbotten in Meänkieli, Mondays to Fridays.
SR Sisuradio is responsible for both national broadcasts as well as
regional/local broadcasts in Meänkieli. A central component of SR
Sisuradio’s news coverage has been to review the development of
Meänkieli as a national minority language in Sweden.
Refer to also Part II, Article 7.1.d.
Article 11.1.d. – Encouragement and/or facilitation of production and
distribution
Refer also to Part III, Article 11.1.a iii and 11.1.f.ii regarding Meänkieli.

123
For information on Filmpool Nord, which produces, among other
things, animated children’s programmes in Meänkieli, refer to Part II,
Article 7.1.d.
Article 11.1.e.i – Encourage and/or facilitate conditions for
newspapers
Adequate support for newspapers in minority languages is also essential
to their preservation and development. The terms and conditions
governing public press subsidies include special rules on the allocation of
funds to newspapers that address minorities in their own languages. In
October 2004, the Government decided to appoint a parliamentary
committee to analyse the need for press subsidies to newspapers aimed at
immigrants and national minorities. The Committee submitted its final
report in February 2006. In the report, the committee submitted
proposals for how to facilitate the establishment of newspapers in Sami
and Meänkieli respectively. These proposals are currently being discussed
within the Government Offices.
For information on the Swedish Press Committee, refer to Part I, Point
5 (Recommendation 6) and for information on Committee Report
Diversity and scope (Official Government Report 2006:8), refer to Part
III, Article 11.e.i regarding Sami.
Refer also to Part III, Article 11.1.a.iii and Article 11.1.f.ii regarding
Meänkieli.
Article 11.1.f.ii – Financial support to TV programmes
Refer to Part III, Article 11.1.f.ii regarding Sami.
Article 11.2 – Right to reception of radio and TV broadcasts from
other countries
There are no restrictions either on the freedom of direct reception of
radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a
language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority
language or on the rebroadcasting of radio and television programmes
from neighbouring countries in such a language.
The Tornedalers are interested in receiving media productions in
Finnish. Refer also to Part III, Article 11.2 regarding Finnish.

124
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Sweden has undertaken to ensure the use of Meänkieli in cultural activities and
facilities as follows:
1. With regard to cultural activities and facilities - especially libraries, video
libraries, cultural centres, museums, archives, academies, theatres and
cinemas, as well as literary work and film production, vernacular forms of
cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries, including inter alia
the use of new technologies - the Parties undertake, within the territory in
which such languages are used and to the extent that the public authorities
are competent, have power or play a role in this field:
a. to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or
minority languages and foster the different means of access to works
produced in these languages
b. to foster the different means of access in other languages to works
produced in regional or minority languages by aiding and developing
translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;
d. to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting
cultural activities of various kinds make appropriate allowance for
incorporating the knowledge and use of regional or minority languages and
cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for which they provide
backing;
f. to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a
given regional or minority language in providing facilities and planning
cultural activities
g. to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies
responsible for collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing
works produced in the regional or minority languages
2. In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or
minority languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the
number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow,
encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in
accordance with the preceding paragraph

Article 12.1.a - Encouragement of cultural activities
The Tornedal Theatre is an active amateur theatre that performs plays in
Meänkieli and Swedish. Since the financial year of 2002, the Theatre has
received financial support from the Swedish Arts Council every year.
This support has increased and currently amounts to SEK 2 million each
year.

125

The Swedish Tornedalian Association (Svenska Tornedalingars
Riksförbund Tornionlaaksolaiset - STR-T) was founded in 1981. The
aim of the Association is to look after the linguistic and cultural interests
of the Tornedalers. It does this by producing teaching material and a
dictionary in Meänkieli in order to develop the written form of the
language. The Association has received project support from the Swedish
Arts Council to produce literature in relevant areas of interest. Meän
Akateemi (Academia Tornedaliensis) is a foundation that offers different
cultural activities, language programmes and publications in Meänkieli. It
also runs a kind of informal language council. This foundation has also
received project support from the Swedish Arts Council.
Refer also to Part II, Article 7.1.c.
Article 12.1.b – Foster access in other languages to works produced in
regional or minority language
The Swedish Arts Council, as mentioned previously, allocated support to
national minority literature and culture. In response to the comments
made in the Council of Europe’s previous review of Sweden’s policy in
this area, it is worth mentioning that the Swedish Arts Council has given
subsidies to a number of publishing companies, including Barents
publisher, Kaamos, Meän akateemi and Meänkieli förlaaki. The aim has
normally been to support Meänkieli as a language, i.e. mainly support for
the publishing of books in Meänkieli. Several of the books published by
these companies are bilingual, however, which also fosters access to these
works for users of the majority language.
See Part III, Article 12.1.b regarding Sami and Part II, Article 7.1.c.
Article 12.1.c – Foster access in regional or minority languages to
works produced in other languages
The Swedish Arts Council is the agency responsible for allocating
support to cultural activities. For further information on the Council’s
support to the national minorities, information on the National Archives
and the Film Institute, refer to Part II, Article 7.1.c.
Article 12.1.f – Participation of regional or minority language
speakers
See Part III, 12.1.f regarding Sami and SWEBLUL. Refer also to Part II,
Article 7.1.c.

126

Article 12.1.g –Archives
As mentioned in previous reports, a collection of literature published in
Meänkieli is kept at the National Library of Sweden. Furthermore, books
in Meänkieli are also available in the administrative district for Meänkieli
and the collection at the Swedish Institute for Dialectology, Onomastics
and Folklore Research are important for all the national minority
languages, including Meänkieli. Support from the Swedish Arts Council
to the North Scandinavian Library (Nordkalottbiblioteket) in Övertorneå
is disbursed annually to set up a centre for Meänkieli containing both
archives and printed material. SEK 250 000 is currently allocated in
support every year via the Norrbotten County Library.
Refer also to Part II, Article 7.1.c regarding e.g. archive issues
Article 12.2 – Cultural activities outside the administrative districts
Cultural activities that involve Meänkieli are normally conducted in the
Tornedal region, even though interest in the culture of the Tornedalers
has been shown in other places.
Refer to Part III, Article 10 regarding Sami.

Article 13 – Economic and social life
Sweden has undertaken to ensure the use of Meänkieli in economic and social
life as follows:
1. With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake,
within the whole country:
a. to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting
without justifiable reasons the use of regional or minority languages in
documents relating to economic or social life, particularly contracts of
employment, and in technical documents such as instructions for the use of
products or installations
There is no legislation in Sweden which prohibits or limits the use of regional
or minority languages in documents relating to economic or social life.

127
Article 14 – Transfrontier exchange
Sweden has undertaken to:
a) to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them
with the States in which the same language is used in identical or similar
form, or if necessary to seek to conclude such agreements, in such a way as
to foster contacts between the users of the same language in the States
concerned in the fields of culture, education, information, vocational
training and permanent education
b) for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or
promote cooperation across borders, in particular between regional or local
authorities in whose territory the same language is used in identical or
similar form
Transfrontier exchange
Sweden’s universities and university colleges are primarily responsible
for setting up exchanges with other universities both within Sweden and
abroad. Sweden has given the universities and university colleges
considerable autonomy in this respect, enabling each institution to
decide for itself which foreign partners are best suited to exchange
programmes.
Cooperation is ongoing across the Tornedal region and between the
border municipalities of Torneå in Finland and Haparanda in Sweden.
Bilateral cooperation is carried out under the Boundary Rivers
Agreement (Gränsälvsöverenskommelsen) with Finland as regards
management of the Torne river (SÖ 1971:44).
For information on transfrontier cooperation that is carried out jointly
for the national minorities, refer to Part II, Article 7.1.i.

128
APPENDICES

Appendix 1, ratified articles
Sweden has ratified the following Articles in the European Charter for
Regional or Minority Languages, Section III

Sami
8.1.a.iii)
8.1.b.iv)
8.1.c.iv)
8.1.d.iv)
8.1.e.iii)
8.1.f.iii)
8.1.g
8.1.h
8.1.i
8.2

Finnish
8.1.a.iii)
8.1.b.iv)
8.1.c.iv)
8.1.d.iv)
8.1.e.iii)
8.1.f.iii)
8.1.g
8.1.h
8.1.i
8.2

Meänkieli
8.1.a.iii)
8.1.b.iv)
8.1.c.iv)
8.1.d.iv)
8.1.e.iii)
8.1.f.iii)
8.1.g
8.1.h
8.1.i
8.2

9.1.a.ii)
9.1a.iii)
9.1.a.iv)
9.1.b.ii)
9.1.b.iii)
9.1.c.ii)
9.1.c.iii)
9.1.d
9.2
9.3

9.1.a.ii)
9.1.a.iii)
9.1.a.iv)
9.1.b.ii)
9.1.b.iii)
9.1.c.ii)
9.1.c.iii)
9.1.d
9.2
9.3

9.1.a.ii)
9.1.a.iii)
9.1.a.iv)
9.1.b.ii)
9.1.b.iii)
9.1.c.ii)
9.1.c.iii)
9.1.d
9.2
9.3

Judicial
authorities

10.1.a.iii)
10.1.a.v
10.1.c
10.2.b
10.2.c
10.2.d
10.2.g
10.4.a
10.5

10.1.a.iii)
10.1.a.v)
10.1.c
10.2.b
10.2.c
10.2.d
10.2.g
10.4.a
10.5

10.1.a.iii)
10.1.a.v)
10.1.c
10.2.b
10.2.c
10.2.b
10.2.g
10.4.a
10.5

Administrative
authorities and
public services

11.1.a.iii)
11.1.c.i)

11.1.a.iii)

1.1.a.iii)

Media

Education

129
11.1.d
11.1.e.i)
11.1.f.ii)
11.2

11.1.d
11.1.e.i)
11.1.f.ii)
11.2

11.1.d
11.1.e.i)
11.1.f.ii)
11.2

12.1.a
12.1.b
12.1.c
12.1.d
12.1.e
12.1.f
12.1.g
12.1.h
12.2

12.1.a
12.1.b
12.1.c
12.1.d

12.1.a
12.1.b

12.1.f
12.1.g
12.1.h
12.2

12.1.f
12.1.g

13.1.a

13.1.a

3.1.a

Economic
and social life

14.a

14.a

14.a

Transfrontier

14.b

46

12.1.d

12.2

14.b

46

Cultural activities
and facilities

14.b

43

exchange

130

Appendix 2, Relevant Swedish legislation
The Constitution
Chapter 1 Basic principles of the form of government
Section 2: Public power shall be exercised with respect for the equal
worth of all and the liberty of the private person.
The personal, economic and cultural welfare of the private person shall
be fundamental aims of public activity. In particular, it shall be
incumbent upon the public institutions to secure the right to health,
employment, housing and education, and to promote social care and
social security.
The public institutions shall promote sustainable development leading to
a good environment for present and future generations.
The public institutions shall promote the ideals of democracy as
guidelines in all sectors of society and protect the private and family lives
of private persons. The public institutions shall promote the opportunity
for all to attain participation and equality in society. The public
institutions shall combat discrimination of persons on grounds of
gender, colour, national or ethnic origin linguistic or religious affiliation,
functional disability, sexual orientation, age or other circumstance
affecting the private person.
Opportunities should be promoted for ethnic, linguistic and religious
minorities to preserve and develop a cultural and social life of their own.
(Amendment Act 2002:903).

Swedish Municipality and County Council Boundaries Act (1979:411)
Chapter 1. Amendments to the division of Sweden into municipalities
Prerequisites for amendments
Section 1: The Government may decide on amendments to the country’s
municipal boundaries provided that the amendment can be assumed to
involve lasting benefit to a municipality or part thereof or other benefits
to the population at large. The Government may then give notice of the
provisions that are needed to implement the amendment.

131
When assessing the issue of division amendments, special consideration
shall be given to the wishes and views of the municipality or
municipalities that are most immediately affected by the amendment. If
such a municipality opposes an amendment to the division, notice of a
decision to implement an amendment may only be given on exceptional
grounds. Particular consideration shall also be given to the wishes and
views of the population.

The Swedish Education Act (1985:1100)
Chapter 8 Sami School
Section 1: Sami School education shall be aimed at giving Sami children
an education with a Sami orientation otherwise equivalent to education
up to and including grade 6 of compulsory school (12-13 year-olds).
Special support shall be given to pupils who have difficulties with school
work.
Section 2: Pupils shall have influence over how their education is
structured. The scope and model of the pupils’ influence shall be adapted
to their age and maturity.
Section 3: Sami children may complete their compulsory schooling in
Sami School instead of in mainstream compulsory school. This also
applies to other children, if there are special reasons.
Section 4: Sami School education shall be free of charge to the pupils.
They shall without payment have access to books, writing materials tools
and other aids that are needed for a modern education. There may,
however, be occasional elements in the education that cause pupils
negligible expense.
Section 4 a: Pupils in Sami School shall be offered free school meals. Act
(1997:1212).
Section 5: For Sami School pupils who, in order to go to school, may
live away from home, the State shall be responsible for ensuring they
have satisfactory living conditions at no extra cost.
The State shall be responsible for Sami School pupils being provided free
of charge with the transport required for the education.
Section 6: There shall be a board for the Sami School.

132
The board shall decide admission of pupils to Sami School. The pupil or
his or her representative may appeal the board’s decision in such matters
to the Board of Appeal for Education.
Section 7: The home municipality shall pay compensation to the State
for certain costs for Sami School pupils.
The Government or authority appointed by the Government may issue
regulations concerning the amount of compensation. Act (1994:152).

The Sami Parliament Act (1992:1433)
Chapter 1 Introductory provisions
Section 1: In this Act provisions are made for a special authority - the
the Sami Parliament - whose principal responsibility is to monitor issues
pertaining to Sami culture in Sweden.
Section 2: For the purposes of this Act, a Sami refers to a person who
considers himself/herself to be a Sami and
1. can show that he/she speaks or has spoken the Sami language at home,
or
2. can show that one of his or her parents or grandparents speak or have
spoken Sami at home, or
3. has a parent who is or has been entered on the Sami Parliament
electoral register.
What is stated in the first paragraph 3 does not apply if the county
administrative board has decided that the parent shall not be entered on
the Sami Parliament electoral register on the grounds that the parent is
not Sami. Act (2006:803).
Chapter 2 The Sami Parliament
Responsibilities of the Sami Parliament
Section 1: The Sami Parliament shall contribute to a vibrant Sami culture
and to this end take initiatives for activities and propose measures to
promote the Same culture. The tasks of the Sami Parliament include in
particular to:
1. take decisions on distribution of state subsidies and of funds from the
Sami Foundation to Sami culture and Sami organisations and from other
funds at the joint disposal of the Sami people,

133

2. appoint the board of the Sami schools referred to in Chapter 8,
Section 6 of the Education Act (1985:1100),
3. lead Sami language work,
4. participate in community planning and ensure that Sami needs are
taken into consideration, including the interests of the reindeer breeding
industry pertaining to use of land and water,
5. spread information about Sami conditions,
6. perform other tasks that rest with the Sami Parliament according to
the law or other statute. Act (2006:803).

Higher Education Act (1992:1434)
Chapter 1. Initial provisions
Section 5: Universities shall in their activities promote sustainable
development so that present and future generations are assured a healthy
and good environment, economic and social welfare, and justice.
Gender equality shall always be observed and promoted in the activities
of the universities.
Furthermore, the universities should in their activities promote an
understanding for other countries and international conditions.
The universities shall also actively promote and broaden their
recruitment. (Amendment Act 2005:1208)

Personal Data Act (1998:204)
Processing of personal data subject to the Act
Section 13: It is prohibited to process data that reveals
a) race or ethnic origin,
b) political opinions,
c) religious or philosophical beliefs, or
d) membership of a trade union.

134

It is also prohibited to process such personal data as concerns health or
sex life.
Information of the kind referred to in the first and second paragraphs is
designated as sensitive personal data in this Act.

Equal Treatment of Students at Universities Act (2001:1286)
Purpose of the act
Section 1: The purpose of this Act is to promote in the higher education
sector equal rights for students and applicants and to combat
discrimination owing to sex, ethnic origin, religion or other religious
belief, sexual orientation and disability. (Amendment Act 2003:311).
Definitions
Section 2: In this Act:
University: means a university or a university college which is managed
by the State, a municipality or a county council and which is subject to
the Higher Education Act (1992:1434) and also private organisers of
education who hold a licence to award degrees in accordance with the
Award of Certain Degrees Licensing Act (1993:792),
Student: means a person who has been accepted and is undertaking basic
higher education or research education in accordance with the Higher
Education Act or a course that can result in a degree that a private
organiser of education may award in accordance with the Award of
Certain Degrees Licensing Act; however, a person who is employed as a
doctoral student shall not be deemed to be a student when applying this
Act,
Applicant: means a person who by the appropriate procedure has given
notice that he or she wishes to be accepted for basic higher education or
research education in accordance with the Higher Education Act or to a
course that can result in a degree that an individual organiser of
education may award in accordance with the Award of Certain Degrees
Licensing Act,
Ethnic belonging: that someone belongs to a group of people who have
the same colour or national or ethnic origin,
Sexual orientation: homosexual, bisexual or heterosexual orientation,

135
Disability: permanent physical, mental or intellectual limitation of
functional capacity as a consequence of an injury or an illness that
existed at birth, has arisen thereafter or which may be expected to arise.
(Amendment Act 2003:311).
Active measures
Goal-oriented work
Section 3: A university shall, within the framework of its activities,
conduct goal-orientated work to actively promote the equal rights of
students irrespective of their sex, ethnic origin, religion or other religious
belief, sexual orientation or disability.
More detailed regulations concerning the obligations of universities in
accordance with the first paragraph are contained in Sections 4 and 5.
(Amendment Act 2003:311).
Preventing and precluding harassment
Section 4: A university shall take measures to prevent and preclude
students or applicants being subjected to harassment. In this Act, the
term harassment means conduct that violates a student’s or an
applicant’s dignity in higher education studies, if the conduct is related
to
– ethnic origin (ethnic harassment),
– religion or other religious belief (harassment owing to religion or other
religious belief)
– sexual orientation (harassment owing to sexual orientation),
– disability (harassment owing to disability), or
– sex or is of a sexual nature (sexual harassment). (Amendment Act
2003:311).
Annual plan
Section 5: A university shall each year prepare a plan that shall contain a
review of the measures that are required to promote the equal rights of
students irrespective of sex, ethnic origin, religion or other religious
belief, sexual orientation or disability and in order to prevent and
preclude harassment in accordance with Section 4. The plan shall also
contain a report on which of these measures the university intends to
commence or implement during the forthcoming year.

136
A report on how the planned measures in accordance with the first
paragraph have been implemented shall be included in the plan for the
following year. (Amendment Act 2003:311).
Obligation to investigate and take measures against harassment
Section 6: A university that becomes cognisant of a student considering
him or herself to have been exposed to such harassment as referred to in
Section 4, shall investigate the circumstances surrounding the said
harassment and, in appropriate cases, take such measures that may
reasonably be required to preclude continued harassment.
Prohibition against discrimination
Direct discrimination
Section 7: A university may not disfavour a student or an applicant by
treating him or her worse than the university treats, has treated or would
have treated someone else in a comparable situation, if the disfavour is
connected with sex, ethnic origin, religion or other religious belief,
sexual orientation or disability.
The prohibition does not apply if the treatment is justified taking in to
account a special interest that is manifestly more important than the
interest of preventing discrimination at the university. (Amendment Act
2003:311).
Indirect discrimination
Section 8: A university may not disfavour a student or an applicant by
applying a provision, a criterion or a method of procedure that appears
to be neutral but which in practice especially disfavours persons of a
particular sex, with a particular ethnic origin, religion or religious belief,
or sexual orientation or particular disability. However, this does not
apply if the provision, criterion or method of procedure can objectively
be justified owing to a reasonable goal and the means are appropriate and
necessary in order to achieve the goal. (Amendment Act 2003:311).
Harassment
Section 8 a: A university may not discriminate against a student or an
applicant by harassing him or her. (Amendment Act 2003:311).
Instructions to discriminate
Section 8 b: A university may not issue orders or instructions to an
employee at the university concerning the discrimination of a student or
an applicant according to Sections 7–8 a. (Amendment Act 2003:311).

137

Scope of the prohibitions
Section 9: The prohibitions against discrimination contained in Sections
7–8 b shall apply when a university
1. decides on entry to higher education or takes any other measure that
is important for entry,
2. decides on examinations or makes any other assessment of study
performance,
3. decides or conducts any other similar assessment on matters
concerning
a) crediting of education,
b) respite with studies or continuation of studies after study breaks,
c) change of tutor,
d) withdrawal of tutor or other resources in connection with research
education,
e) training allowance for doctoral students, or
4. takes a disciplinary measure against a student. (Amendment Act
2003:311).
Section 10: The prohibition contained in Section 7 against direct
discrimination when a university decides on entry to higher education
and underlying education, also applies when the university, by making
premises accessible and usable, can create a situation for a person with
disability that is comparable to that for persons without such disability,
provided it is reasonable to require that the university takes such
measures.
Prohibition against victimisation
Section 11: A university may not subject a student or an applicant to
victimisation because he or she has reported the university for
discrimination or participated in an investigation under this Act.
Information concerning credentials
Section 12: An applicant who has been denied access to education is
entitled, upon request, to be provided with written information from the
organiser of the education concerning what education or what other
credentials the person who has been accepted for the education

138
possesses. This right applies if the education sought can lead to a degree
that an individual organiser of education may issue in accordance with
the Award of Certain Degrees Licensing (Amendment Act 1993:792).
Damages
Section 13: The State, a municipality or a county council that is the
manager of a university and a private organiser of education who has a
licence to award degrees in accordance with the Award of Certain
Degrees Licensing Act (1993:792) shall pay damages for the violation
that a student or an applicant has been subjected to by reason of the
university neglecting
– the obligation under Section 6 to investigate and take measures against
harassment of students,
– the prohibitions contained in Section 7, 8, 8 a or 8 b and Section 9 or
Section 10 against discrimination of students or applicants,
– the prohibition contained in Section 11 against subjecting students or
applicants to victimisation.
If it is reasonable, the damages may be reduced or lapse completely.
(Amendment Act 2003:311).
Appeals
Section 14: A decision by a university or a university college that is
managed by the State, a municipality or a county council may be
appealed against to the University Appeals Board on the grounds that
the decision contravenes the prohibitions on discrimination contained in
Section 7 or 8 and Section 9, items 1, 3 or 4 or Section 10 or the
prohibition against victimisation contained in Section 11. If the Appeals
Board considers that the decision violates any of the prohibitions and
that it may be assumed that this had an impact on the outcome, the
decision shall be annulled and the matter, if it is necessary, be remitted to
the university or university college to be considered anew.
If a decision may be appealed against in accordance with any other
enactment, the appeal shall be made according to the procedure
prescribed there instead of in accordance with the provisions contained
in the first paragraph.
Section 15: A decision by the University Appeals Board under this Act
may not be appealed against.

139
Supervision
Section 16: The Equal Opportunities Ombudsman, the Ombudsman
against Ethnic Discrimination, the Ombudsman against Discrimination
because of Sexual Orientation and the Disability Ombudsman shall
ensure that this Act is complied with.
An Ombudsman shall endeavour to secure voluntary compliance with
this Act by the universities.
A university is liable, if directed by an Ombudsman, to provide the
information concerning the circumstances regarding the operations of
the university that may be of importance for supervision. A university is
also obliged to submit information when an Ombudsman supports a
request made by an applicant under Section 12.
Trial applicable rules
Section 17: Cases concerning damages in accordance with Sections 6–11
and also Section 13 shall be dealt with in accordance with that prescribed
in the Code of Judicial Procedure regarding litigation in contentious
cases where settlement of the matter is allowed.
However, in such cases it may be ordered that either party shall bear his
or her own litigation costs, if the party that lost the case had reasonable
cause to have the dispute considered.
Burden of proof
Section 17 a: If a person who considers that he or she has been
discriminated against or victimised shows circumstances that give cause
to assume that he or she has been discriminated against or victimised, it
is the university that shall prove that discrimination or victimisation has
not occurred. (Amendment Act 2003:311)
Right to bring an action
Section 18: In a dispute in accordance with Section 17, the Equal
Opportunities Ombudsman, the Ombudsman against Ethnic
Discrimination, the Ombudsman against Discrimination because of
Sexual Orientation or the Disability Ombudsman may as a party bring
an action for a student or an applicant who gives consent for the same.
If an Ombudsman brings an action for a student or an applicant pursuant
to this Act, the Ombudsman may within the same litigation also bring
another action as a representative for the student or the applicant.

140
That prescribed by the Code of Judicial Procedure concerning situations
of disqualification relating to parties, personal attendance, questionings
under truth affirmation and other issues that relate to evidence shall also
apply to a person for whom an Ombudsman brings an action in
accordance with the first paragraph.
Limitation periods, etc.
Section 19: An action in a case for damages in accordance with Sections
6 – 11 and also Section 13 shall be instituted within two years after when
the act complained of occurred or an obligation should have at the latest
been performed. Otherwise the right to bring proceedings expires.
Section 20: An action that is brought by the Equal Opportunities
Ombudsman, the Ombudsman against Ethnic Discrimination, the
Ombudsman against discrimination because of Sexual Orientation or the
Disability Ombudsman shall be treated as if the action had been brought
by the student or by the applicant him or herself.

Prohibition of Discrimination and Other Degrading Treatment of
Children and School Students Act (2006:67)
Purpose and scope of the Act
Section 1: The purpose of this Act is to promote equal rights for
children and school students and to combat discrimination on grounds
of sex, ethnic origin, religion or other belief, sexual orientation or
disability. This Act also has the purpose of combating other degrading
treatment.
This Act is applicable to education and other activities referred to in the
Education Act (1985:1100).
Definitions
Section 2: In this Act the following terms have the meaning set out in
this section.
school student: a person being educated or applying for an education
under the Education Act (1985:1100),
child: a person taking part in or applying to a pre-school activity or
school age child care under the Education Act,
staff: employees and contractors in education and other activities,

141
ethnic origin: the condition of belonging to a group of persons who have
the same national or ethnic origin, race or skin colour,
sexual orientation: homosexual, bisexual or heterosexual orientation,
disability: permanent physical, mental or intellectual limitations of a
person’s functional capacity that, as a consequence of injury or illness,
existed at birth, have arisen since then or may be expected to arise,
harassment: conduct that degrades a child’s or school student’s dignity
and that
1. is related to
- ethnic origin (ethnic harassment)
- religion or other belief (harassment on grounds of religion or other
belief)
- sexual orientation (harassment on grounds of sexual orientation),
- disability (harassment on grounds of disability),
- sex (harassment on grounds of sex) or
2. is of a sexual nature (sexual harassment),
other degrading treatment: conduct that otherwise degrades a child’s or
school student’s dignity.
Responsibility for employees and contractors
Section 3: The organiser of an activity referred to in Section 1, second
paragraph is responsible for the employees and contractors in this
activity complying with the duties specified in this Act when they act in
their post or within the framework of their contract.
Mandatory provisions
Section 4: Terms in an agreement that restrict duties under this Act have
no legal force.
Active measures
Goal-oriented work
Section 5: The organiser of the activity shall ensure that it is conducted
in a goal-oriented manner in order to promote the purposes specified in

142
Section 1, first paragraph. Special provisions on this are set out in
Sections 6–8.
Equal treatment plan
Section 6: The organiser of the activity or the person designated by the
organiser shall ensure that there is an equal treatment plan for each
individual activity. The plan shall aim to promote the equal rights of
children and school students irrespective of sex, ethnic or national
origin, religion or other belief, sexual orientation or disability and to
prevent and hinder harassment and other degrading treatment. The plan
shall set out the measures planned. The plan shall be followed up and
reviewed each year.
Duty to prevent and hinder harassment and other degrading treatment
Section 7: The organiser of the activity or the person designated by the
organiser shall take measures to prevent and hinder children and school
students from being subjected to harassment and other degrading
treatment.
Duty to investigate and take measures against harassment and other
degrading treatment
Section 8: If the organiser of the activity, the head teacher or some other
person with a corresponding management function or some other staff
member becomes aware that a child or a school student in the activity
considers that he or she has been subjected to harassment or other
degrading treatment in connection with the conduct of the activity, the
organiser or the person designated by the organiser shall investigate the
circumstances and, where necessary, take the action that can reasonably
be required to prevent the continuation of the harassment or other
degrading treatment.
Prohibition of discrimination
Direct discrimination
Section 9: The organiser of the activity, the head teacher or some other
person with a corresponding management function or another staff
member may not disadvantage a child or a school student by treating the
child or school student worse than the representative of the activity
treats, has treated or would have treated some other child or school
student in a comparable situation if the disadvantageous treatment is
related to sex, ethnic origin, religion or other belief, sexual orientation or
disability.
Indirect discrimination

143

Section 10: The organiser of the activity, the head teacher or some other
person with a corresponding management function or some other staff
member may not disadvantage a child or a school student by the
application of a provision, a criterion or a procedure that is apparently
neutral but that in practice particularly disadvantages children or pupils
of a particular sex, ethnic origin, religion or other belief, sexual
orientation or disability. This does not apply, however, if the provision,
criterion or procedure can be motivated by a legitimate aim and the
means are appropriate and necessary to achieve the aim.
Harassment
Section 11: The organiser of the activity, the head teacher or some other
person with a corresponding management function may not subject a
child or a school student to harassment.
Instructions to discriminate
Section 12: The organiser of the activity, the head teacher or some other
person with a corresponding management function or another staff
member may not give orders or instructions to discriminate against a
child or a school student in his or her activity under Sections 9–11.
Prohibition of other degrading treatment
Section 13: The organiser of the activity, the head teacher or some other
person with a corresponding management function or another staff
member may not subject a child or school student to other degrading
treatment.
Prohibition of reprisals
Section 14: The organiser of the activity, the head teacher or some other
person with a corresponding management function or another staff
member may not subject a child or school student to reprisals because
the child or school student has reported or complained that someone in
the activity has acted contrary to this Act or because the child or school
student has taken part in an investigation under this Act.
Damages
Section 15: If the organiser of the activity, the head teacher or some
other person with a corresponding management function or another staff
member sets aside his or her duties under Sections 6-14, the organiser
shall both pay damages to the child or school student for the degrading
treatment and pay compensation for any other damage caused by the
setting aside of the duty. However, damages for degrading treatment in

144
cases other than discrimination or reprisals are not payable if the
degradation is minor.
If there are special reasons, the damages for degrading treatment can be
reduced or cancelled.
Supervision
Section 16: The Equal Opportunities Ombudsman, the Ombudsman
against Ethnic Discrimination, the Ombudsman against Discrimination
because of Sexual Orientation, the Disability Ombudsman and the
National Agency for Education shall each ensure that this Act is
followed in their areas of responsibility.
At the request of an Ombudsman or the National Agency for Education
the organiser of the activity, the head teacher or some other person with
a corresponding management function is required to supply the
information on circumstances in the activity that can be of importance
for the supervision.
Legal proceedings
Section 17: Cases concerning damages under this Act shall be dealt with
in accordance with the provisions of the Swedish Code of Judicial
Procedure concerning procedures in civil cases where conciliation in the
matter is permitted.
In such cases it may, however, be ordered that each party shall bear its
litigation costs, if the party that has lost the case had reasonable grounds
for bringing the dispute to court.
Burden of proof
Section 18: If a child or a school student who considers that he or she
has been discriminated against under Sections 9–12, subjected to other
degrading treatment under Section 13 or subjected to reprisals under
Section 14 presents circumstances that give grounds to presume that he
or she has been discriminated, subjected to other degrading treatment or
subjected to reprisals, the organiser of the activity shall show that the
discrimination, other degrading treatment or reprisals have not taken
place.
Section 19: If a child or school student shows that he or she has been
subjected to harassment or other degrading treatment by another child
or school student in connection with the conduct of the activity, then, in
order to escape liability for damages, the organiser shall show that every
reasonable measure had been taken to prevent or hinder such treatment.

145
Right to bring an action
Section 20: In a dispute on damages under this Act, the Equal
Opportunities Ombudsman, the Ombudsman against Ethnic
Discrimination, the Ombudsman against Discrimination because of
Sexual Orientation, the Disability Ombudsman or the National Agency
for Education may bring an action as a party for a child or school student
who consents to this. For children and school students under 18 years
who are not married the custodians shall give consent.
If an Ombudsman or the National Agency for Education brings an
action under the first paragraph, the Ombudsman or the Agency may
also bring another action in the same proceedings as the representative of
the child or school student.
The provisions of the Swedish Code of Judicial Procedure concerning
parties with respect to disqualification, personal appearance and
examination on oath as well as other questions relating to evidence shall
also apply to the person on whose behalf an Ombudsman or the
National Agency for Education brings an action under the first
paragraph.
Statutory limitation, etc.
Section 21: Legal proceedings in a case on damages under Section 9, 10,
12 or 14 shall be initiated within two years from the date of the action
complained about or from the last date on which a duty should have
been fulfilled. Otherwise the right to initiate legal proceedings is
forfeited.
Section 22: An action brought by the Equal Opportunities Ombudsman,
the Ombudsman against Ethnic Discrimination, the Ombudsman against
Discrimination because of Sexual Orientation, the Disability
Ombudsman or the National Agency for Education is treated as if it had
been brought by the child or school student himself or herself.
Transitional provisions
2006:67
This Act enters into force on 1 April 2006 and is applicable to cases of
damage that take place after its entry into force.

146
Ordnance (1991:978) on state subsidies for the production of certain
teaching media
Section 1: State subsidies in accordance with this ordinance may be
granted for the production of teaching media if there is a lack of suitable
teaching media.
State subsidies will only be granted for the production of
1. teaching media that is intended to be used for
- mother tongue tuition at pre-schools for children with a mother tongue
other than Swedish,
- teaching that is monitored by the Swedish National Agency for
Education.
2. interpreters’ glossaries. Ordinance (1997:604).
Section 2: State subsidy issues are assessed by the Swedish National
Agency for School Improvement, unless otherwise stipulated in Section
3.
Applications for state subsidies are submitted to the Swedish National
Agency for School Improvement.
Ordinance (2002:1162).
Section 3: Issues regarding government support for the production of
teaching media for students with disabilities are decided by the Swedish
Institute for Special Needs Education.
Applications for state subsidies are submitted to the Swedish Institute
for Special Needs Education. Ordinance(2001:289).
Section 4: State subsidies may be granted as
1. support for the entire production cost or parts thereof,
2. support with a repayment clause for some of or the entire
sum in question,
3. a guarantee of support if losses are incurred. Ordinance (1993:454).
Section 5: Decisions with regard to state subsidies may not be appealed.
Ordinance (1993:454).
Section 6: The Swedish National Agency for School Improvement and
the Swedish Institute for Special Needs Education may separately

147
communicate the regulations required to implement this ordinance.
Ordinance (2002:1162).

Upper Secondary School Ordinance (1992:394)
Chapter 5 Educational content
Mother tongue tuition
Section 7: If a pupil’s parents or guardians or one of them has a language
other than Swedish as their mother tongue and the language represents a
language of daily intercourse for the pupil, the pupil shall receive tuition
in his or her mother tongue as a subject (mother tongue tuition)
provided that the pupil has good knowledge of the mother tongue and
that he or she also wishes to have such tuition.
A Sami, Tornedal-Finnish or Romany pupil is entitled to receive tuition
in his or her own language, even if the language is not the pupil’s
language of daily intercourse at home. The same applies to a pupil who is
an adopted child and who has a mother tongue that is not Swedish.
Chapter 8, Sections 5 and 6 contain provision on study guidance in the
pupil’s mother tongue. Ordinance (1997:605).
Section 8: Mother tongue tuition may not include more than one
language per pupil.
A foreign Romany pupil may however receive mother tongue tuition in
two languages, if there are special reasons. Ordinance (1997:605).
Section 9: Mother tongue tuition can be organised as:
1. an individual choice.
2. extended programme, or
3. as a replacement for tuition in languages other than Swedish and
English. Ordinance (1999:844).
Section 10: A pupil is entitled to receive mother tongue tuition for a
maximum of seven academic years during his or her schooling within the
state education system. If the pupil has a special need, however, he or she
is entitled to mother tongue tuition for longer.
Neither does the limitation apply if the tuition:
1. replaces tuition in a language other than Swedish and English,

148

2. is provided as an individual choice, or
3. is provided for a Sami, Tornedal-Finnish or Romany pupil or for a
pupil with Finnish or a Nordic language as a mother tongue. Ordinance
(1999:844).
Section 11: The head teacher decides on a pupil’s mother tongue tuition.
Ordinance (1997:605).
Section 12: A municipality is not obliged to provide mother tongue
tuition if there is no suitable teacher available.
Neither is a municipality obliged to organise mother tongue tuition if
the number of pupils wanting such tuition in a certain language in the
municipality is less than five.
The second paragraph does not apply to mother tongue tuition for Sami,
Tornedal-Finnish or Romany pupils. Ordinance (1997:605).
Section 13: A pupil who receives mother tongue tuition may, subject to
the limitation stated in Section 10, continue to participate in such tuition
even if the language ceases to be the pupil’s everyday language of
intercourse. Ordinance (1999:844).

Compulsory School Ordinance (1994:1194)
Chapter 2 Educational content
Bilingual education
Section 7: For pupils who have a language other than Swedish as their
everyday language of intercourse with one or both their
parents/guardians, a municipality may provide parts of the education in
grades 1-6 in the language of intercourse (bilingual education). For
pupils with Finnish as a language of intercourse, such education may also
be provided in grades 7-9.
A maximum of 50 percent of the total bilingual education provided may
be given in the language of intercourse. The education shall be planned
so that tuition in Swedish gradually increases during the pupil’s
schooling.
Chapter 8: of the Sami School Ordinance (1995:205) contains provisions
on integrated Sami tuition in compulsory school. Ordinance (1997:599).
Mother tongue tuition

149

Section 9: If one or both the pupil’s parents/guardians has a language
other than Swedish as their mother tongue and the language represents
an everyday language of intercourse for the pupil, he or she shall receive
tuition in the language as a subject (mother tongue tuition), if
1. the pupil has a basic knowledge of the language and
2. the pupil wishes to have such tuition.
A Sami, Tornedal-Finnish or Romany pupil shall be offered mother
tongue tuition even if the language is not the pupil’s everyday language
of intercourse at home. The same applies to a pupil who is an adopted
child and who has a mother tongue that is not Swedish.
Chapter 5, Sections 2 and 3 contain provision on study guidance in the
pupil’s mother tongue. Ordinance (1997:599).
Section 10: Mother tongue tuition can be provided:
1. as a language choice,
2. as the pupil’s choice,
3. within the framework of the school’s choice, or
4. outside the school timetable.
Mother tongue tuition may not include more than one language per
pupil. A foreign Romany pupil may however receive mother tongue
tuition in two languages, if there are special reasons.
The syllabus for Sami established by the National Agency for Education
pursuant to Chapter 3, Section 6 of the Sami School Ordinance
(1995:205) shall be used for mother tongue tuition in Sami. Ordinance
(2002:1010).
Section 11: If mother tongue tuition for a pupil is provided outside the
school timetable, the pupil is entitled to receive such tuition for a
maximum of seven academic years during his or her schooling within the
state education system. The pupil is entitled to the tuition for longer if
he or she has a special need for it.
This limitation does not apply to mother tongue tuition for Sami,
Tornedal-Finnish, Romany or Finnish pupils or if the tuition relates to a
Nordic language. Ordinance (1997:599).

150
Section 12: If a decision is made to provide mother tongue tuition for a
pupil within the framework of the school’s choice or outside the school
timetable, the pupil and his or her parents/guardians shall be consulted
beforehand. Ordinance (1997:599).
Section 13: A municipality is obliged to provide mother tongue tuition
in a language only if there is a suitable teacher.
A municipality is obliged to provide such tuition if at least five pupils
wish to have it. As regards Sami, Tornedal-Finnish or Romany pupils,
the municipality is obliged to provide mother tongue tuition even if the
number of pupils is less than five. Ordinance (1997:599).
Section 14: A pupil who receives mother tongue tuition may, subject to
the limitation stated in Section 11, continue to participate in such tuition
even if the language ceases to be the pupil’s everyday language of
intercourse. Ordinance (1997:599).
Chapter 5 Special support measures
Section 2: A pupil shall receive study guidance in his or her mother
tongue if he or she needs it. Ordinance (1997:599).

Sami School Ordinance (1995:205)
Chapter 1 General provisions
Section 1: This ordinance contains provisions relating to Sami School in
addition to those laid down in the Education Act (1985:1100).
Chapter 8 contains provisions on Sami tuition that is integrated into
compulsory school education.
Section 2: Sami School is provided at “units” determined by the Sami
Education Board. A “unit” in this ordinance is called a “Sami school”.
A Sami school may only be established within the framework of available
funding.
A school boarding house may be linked to a Sami school.
Section 3: In this ordinance the term.
- school days refers to the days during an academic year when education
shall be
provided,

151

- teaching time refers to the work planned by teachers and pupils
jointly or which the pupils attend under the direction of a teacher,
– subject refers to a subject for which the Government, or, after being
authorised by the Government
, the National Agency for Education has established a syllabus.
Section 4: When this ordinance refers to the Compulsory School
Ordinance
(1994:1194), the provisions governing the “board” shall relate to the
Sami Education Board. The provisions governing the “head teacher” shall
relate to the “school director”.
Section 5: The National Agency for Education establishes the forms
needed to implement this ordinance.
Section 6: Tasks relating to school healthcare which, in accordance with
the Education Act (1985:1100), is taken care of by the State in its
capacity as principal of the Sami School may instead be performed by a
municipality or a county council, provided that the Same Education
Board and the municipality or county council agree.
Section 7: Education for persons designated by the principal may, upon
special remuneration, be provided at a Sami school on behalf of someone
other than a private individual. Ordinance (1996:551).
Chapter 2 Sami Education Board
Information
Section 1: The Sami Education Board is the governing body of the Sami
schools and their related activities.
The Sami Education Board shall also:
– through reports and proposals promote and develop elements of Sami
education in the state education system for children and young people,
and
– promote the development and production of teaching media for Sami
tuition.
Section 2: The Sami Education Board should
– support the municipalities with respect to outreach activities among
Sami.

152
– inform about Sami School and about elements of Sami education in the
state education system for children and young people.
Section 3: The Sami Education Board may, after entering into an
agreement with a municipality, perform the municipality’s tasks with
respect to pre-school class, pre-school and leisure-time centre activities
for Sami children. Ordinance (1997:1232).
Section 4: has been abrogated by Ordinance (1996:551).
Composition of the Board
Section 5: The Sami Education Board consists of five members.
One of these is chairperson and one is vice-chairperson
Organisation
Section 6: The Sami Education Board has its own secretariat headed by a
school director.
The school director shall assist the Sami Education Board in its activities
and is the Board’s chief lieutenant in charge of the Sami schools. One of
the school director’s main tasks is to develop Sami education.
Application of the ordinance
Section 7: The following provisions in Ordinance 1995:1322 shall be
applied to the Sami Education Board:
Section 26 on who may request explanations, etc.,
Sections 27 and 28 on the authority’s regulations,
Section 29 on the collection of data,
Section 30 on schedules of business,
Section 31 on the authority’s decisions.
The Same Education Board has the responsibility for the activities and
the tasks specified in Sections 6 - 9, 11, 13 and 15 of the ordinance.
Ordinance (1996:551).
Conduct of business
Section 8: The Sami Education Board is quorate when the chairperson
and at least half the other members are present.

153

When more important matters are to be discussed, all members shall, if
possible, be present.
Section 9: If a matter is so urgent that the Sami Education Board has not
the time to meet to discuss it, the matter may be decided in
communication between the chairperson and at least as many of the
other members needed to form a quorum.
If this procedure is unsuitable, the chairperson may decide on the matter
alone in the presence of the school director. Such a decision must be
reported at the next board meeting.
Section 10: The Sami Education Board may delegate responsibility to the
school director for taking decisions on routine or special matters that do
not need to be assessed by the Sami Education Board.
Section 11: Such matters are decided following presentations.
Regarding routine and special decisions, however, it may be stated the
the matter being decided in accordance with Section 10 need not be
presented.
Appointments, etc.
Section 12: Pursuant to Chapter 2, Section 2, second paragraph of the
Sami Parliament Act (1992:1433), the members of the Sami Education
Board are appointed by the Sami Parliament. The members are appointed
for a fixed period.
The Sami Parliament appoints the chairperson for a fixed period.
The Sami Education Board appoints its own vice chairperson for a fixed
period.
Section 13: The school director is hired by the Sami Parliament after a
proposal from the Sami Education Board.
Only someone with the appropriate pedagogical education and
experience may be hired as school director.
Section 14: Employees working with pedagogical tasks under the school
director shall also have the necessary pedagogical experience.
Section 15: The National Disciplinary Offence Board decides in matters
of disciplinary responsibility, prosecution and dismissal, as regards the
school director.

154
Chapter 3 Educational content and organisation
Curriculum
Section 1: There is one Sami School curriculum
The curriculum incorporates the overarching educational aims and
guidelines.
The curriculum is established by the Government.
Timetable
Section 2: The timetable outlined in the annex to this ordinance applies
to Sami School.
The following applies in this regard:
– the education shall be provided in Swedish and Sami, and
– Sami as a school subject shall be provided in all grades.
The timetable specifies the minimum total teaching time to be offered to
pupils in grades 1-6.
Section 3: Decisions on the allocation of hours for subjects,
subject groups and pupils’ choices for each grade are taken by the Sami
Education Board based on proposals from the school director.
Section 4: To an extent determined by the school director, outdoor
activities under the direction of a teacher shall be provided in Sami
School.
Section 5: For pupils who have been admitted to Sami School pursuant
to special grounds referred to in Chapter 8, Section 3 of the Education
Act (1985:1100), tuition in Sami and tuition in Sami as a subject may be
replaced by tuition in another subject.
Syllabi
Section 6: The compulsory school syllabi established by the
Government also apply to Sami School.
The National Agency for Education shall establish a syllabus in Sami that
can also be used in mother tongue tuition in Sami in compulsory school.
Ordinance (2002:1009).
Certain regulations governing the timetable

155

Pupil’s choice
Section 7: The timetable includes a certain number of hours for the
pupil’s choice. The aim of this education is to deepen and broaden the
pupil’s knowledge in one or more subjects.
The content and focus of the education shall be in line with the aims in
the syllabus or the syllabi established for the subject or subjects that
constitute the pupil’s choice.
Section 8: The Sami Education Board shall offer the pupils a
comprehensive range of subjects from which the pupil can make his or
her choice. The Board shall strive to cater for the pupil’s choice by
utilising the options available within the framework of the applicable
provisions.
The school’s choice
Section 9: The timetable includes a certain number of hours that may be
used for the school’s choice. Bearing in mind the limitations specified in
the annex to this ordinance, the scope for the school’s choice shall be
used for education in one or more subjects.
The content and focus of the education shall be in line with the aims in
the syllabus or the syllabi established for the subject or subjects that
constitute the school’s choice.
Decisions as to how the scope for the school’s choice shall be used are
taken by the Sami School director.
Mother tongue tuition and tuition in Swedish as a second language
Section 9a: The provisions on mother tongue tuition and tuition in
Swedish as a second language in Chapter 2, Section 9-16 of the
Compulsory School Ordinance (1994:1194) also apply to the
appropriate extent to Sami School. Ordinance (1997:600).
Plan of work
Section 10: A plan of work shall be drawn up for the implementation of
the established educational aims.
This plan of work shall be drawn up together with teachers and other
staff as well as with representatives of the pupils and their guardians. The
Sami School director decides on the plan of work.
The plan of work shall be continually monitored and evaluated.

156

Teaching media
Section 11: Chapter 8, Section 4 of the Education Act (1985:1100)
stipulates that Sami School education shall be free of charge for the
pupils and that they shall, without payment, have access to books,
writing materials, tools and other aids that are needed for a modern
education.
Special emphasis shall be placed on pupils having access to study aids
that cover essential elements of a subject or group of subjects and that
are aimed at bringing consistency and context to the education.
Teaching time, etc.
Section 12: Regulations governing teaching time, classes and groups,
timetables and decisions on exemption from the obligation to participate
in compulsory elements in Chapter 4 of the Compulsory School
Ordinance (1994:1194) shall apply to Sami School. Ordinance
(1996:551).
Special support measures
Section 13: Regulations governing special support measures in Chapter 5
of the Compulsory School Ordinance (1994:1194) apply to the
appropriate extent to Sami School.
Chapter 4 Forms of cooperation
Cooperation among different interest groups
Section 1: The forms of cooperation among different interest groups in
each Sami school shall be developed bearing in mind the local conditions.
This applies unless there are special provisions in statutes or collective
agreements relating to the treatment of a certain issue.
Pupil welfare committee
Section 2: Pupil welfare issues shall be dealt with by a pupil welfare
committee.
Section 3: The following shall be members of the pupil welfare
committee:
1. The school director
2. A pupil welfare representative, and

157
3. The relevant form teacher and other relevant staff.
The school director decides the composition of the pupil welfare
committee in more detail. The school director or the employee
appointed by the school director is chairperson. The school director may
send another employee in his or her place.
The pupil welfare committee may also allow persons other than
committee members to be present at meetings and pass comment.
Section 4: The pupil welfare committee is quorate when more than half
the members are present.
Minutes shall be recorded at all pupil welfare committee meetings.
Pupil influence
Section 5: In each class or teaching group, pupils shall be given the
opportunity to discuss issues of common interest with the teacher. What
form this should take shall be set out in more detail in the plan of work.
Ordinance (1997:600).
Chapter 5 Pupils
Admission
Section 1: Chapter 8, Section 6 contains provisions governing the
admission of pupils to Sami School.
Point 4 in the transitional regulations relating to the Act (1991:1107) on
amendments to the Education Act (1985:1100) contains provisions
relating to the admission of children to Sami School in the autumn term
of the calendar year in which the pupil has his or her sixth birthday.
An application for admission is submitted to the Sami Education Board
by the parents/guardians according to a procedure decided by the Board.
Section 1a: The Ordinance (2001:976) on education, pre-school
activities and after-school care of asylum-seeking children, etc., contains
special provisions governing the admission of asylum-seeking children,
etc., to Sami School. Ordinance (2001:981).
Progress to the next school-year, leave of absence and disciplinary
measures, etc.
Section 2: The regulations governing progress to the next school-year,
leave of absence, absenteeism, school rules and disciplinary measures in

158
Chapter 6, Sections 3-10 of the Compulsory School Ordinance
(1994:1194) shall be applied at Sami School. Ordinance (2006:206).
Pupil development meetings
Section 3: The teacher shall constantly inform the pupil and the pupil’s
parent/guardian about the pupil’s schooling. The teacher, pupil and
pupil’s parent/guardian shall at least once a term discuss how the
knowledge and social development of the pupil can best be supported
(pupil development meetings). In the development meeting, the teacher
shall summarise in writing in a progressive, individual development plan
the measures needed to ensure that the pupil reaches the set goals and
otherwise develop as far as possible within the framework of the
curriculum and syllabi. The development plan may also contain
agreements between the teacher, pupil and parent/guardian. The
information at the pupil development meeting should be based on an
evaluation of the pupil’s development in relation to the set goals in the
curriculum and syllabi.
At the request of a pupil’s parent/guardian, the teacher shall also provide
further written information on the pupil’s schooling in addition to that
specified in paragraph 1.
The information in the development plan and information referred to in
paragraph 2 here must not be in the form of a school grade.
Pupil development meetings shall in certain cases result in a programme
of measures similar to the action plan referred to in Chapter 5, Section 1
of the Compulsory School Ordinance (1994:1194). Ordinance
(2005:176).
Leaving certificate
Section 4: When a pupil leaves a Sami school, he or she shall be issued
with a leaving certificate.
This certificate shall include details about:
1. the grade from which the pupil has left,
2. the date the pupil left,
3. the subjects in which the pupil has been taught, and
4. the number of hours teaching the pupil has been offered.
The certificate shall be signed by the school director

159
Chapter 6. Sami School staff
General provisions
Section 1: When the Sami Education Board intends to hire a new
member of staff, the vacant post should be reported to the public
employment agency, unless this is obviously unnecessary. If the post is
not reported to the public employment agency, the Sami Education
Board shall inform about the vacant post by notifying the board and the
school in question.
School management
Section 2: The Sami Education Board determines the make-up of every
Sami school’s management team immediately under the school director.
Anyone appointed to the school management team shall have the
relevant pedagogical qualifications and experience.
The school director may instruct anyone in the management team to
perform tasks that, in accordance with this ordinance, fall within the
school director’s remit or that are the responsibility of the head teacher
in accordance with the curriculum or other statute.
Teachers
Section 3: Teachers are obliged to complete educational tasks that fall
within the remit of their employment contact and other tasks that are
within the framework of their professional qualifications and that are in
line with their role in accordance with the curriculum or provisions in
other statutes.
Section 4: A teacher is, as instructed, obliged to
1. be a form teacher in accordance with Section 5 below.
2. assist in teacher training at the Sami school in which he or she works.
Section 5: The form teacher has the general responsibility for a class or a
particular teaching group. One of the form teacher’s key tasks is to
manage pupil welfare in the class.
The form teacher shall assist the school management in issues
concerning the class or group.
Section 6: The Sami Education Board may stipulate that an applicant
having knowledge of the Sami language will be looked on favourably
when employing teachers at Sami School.

160
Section 7: To make up the required number of contract hours, work as a
teacher at a different type of school within the state education system is
included as part of a teacher’s employment though not if the teacher is
only employed by the hour. A position as a music teacher may also
include work at a municipal music school to make up the required
number of contract hours.
Section 8: Chapter 2, Sections 3-5 apply when employing a teacher
unless otherwise dictated by paragraph 2.
Part-time teachers (employed by the hour) who fulfil the requirements
under Chapter 2 Section 4 of the Education Act may be employed on a
permanent basis until a fixed date during the academic year. The parttime teacher shall otherwise be permanently employed though only until
a certain date during the term.
Other staff
Section 9: Chapter 14, Section 2 of the Education Act (1985:1100)
stipulates that there shall be a school medical officer and school nurse for
school healthcare.
Chapter 7 Appeals
Section 1: Decisions by the Sami Education Board in staff matters in
accordance with this ordinance may be appealed to the National Agency
for Education, if the decision relates to:
1. the hiring of an employee, and
2. a teacher’s supplementary hours.
Under Section 21 of the Employment Ordinance (1994:373), no appeal
may be made against a Sami Education Board proposal to appoint a
school director or decision to discontinue an employment procedure.
Section 2: No appeal may be made against decisions by the Sami
Education Board in matters relating to this ordinance other than staff
issues
Section 3: No appeal may be made against decisions by the National
Agency of Education in matters relating to this ordinance.
Chapter 8 Integrated Sami tuition
Section 1: A municipality may provide Sami tuition for Sami pupils at its
compulsory school if an agreement has been concluded between the
municipality and the Sami Education Board.

161

The term “Sami tuition” refers to tuition with Sami elements and tuition
in Sami in addition to the tuition provided as mother tongue tuition in
Sami. Ordinance (2002:1009).
Section 2: Tuition for Sami pupil shall be integrated with comparable
education for other compulsory school pupils.
The Sami tuition may also be administered outside the school timetable
during the school day.
Section 3: Sami teachers are employed by the education board after
consultation with the Sami Education Board. The provisions on teachers
in Chapter 2, Sections 3-5 of the Education Act (1985:1100) thereby
apply.
Section 4: The Same Education Board shall report the scope of and
experience gained in integrated Sami tuition activities every year in
connection with grant applications.

Independent Schools Ordinance (1996:1206)
Chapter 1 Independent pre-school classes
Mother tongue tuition
Section 5: The provisions governing mother tongue tuition that apply to
equivalent types of schools within the state education system shall also
apply to independent schools.
Mother tongue tuition may either be provided at the schools or offered
by an external education provider with whom the schools conclude
agreements. Ordinance (1997:603).
Chapter 2 Independent upper secondary schools and upper secondary
special schools
Mother tongue tuition
Section 7: The provisions governing mother tongue tuition that apply to
equivalent types of schools within the state education system shall also
apply to independent schools.
Mother tongue tuition may either be provided at the schools or offered
by an external education provider with whom the schools conclude
agreements. Ordinance (1997:603).

162

Ordinance (2000:86) on state subsidies for measures in support of the
use of Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli.
Section 1: This ordinance contains provisions on state subsidies for
measures in accordance with the Act (1999:1175) on the right to use
Sami in dealings with public authorities and courts and the Act
(1999:1176) on the right to use Finnish and Meänkieli in dealings with
public authorities and courts.
Section 2: State subsidies for measures in support of the use of Sami are
allocated to the municipalities of Arjeplog, Gällivare, Jokkmokk and
Kiruna and to Norrbotten County Council.
Subsidies for measures in support of the use of Finnish and Meänkieli are
allocated to the municipalities of Gällivare, Haparanda, Kiruna, Pajala
and Övertorneå and to Norrbotten County Council.
Section 3: State subsidies to the municipalities are determined based on
an estimation of the number of inhabitants in each municipality who
speak Sami, Finnish or Meänkieli. When allocating subsidies, the special
needs of municipalities to take measures in support of the use of Sami,
Finnish and Meänkieli respectively must also be taken into
consideration.
State subsidies to the county council are determined based on the county
council’s need to take measures in support of the use of Sami, Finnish
and Meänkieli respectively.
If the municipalities concerned and county council agree, other
supplementary allocation criteria may also be applied.
Section 4: Decisions on state subsidies in accordance with this ordinance
are taken by the Norrbotten County Administrative Board.
Before the allocation of state subsidies is decided, the County
Administrative Board shall consult the municipalities concerned and the
county council.
Section 5: No appeal may be made against the decision of the County
Administrative Board in accordance with this ordinance.

163
Ordinance (2003:306) regulating pilot schemes offering bilingual
education in nine-year compulsory school
The Government prescribes the following:
Section 1: A municipality may implement pilot schemes in accordance
with the provisions of this ordinance.
For pupils who have a language other than Swedish as their language of
daily intercourse with one or both their parents/guardians, parts of their
education in grades 7-9 may be provided in the language of intercourse
(bilingual education).
Provisions governing bilingual education can also be found in Chapter 2,
Section 7 of the Compulsory School Ordinance (1994:1194).
Section 2: A maximum of 50 percent of the total bilingual education
provided may be given in the language of intercourse.
The education shall be planned so that tuition in Swedish gradually
increases during the pupil’s schooling.
Section 3: A municipality that participates in the pilot scheme shall
continuously monitor and evaluate the activities.
Provisions regulating quality audits can be found in the Ordinance
(1997:702) on quality audits in the education system.
Section 4: A municipality that has decided to participate in the pilot
schemes shall notify the National Agency for School Improvement of
their decision. This notification shall contain information on:
1. activities at the school in question,
2. the grounds for participating in the pilot schemes,
3. design of the pilot scheme, and
4. how the pilot scheme shall be monitored and evaluated.

Ordinance on government support for national minorities (2005:765)
Scope

164
Section 1: This ordinance includes provisions on government support
for the Sami Parliament and organisations that represent the national
minorities.
Provisions in Sections 4 to 14 do not apply to the Sami Parliament and
organisations that represent the Sami minority.
Aim
Section 2: The aim of this government support is to aid and facilitate
activities at the Sami Parliament and the organisations that represent the
national minorities.
Types of support
Section 3: Government support in accordance with this ordinance is
submitted in accordance with the conditions stipulated in Sections 7 and
8 with an equally large fixed portion per national minority and a flexible
portion that is based on the number of local associations or sections.
This does not, however, apply to the Sami. Instead the Government
determines the level of support to the Sami Parliament on an annual basis
depending on the availability of funds with a figure that corresponds to
half of one of the fixed portions referred to in the first sentence.
Definitions
Section 4: A minority organisation referred to in this ordinance is a
national organisation or an organisation of national interest which
1. represents one of the national minorities and where the members of
the organisation or its local associations or sections consist to an
overwhelming extent of people who belong to the national minority, and
which
2. organises activities aimed at empowering the national minority,
promoting the identity, culture and language of the national minority
group, combating discrimination or disseminating knowledge about the
group in question.
Section 5: A national organisation in this ordinance is an organisation
that has at least five local associations or sections in different parts of
Sweden.
Section 6: A local association or section in a minority organisation in
this ordinance is an association or section which
1. is included on the minority organisation register of local associations
or sections,

165

2. has members and bodies, appointed by the members, which determine
the activities or finances of the local association or section, and which
3. pursues activities.
Preconditions for support
Section 7: Support is awarded for one year at a time depending on the
funds available. A “support year” corresponds to a government
budgetary year.
Section 8: Government support may be submitted to a minority
organisation which is applying for support in accordance with its needs
and which
1. has statutes and a board or equivalent body,
2. is an open group and where membership is voluntary
3. is democratic,
4. has pursued activities in Sweden for at least the last two years, and
which
5. strives to ensure that there is an equal distribution of power and
influence between men and women in the organisation.
Moreover, the minority organisation must have at least two local
associations or sections for the flexible portion of the government
support.
When an assessment of the minority organisation’s need for government
support is being made, account shall be taken of whether the
organisation receives other state subsidies for its activities.
Applying for support
Section 9: Applications for support in accordance with this ordinance
are decided by the Government.
A decision with regard to support may be conditional.
Section 10: An application for government support shall be made in
writing on the form provided by the Government Offices. The
application shall be signed in person by the authorised representative

166
from the organisation and the Government Offices shall have received it
by 1 October the year before the support year at the latest.
Along with the application, the organisation shall submit its statutes and
annual report for the latest financial year and information with regard to
the composition of the board or corresponding body.
The organisation is also obliged to submit to the Government Offices
other documents and information that are required for a decision to be
made concerning the application.
Section 11: If an organisation applying for support in accordance with
this ordinance does not submit the documents and information
stipulated under Section 10, the applicant shall be given the opportunity
to submit the complementary documents within a certain time period. If
the applicant does not do so, the application shall be considered at it is.
Financial accounting
Section 12: An organisation which has been granted support in
accordance with this ordinance is obliged to submit the accounts, annual
reports and other information determined by the Government Offices.
A financial account must be signed by an accountant or if the support
that has been granted amounts to SEK 250 000 or more, by a chartered
or certified accountant.
Repayment
Section 13: The Government may decide that support must be repaid in
part or in its entirety if
1. the support has been paid on erroneous grounds,
2. the organisation does not submit the documents or information
referred to under Section 12 or if
3. the conditions stipulated have not been adhered to.
Appeals
Section 14: Decisions in accordance with this ordinance may not be
appealed.
Transitional provisions
2005:765
1. This ordinance comes into force on 15 December 2005 and

167
will be applied for the first time for government support for support year
2006.
2. Applications for government support for the support year 2006 must
be submitted by 16 January 2006 at the latest.

168

Appendix 3, Summary of comments made by national minority organisations

During 2005, Sweden performed a survey of the situation as regards
human rights in Sweden. As previously mentioned in this report, this
survey forms part of the National action plan for human rights, 2006–
2009. The comments of the national minority organisations summarised
below are an extract from the action plan.
The Government has an ongoing dialogue with representatives of
national minority organisations. Each minority group has within the
framework of this dialogue highlighted various priority areas in which
they feel that further measures are required. The five minority groups
have all claimed that there are considerable shortcomings as regards the
rights of the national minorities concerning education. Many
municipalities do not know what their obligations are when it comes to
providing mother tongue tuition in the minority languages. There is also
a severe shortage of trained teachers of the minority languages and the
supply of teaching media is very limited.
Representatives from the Swedish Finns has criticised the requirement
that at least five pupils in one municipality must request mother tongue
tuition in Finnish before the municipality is obliged to organise the
tuition. For Sámi, Meänkieli and Romani Chib one pupil requesting
mother tongue tuition suffices. Representatives from the Swedish Finns
have also brought up the issue of mother tongue use at pre-schools and
claim that the situation as regards the language development of the
children is alarming. According to the representatives, there is no
statutory right nor earmarked fund for mother tongue support in preschools. As a result, many municipal Finnish-speaking pre-school
groups have closed. In conjunction with the survey carried out prior to
the new human rights action plan, representatives from the Swedish
Finns called for a new bill of rights as regards Finnish tuition and tuition
in Finnish at pre-schools and schools to supplement the national human
rights action plan. They also call for the right of the Swedish Finns
minority and the other national minorities to their own mother tongue
and their own culture to be highlighted to a greater extent in the new
action plan.
Roma representatives have identified the fact that the educational level of
most Roma people is very low as a major problem. Many graduate from
compulsory school with incomplete grades, few attend upper secondary
education and very few Roma people pursue an academic education.
Today there are many adult Roma people who have not completed their
compulsory education. This low level of education in turn means that
Roma people have problems competing on the labour market.

169
Representatives from the national minorities have stated that the way
schools teach about the national minorities, their languages, history and
culture is deficient and quite often non-existent despite the fact that the
school curriculum stipulates that this shall be taught. Representatives
from the minorities say that there is no teaching media to use when
teaching about the national minorities.
The situation of the national minority languages is something that all the
groups highlight as a problem. Several of the minority languages have
been languages that have basically only been spoken at home and not in
contact with society as a whole. During certain periods it was not even
permitted to speak any other language than Swedish at school. This
means that the national minority languages are to a varying extent
threatened today. All the five national minority groups want to see more
support for the national minority languages in order to be able to
preserve and develop them. This includes everything from developing
dictionaries to drawing up action plans for the different languages. Many
have said that there is a need for some kind of body to offer linguistic
guidance for the minority languages.
All the minority groups request information about the national
minorities not only in central government and municipal activities but
also in society at large. It is clear that the municipalities and central
agencies still have very little knowledge as regards the existence of rights
of the national minorities and their languages. Many representatives from
the national minorities feel that there is a lack of knowledge about the
existence of a minorities policy and about which minorities are classed as
‘national minorities’. They believe that the minorities policy is not being
implemented at the local and regional level, which makes it difficult for
individuals to ensure that their rights are upheld in practice when they,
for example, request mother tongue tuition for their children at school.
A further problem is that many who belong to one of the national
minorities themselves do not know their rights and because of this are
unable to uphold them. Information measures are requested that are
geared towards informing the national minorities of their rights.
The national minority organisations have annually applied for support
for their activities since the minority policy was established. All the
organisations have, however, stated that the support is not sufficient to
be able to pursue the activities they wish to.
Several of the minority groups have demanded elderly care in their
language. Representatives from the national minorities have also
emphasised the importance of respecting a person’s background and
culture in elderly care.
All the minority groups have demanded that their influence as regards
issues affecting the national minorities at all levels is enhanced.

170

Representatives from the Swedish Finns have also proposed the
introduction of a language register to provide statistical information
concerning the size of the Swedish Finns group so that the measures
provided by society can stand in relation to the figures. Other national
minorities have, however, strongly disassociated themselves from such
demands since they have experienced oppression on the grounds of their
ethnic origin.
The Swedish Finns has observed that the health of its members is in
general much poorer compared to other groups in Sweden. They believe
that the issue of the health of Swedish Finns should be included in the
general public health initiative.
Representatives from the Jewish group have reported a number of times
that the issues receiving most priority are Yiddish tuition, the legalisation
of kosher slaughter, Jewish elderly care and childcare as well as measures
to combat anti-Semitism.
As regards media issues it seems that the lack of a daily newspaper in
Meänkieli is seen as a serious shortcoming for the inhabitants of
Tornedalen. They have demanded that the Swedish public service
broadcasters Sveriges Television (SVT), Sveriges Radio (SR) and
Utbildningsradion (UR) should increase their broadcasts in Meänkieli.
They have also said that there is still a lack of knowledge within public
service broadcasting about Meänkieli being a language in its own right
and that it therefore should not be defined as Finnish. The Roma group
would also like more space in different types of media, for example radio,
television and the printed press.

