Strasbourg, 18 June 2001

MIN-LANG/PR (2001) 1

THE EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL OR M INORITY LANGUAGES

Initial Periodical Report
presented to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe
in accordance with Article 15 of the Charter

SWEDEN

Swedish report on
the Council of Europe Charter for
Regional or Minority Languages
Initial Periodical Report
presented in accordance with Article 15 of the Charter

Ministry of Industry, Employment
and Communications

2

Foreword

The European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages was opened for signature on 5
November 1992. The Charter entered into force on 1 March 1998. Sweden ratified the Charter
in February 2000 and the Charter entered into force for Sweden on 1 June 2000.
Since the year 2000, Sweden has a comprehensive and clear policy on national minorities.
The Swedish minority policy is still new and the Government is avare of the need of further
development. The Swedish minority policy of today is a first step. Hence, as a minister with
responsibilities for the policy on national minorities, it is a great pleasure for me to present
this initial report to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe on Sweden’s
implemenation of the Charter.
The information is provided in accordance with the instructions set out in the Outline, adopted
by the Committee of Ministers at its 648th meeting.

Stockholm 1 June 2001

Mona Sahlin
Minister responsible for Sweden’s policy on national minorities

3

Contents
Foreword..................................................................................................................................... 3
PART I........................................................................................................................................ 5
PART II ...................................................................................................................................... 9
PART III ................................................................................................................................... 16
Language: SAMI .................................................................................................................. 16
Article 8 – Education........................................................................................................ 16
Article 9 – Judicial authorities.......................................................................................... 19
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services ............................................ 20
Article 11 - Media ............................................................................................................ 22
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities .................................................................... 23
Article 13 – Economic and social life .............................................................................. 25
Article 14 - Transfrontier exchange ................................................................................ 26
Language: FINNISH ............................................................................................................ 28
Article 8 – Education........................................................................................................ 28
Article 9 – Judicial authorities.......................................................................................... 29
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services ............................................ 31
Article 11 - Media ............................................................................................................ 32
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities .................................................................... 34
Article 13 – Economic and social life .............................................................................. 37
Article 14 - Transfrontier exchange ................................................................................ 37
Language: MEÄNKIELI ...................................................................................................... 38
Article 8 – Education........................................................................................................ 38
Article 9 – Judicial authorities.......................................................................................... 39
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services ............................................ 41
Article 11 - Media ............................................................................................................ 42
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities .................................................................... 43
Article 13 – Economic and social life .............................................................................. 45
Article 14 - Transfrontier exchange ................................................................................ 45

APPENDICES .......................................................................................................................... 46
Appenix 1 ............................................................................................................................. 46
Appendix 2 ........................................................................................................................... 47
Appendix 3 ........................................................................................................................... 48

General remark: Whenever possible, accepted English names of Swedish organisations are
used in the report. When no established names exist, the Swedish names are merely
translated into English.

4

PART I
1. Please state the main legal act(s) whereby the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages has
been implemented in your State. If you so desire, please mention the general considerations which have
guided your country in the ratification process.

As a direct result of the ratification of the Charter, two legal acts have been adopted– the Act
on the right to use Sami in administrative authorities and courts of law (SFS 1999:1175 1 ) and
the Act on the right to use Finnish and Meänkieli in administrative authorities and courts of
law (SFS 1999:1176). These Acts entitle persons to use Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli
(Tornedal Finnish) in their contacts with administrative authorities and courts of law in
geographical areas where these languages have traditionally flourished and continue to be
used to a sufficient extent. The Acts entered into force on 1 April 2000.
The legislation passed as a consequence of the Swedish ratification of the European Charter
for Regional or Minority Languages was limited, in view of the fact that the Swedish
legislation at the time of the ratification already fulfilled many of the provisions of the
Charter.
2. Please indicate all regional or minority languages, as defined in paragraph a of Article 1 of the Charter
which exist on your State’s territory. Indicate also the parts of the territory of your country where the
speakers of such languages(s) reside.

Sami
The Sami language consists of several varieties. In Sweden three varieties are spoken (North
Sami, Lule Sami and South Sami). Upon ratification the three varieties were ratified as one
minority language.
The Sami live mainly in areas traditionally inhabited by Samis, stretching from Idre in the
region of Dalarna to Kiruna in the county of Norrbotten. Nowadays many Sami live even in
the coastal regions in northern and central Sweden as well as in Stockholm. The
administrative district for Sami comprises the municipalities of Arjeplog, Gällivare,
Jokkmokk and Kiruna.
Finnish
The Finnish language is spoken all over Sweden with some concentratio ns in the county of
Norrbotten and in the region around the Lake Mälaren in central Sweden (Mälar Valley).
Historically the geographic base for the Finnish language has been in the region of
Norrbotten, close to the Finnish border. The administrative districts for Finnish are the five
northernmost municipalities in Sweden – Gällivare, Haparanda, Kiruna, Pajala and
Övertorneå.
Meänkieli (Tornedal Finnish)
Meänkieli is a regionally based language, spoken by people in the region of Tornedalen. The
majority of the Tornedalers live in the municipalities of Haparanda, Övertorneå and Pajala
and in parts of the municipalities of Kiruna and Gällivare. These municipalities are also the
administrative district for Finnish and Meänkieli.

1

SFS means Swedish Code of Statues.

5

3. Please indicate the number of speakers for each regional and minority language. Specify the criteria for
the definition of “speaker of regional or minority language” that your country has retained for this purpose.

No official data is kept in Sweden on grounds of ethnic, linguistic or cultural origin. The
figures given below are rough estimates. The figures presented are medians from different
sources, figures provided by professional researchers, estimates from the own linguistic group
etc. These figures can be found in the Gove rnment Bill Nationella minoriteter i Sverige
1998/99:143 (National Minorities in Sweden).
Sweden has no official definition of “speaker of a regional or minority language”. Sweden
applies the definition given in the Article 1 of the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages. A regional- or minority language should have been used in a certain territory
within a state by its citizens and it should differ from the official language. Moreover, the
language should be spoken by a sufficient number. If a language does not fulfil the criteria of
being historically geographically based, it could be included by the Convention as a nonterritorial language.
Sami
The Sami population in Sweden amounts to approximately 15 000 – 20 000 people. There are
about 9 000 speakers of Sami in Sweden.
The Sami are an indigenous population. According to the Sami Parliament Act
(Sametingslagen) (SFS 1992:1433) a Sami is a person who considers him- or herself to be
Sami and who speaks or has spoken the Sami language at ho me, or whose parents or
grandparents speak or have spoken Sami at home or has a parent who is or has been registered
in the electoral register of the Same Parliament.
Finnish
The Swedish-Finnish population amounts to approximately 450 000 people and it has been
estimated that half of the population use the Finnish language to some degree. Approximately
16 000 Finnish-speakers live in the county of Norrbotten.
Meänkieli
Approximately 50 000 Tornedalers lives in the municipalities of Haparanda, Övertorneå and
Pajala and in certain areas of the municipalities of Kiruna and Gällivare. A figure mentioned
is that roughly 40 000 has some knowledge of Meänkieli. In the 1950’-s a remarkable
movement of people took place from the region of Tornedalen to the southern part of the
county of Norrbotten and the whole country.
4. Please indicate the non-territorial languages, as defined in paragraph c, Article 1 of the Charter, used on
your State’s territory and provide statistical data concerning speakers.

Romani Chib
As in the case of Sami, the different varieties of Romani Chib spoken in Sweden are ratified
as one minority language.
The number of Roma living in Sweden is approximately 35 000 – 40 000 people. The Roma
population consists of several groups, 2 500 so-called Swedish Roma, 3 200 Finnish Roma
and 10 000 who come from countries outside Scandinavia. In addition to this there are around
20 000 travellers in Sweden who speaks a variety of Romani Chib called Swedish Romani.
There are no figures available of the number of persons having a command of any variety of
Romani Chib.
6

Yiddish
The Jewish community in Sweden amounts to 20 000 - 25 000 people and includes those with
two parents of Jewish origin as well as those with one parent of Jewish origin. It is estimated
that today 3 000 have a command of Yiddish in Sweden.
In the case of Yiddish, it is important to remember that the number of Yiddish-speakers has
decreased unnaturally in the whole of Europe due to the Holocaust. Today efforts are being
made by the Jewish congregations to increase the use of Yiddish in Sweden.
5. Please indicate if any body or organisation, legally established, exists in your State which furthers the
protection and development of regional or minority languages. If so, please list the names and addresses of
such organisations.

The Finnish Language Council in Sweden
The Swedish state finances - with a contribution from the Finnish state - the Finnish Language
Council in Sweden. The Council was established in 1975 in order to provide support for
systematic scientific work in the Finnish language in Sweden. The Council compiles
dictionaries, gives advice in questions regarding the Finnish language and proposes
translations of concepts which describe Swedish society. The Finnish Language Council in
Sweden has three employees.
The Sami Parliament and the Sami Language Council
In 1993 Sweden established a Sami Parliament whose duties and authority are prescribed by
the Sami Parliament Act. According to the Act, the Sami Parliament is a public authority and
at the same time a representative body for the Sami. One of the tasks of the Sami Parliament
is to lead the work for the Sami language in Sweden. For that purpose, a group of experts has
been set up, the Sami Language Council. The Council consists of six members, with
substitutes, representing North-, Lule- and South Sami.
The Sami Language Council is responsible for developing the Sami language in Sweden.
Among other things, the Council shall promote the Sami language in society; support the use
of Sami language in private as well as public life, determine the spelling of Sami words,
advise and provide information on Sami language issues and generally inform about the
language.
The Sami Language Council employs three persons, two language consultants and one
language desk officer.
Names and addresses of the organisations are given in Appendix 1.
6. Please indicate if any body or organisation has been consulted on the preparation of this periodical
report. In the case of an affirmative answer, specify which one(s).

The report has been drafted at the Ministry of Industry, Employment and Communications
with contributions and comments given by different ministries and authorities. According to
the Government’s wish to involve and inform the national minorities in matters concerning
them, the report has been sent for pronouncements2 to six organisations representing the
minorities’ interests:

2

The pronouncements from the minority organisations on this report are enclosed in a separate leaflet. The texts
are, however, only available in Swedish.

7

•
•
•
•
•
•

Sametinget (the Sami Parliament)
Sverigefinländarnas delegation (The Delegation of the Swedish Finns)
Svenska Tornedalingars Riksförbund - Tornionlaaksolaiset (The Swedish Tornedalian
Association)
Romernas Riksförbund (Roma National Union)
Judiska centralförbundet (Official Council of Jewish Communities in Sweden)
SWEBLUL, den nationella kommittén fö r den Europeiska Byrån för Mindre använda
Språk (the Member State Committé for the European Bureau for Lesser Used
Languages)

7. Please indicate the measures taken (in accordance with Article 6 of the Charter) to make better known of
the rights and the duties deriving from the application of the Charter.

In December 2000 the Government implemented an extensive dissemination of information
concerning the Swedish policy on national minorities to all Swedish municipalities and
county councils and a great number of state authorities. The Government has also distributed
some thousands of fact sheets to citizens and non- governmental organisations upon request.
Furthermore, the fact sheet is to be found on the Government’s homepage in English and
Swedish. Furthe rmore, in 2001 a survey of human rights in Sweden3 , including the rights of
national minorites, has been distributed to municipalities, state authorities etc.
The Government has also distributed a booklet with the Act on the right to use Sami in
administrative authorities and courts of law (SFS 1999:1175) and the Act on the right to use
Finnish and Meänkieli in administrative authorities and courts of law (SFS 1999:1176). The
acts are translated into North-, Lule- and South Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli.
The Ministry of Industry, Employment and Communications has made the European Charter
for Regional or Minority Languages available at the Ministry’s homepage
(www.naring.regeringen.se) in English and Swedish.
It may, however take time to establish a new policy area and the Swedish Government will
continue its efforts to make the policy on national minorities a national concern.

3

Mänskliga rättigheter i Sverige – en kartläggning (Ministry report 2001:10).

8

PART II
1. Please indicate what measures your State has taken to apply Article 7 of the Charter to the regional or
minorities languages referred to in paragraphs 2 and 4 of part I above, specifying the different levels of
government responsible.

Measures that the Swedish authorities have implemented in relation to regional- or minority
languages and non-territorial languages in accordance with Article 7 of the Charter:
Article 7 Objectives and principles
1. In respect of regional or minority languages, within the territories in which such languages are used and
according to the situation of each language, the Parties shall base their policies, legislation and practice on
the following objectives and principles:
a)

the recognition of the regional or minority languages as an expression of cultural wealth;

It is vital that pupils in the Swedish school, from children to adult- students, learn about the
history of the country’s national minorities, their culture, language and religion. The school
curricula (Lpo 94 and Lpf 94) has therefore been amended to include instruction on national
minorities and minority languages. National minorities and minority languages have also been
taken into account in the recent revision of school syllabuses.
b)

the respect of the geographical area of each regional or minority language in order to ensure
that existing or new administrative divisions do not constitute an obstacle to the promotion of
the regional or minority language in question;

The Act on the prerequisites for changes in the divisions in municipalities and county councils
(1979:411) is sufficient to fulfil the demands of the European Charter for Regional- or
Minority Languages. In Chapter 1, Section 1 of the Act it is stated that changes in the
country’s division into municipalities can be done if such a change may be assumed to be of
lasting value to a municipality or a part of a municipality or if the change may be assumed to
have other advantages from a general point of view. Particular consideration should be given
to the opinion of those municipalities most concerned by the change. If a municipality
opposes a change, a decision contrary to the municipality’s wish can only be made if there are
very strong reasons for such a change. Particular consideration should also be given to the
views of the population.
In accordance with the statement made in the preparatory work in connection with this law, a
change of the administrative division ought not to be carried out without, from an objective
point of view, sound reasons for such a change (Government Bill 1978/79:145). The reasons
for the proposed change and the importance they should be given in relation to possible
reasons against a change, should take established practice into account. All the pros and cons
shall be weighed up carefully. The assessment should be based on the circumstances of the
population.
In the light of these facts, the Government considers that the legislation provides sufficient
safeguards to ensure that a change based on administrative division will not take place if it
would impede the promotion of a regional or minority language.

9

c)

the need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in order to safeguard
them;

In December 1999, the Swedish Riksdag (parliament) made a historic decision when the
proposals in the Government Bill 1998/99:143 National Minorities in Sweden were adopted
(Parliamentary Standing Committee on the Constitution report 1999/2000:KU6, Government
Communication 1999/2000:69). Since then Sweden has introduced an integrated policy on
minorities and appointed a minister responsible for the policy on national minorities.
The Government subsequently ratified the Council of Europe’s Framework Convention for
the Protection of National Minorities and the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages.
The decision of the Riksdag that Sweden has five minority languages was an important step
for the minority groups and the speakers of the minority languages. It gave the languages
status and restored what previously had been counteracted through periods of
“swedishization” and assimilation policy.
As a new area, minority policy is in need of further development. An inter- ministerial
Working Group on issues related to national minorities has been established in the
Government Offices. The Group shall contribute to the development of policies of national
minorities; ongoing activities and undertakings should be followed up and evaluated.
d)

the facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of regional or minority languages, in speech
and writing, in public and private life;

Facilitation and encouragement to use regional or minority languages are interlinked with the
opportunity to learn these languages as well as the accessibility to public arenas.
Statutory right to mother tongue instruction in school
Pupils that speak Sami, Finnish, Meänkieli, Romani chib and Yiddish as their mother tongue
are entitled to mother tongue instructions in school. Especially favourable rules are valid for
mother tongue instruction in Sami, Meänkieli and Romani Chib. The speaker of these
langua ges are entitled to mother tongue instruction even if the number of pupils is less than
five, which otherwise is the minimum level for mother tongue instruction offered by
municipalities.
Pupils of Finnish origin speaking Romani Chib are the only group entitled to receive mother
tongue instruction in two languages, Finnish and the Finnish variety of Romani Chib. Several
municipalities have however had shortcomings in providing mothertongue instruction in
Romani chib and relatively few pupils take part in mothertongue instruction in Romani chib.
Media
Public subsidies for the press include special rules on the allocation of funds to newspapers
that address minorities in their own languages. The public service companies in Sweden have
as one of their duties to provide programmes for TV and radio in minority languages.

10

e)

the maintenance and development of links, in the fields covered by this Charter, between
groups using a regional or minority language and other groups in the State employing a
language used in identical or similar form, as well as the establishment of cultural relations
with other groups in the State using different languages;

The European Bureau for Lesser Used Languages (EBLUL), within the European Union, is
financed by the union and is represented also in Sweden. The Swedish branch, the Member
State Committé for the European Bureau for Lesser Used Languages (SWEBLUL), is an
association involving the five national minorities in Sweden in the field of regional and
minority languages.
f)

the provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of regional and
minority languages at all appropriate stages;

Teaching and study of regional and minority languages are provided for at all levels in the
Swedish educational system. (It may not necessarily mean that all minority languages are
available at all levels in the educational system.)
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

In the administrative districts for Sami and Finnish and Meänkieli pre-school activities
are offered which involves some or all of the activities in the regional languages
Mother tongue instruction is offered at compulsory school and upper secondary
schools
Private schools with public funding provides education in regional and minority
languages
The Sami school, provides education in Sami for pupils with Sami as their mother
tongue
Adult and continuing education courses are given in regional and minority languages.
Language courses are, however, not available in Romani Chib, but some courses in
other subjects are held in Romani Chib for Roma.
Folk high schools offer courses in regional and minority languages
Universities offer education and research on regional and minority languages, except
on Romani Chib.
g)

the provision of facilities enabling non- speakers of a regional or minority language living in the
area where it is used to learn if they so desire;

Adult education associations
Language courses in all minority languages are provided for through the Swedish adult
education associations.
Universities
University courses in Finnish and Sami are available at a number of Swedish universities. The
universities of Uppsala, Luleå and Umeå offer education and carries out research in the Sami
languages. Studies in the Finnish languages are offered at several universities in Sweden, for
example in Lund, Stockholm, Umeå and Uppsala.
Folk high schools
Several folk high schools offer instruction of regional based minority languages. Education
for speakers of the non-territorial language Romani Chib is also offered at a number of folk
high schools. For further information, refer to Article 8, part III.

11

h)

the promotion of study and research on regional or minority languages at universities or
equivalent institution;

The Government stated in its latest research policy Bill (Government Bill 200/2001:3) that, as
a consequence of the policy on national minorities, it is important that education and research
on minority languages and the national minorities continue and develop. It is therefore
essential that research done in Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli carries on. Furthermore, in the
Bill the need for research in Romani Chib and Yiddish and about the culture, religion and
history of the national minorities is emphasised.
The Bill also adresses the question of so called minor subjects. It is announced that the
National Science Council is given the nation-wide responsibility for promoting a holistic
approach to the allocation and use of resources for such subjects.
Study and research on regional or minority languages and/or on minority cultures are carried
out at following universities:
Sami: the universities of Umeå and Uppsala and the Technical University of Luleå.
Finnish: the Universities of Lund, Stockholm, Uppsala and Umeå
Meänkieli study and research in Meänkieli is integrated with the study and research in
Finnish.
Judaistic: the University of Lund (it is not possible to study Yiddish at any Swedish
university).
Romani chib: Courses in and on Romani Chib is not available at any Swedish university.
The Technical University of Luleå has a special assignment to offer teacher training education
for the compulsory school in Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli.
The Central Bank Jubilee Foundation has recently decided to grant 40 million Swedish kronor
for a Jewish institute in Stockholm. The institute will offer academic studies in Jewish and
other related subjects.
Furthermore, research on national minorities and immigrants is carried out at the universities
of Malmö, Stockholm and Uppsala.
i)

the promotion of appropriate types of transnational exchanges, in the fields covered by this
Charter, for regional or minority languages used in identical or similar form in two or more
States.

Sami
Transnational co-operation across the borders of Finland, Norway, Russia and Sweden is
extensive, both in the private sector as well as among associations. Examples of the later are
the Sami Council established in 1956 and Nordic Sami Institute (Nordiskt Samiskt institut)
established in 1973. Of great importance is also the work carried out within the Sami
language councils.
For further information, please refer to Part III, Article 14.
Finnish
Transnational exchanges take place across the borders between Sweden and Finland in all
forms covering the economic, cultural and social life, in the public and the private sector.

12

Meänkieli
Transfrontier co-operation is carried out in the region of Tornedalen through the Tornedal
Council (Tornedalsrådet) and between the frontier municipalities, Haparanda in Sweden and
Torneå in Finland.
Romani Chib
Co-operation in Roma affairs is present within the Council of Europe, the Organisation for
Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) and the European Union.
2. The Parties undertake to eliminate, if they have not yet done so, any unjustified distinction, exclusion,
restriction or preference relating to the use of a regional or minority language nor intend to discourage or
endanger the maintenance or development of it. The adoption of special measures in favour of regional or
minority languages aimed at promoting equality between the users of these languages and rest of the
population or which take due account of their specific conditions is not considered to be an act of
discrimination against the users of more widely used languages.

There is nothing in Swedish legislation or public administration that supports any unjustified
distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference relating to the use of regional or minority
languages or intending to discourage or endanger the maintenance or development of such
languages.
3. The Parties undertake to promote, by appropriate measures, mutual understanding between all the
linguistic groups of the country and in particular the inclusion of respect, understanding and tolerance in
relation to regional or minority languages among the objectives of education and training provided within
their countries and encouragement of the mass media to pursue the same objective.

Education
Knowledge of different cultures contributes to a process of understanding and respect. All
pupils in the Swedish school, from children to adult- students, shall in school learn about the
history of the country’s national minorities, their culture, language and religion. The school
curricula (Lpo 94 and Lpf 94) have been amended to include instruction on national
minorities and minority languages. Knowledge of national minorities and minority languages
have also been included in the recent revision of school syllabuses.
Information
The Government initiated in December 2000 a national information drive concerning the
Samis as the autochtonous population of Sweden and about the Sami culture. The Swedish
Riksdag has decreed 4 that the information drive will be launched and considers it to be a
matter of urgency for the whole population. The drive will have the nature of a long-term
commitment and is ment to last for five years. One of the aims with the campaign is to
promote respect and tolerans for the Samis and knowledge and understanding of the Sami
culture.
Mass media
Broadcasting licences for public service companies, Swedish Television, the Swedish
Broadcasting Company and the Swedish Educational Broadcasting Company require that
these companies take the needs of national minorities and their languages into account. In the
broadcasting licence it is stated that Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli must be given special status
in the programme production. In the Public Service Radio and Television Bill 2002 – 2005
(Government Bill 2000/01:94) concerning broadcasting licences entering into force in 2002, it
is stated that Romani Chib must also be given special status in the programme production.

4

(bet. 2000/01:MJU2)

13

Furthermore, the Government proposes that the broadcasting companies shall take account of
the fact that Yiddish also has the status of minority language in Sweden.
4. In determing their policy with regard to regional or minority languages, the Parties shall take into
consideration the needs and wishes expressed by the groups which use such languages. They are
encouraged to establish bodies, if necessary, for the purpose of advising the authorities on all matters
pertaining to regional or minority languages.

Giving national minorities the opportunity to influence decisions affecting the minority
community is an important part of Sweden’s policy on national minorities. A range of
measures has accordingly been adopted, aimed at giving national minorities a greater say in
public decision-making. These measures include consultative meetings between
representatives of the Government and minority organisations. Special funds have also been
allocated to organisations representing national minorities in order to strengthen their ability
to participate in decision- making that may affect them.
All five minority groups in Sweden have bodies which represent the minorities and with
which the Government communicates. The largest minority group in Sweden, the Swedish
Finns, established in 2000 the Delegation of the Swedish Finns. The primary aim of the
Delegation is to guard the interests of the Finnish-speaking minority in Sweden in dealings
with the Government and authorities in matters concerning the minority.
The following bodies represent the minority groups in contacts with the Government:
• Sametinget (the Sami Parliament)
• Sverigefinländarnas delegation (The Delegation of the Swedish Finns)
• Svenska Tornedalingars Riksförbund-Tornionlaaksolaiset (The Swedish Tornedalian
Association)
• Romernas Riksförbund (Roma National Union)
• Judiska centralförbundet (Official Council of Jewish Communities in Sweden)
5. The parties undertake to apply, mutandis mutandis, the principles listed in paragraphs 1 to 4 above to
non-territorial languages. However, as far as these languages are concerned, the nature and scope of the
measures to be taken to give effect to this Charter shall be determined in a flexible manner, bearing in mind
the needs and wishes, and respecting the traditions and characteristics, of the groups which use the
languages concerned.

There are two languages in Sweden which correspond to the definition of non-territorial
languages in the Charter, namely. These languages are Romani Chib and Yiddish. In the
Swedish policies on national minorities these languages are to a large extent treated as the
territorial languages, except as regards the regional measures carried out in the seven
northernmost municipalities. The organisations representing the national minorities take part
in consultative meetings with the Government and government officials and in 2000 they
received the same financial support for consultation and influence as the organisations
representing territorial languages.
The needs and prerequisites for all the five minority languages in Sweden differ a lot from
each other. Important factors such as the number of speakers, the level of education within the
group, the existence of a written language, etc. vary remarkably between all the regional and
minority languages in Sweden. With regard to the different needs, it is considered important
that those affected by the minorities policy are able to make their views and wishes known
before decisions are made. One form of influence for the Roma population is the activity
carried out by the Roma Working Group at the Ministry of Industry, Employment and
Communications, which has been working to improve the situation of the Roma.
14

2. If appropriate, state any future measures which are envisaged in your country.
The Government has recently received four reports 5 from national authorities concerning
national minorities and minority languages, each from their field of expertise; from the
National Agency for Education, the National Council for Cultural Affairs, the Swedish
National Council of Adult Education and the County Administrative Board of the County of
Norrbotten. The reports contain proposals to the Government that are to be considered in due
course.

5

Names and references of the reports are given in appendix 2.

15

PART III
For each regional or minority language chosen at the moment of ratification, as follows from
paragraph 2, Article 2 of the Charter, please indicate in which way the paragraphs and/or
sub-paragraphs6 have been implemented.
When indicating the measures taken in order to implement each paragraph or sub-paragraph
chosen, please specify the relevant legal provision and the territory where they are applicable.

Language: SAMI
Article 8 – Education
Sweden has undertaken to provide education in Sami as follows:
1. With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used,
according to the situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the official
language(s) of the State:
a.iii) to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those pupils whose
families so request and whose number is considered sufficient; or
b.iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils whose
families so request and whose number is considered sufficient
c.iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils who, or
where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered sufficient
d.iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils who, or
where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered sufficient;
e.iii) if, by reason of the role of the State in relation to higher education institutions, subparagraphs i and ii cannot be applied, to encourage and/or allow the provision of university or
other forms of higher education in regional or minority languages or of facilities for the study
of these languages as university or higher education subjects;
f.iii) if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult education, to favour
and/or encourage the offering of such languages as subjects of adult and continuing
education;
g.) to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected
by the regional or minority language;
h.) to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of
paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;
i.)

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken and
progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority languages
and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.

2. With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority
languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority
language justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the regional or minority language at all
the appropriate stages of education.

6

For an index of the paragraphs and sub-paragraphs Sweden has ratified, please see appendix 3 .

16

Pre-school activities, 8.1.a.iii
The Act on the right to use Sami in administrative authorities and courts of law requires
municipalities in the administrative districts for Sami to offer parents or guardians of a child
the option of placing their children in pre-schools where parts or all of the activities are
conducted in Sami.
Pre-school activities in Sami existed in the municipalities of Gällivare, Jokkmokk and Kiruna
before the Act on the right to use Sami in administrative authorities and courts of law entered
into force.
Pre-school education is carried out in co-operation with respective Sami school.
Primary school education 8.1.b.iv
The Sami School (Sameskolan) carry out instruction from first to sixth grade for the Samispeaking children. In the school year 2000/2001, there were six Sami schools. According to
the school curricula (Lpo 94), the Sami school, beside the goals of the compulsory school has
a responsibility to ensure that every pupil is familiar with the Sami heritage and can speak,
read and write Sami when leaving the school.
The school syllabus for the compulsory school applies also to the Sami school, but for the
Sami school a syllabus is added for the subject Sami. There are different goals for those who
learn Sami as a first language or as a second language.
After the sixth grade the pupils of the Sami school enter the ordinary compulsory school.
They can the n continue to learn Sami as their mother tongue since Sami is taught as the
mother tongue for those pupils who want to learn it and are of Sami origin.
Integrated Sami education is provided and regulated by agreements between the Sami School
Board and the municipalities. Sami pupils attend the compulsory school but are taught the
Sami language, Sami culture and the Sami way of living. The most common subjects are the
Sami language, Sami handicraft and society oriented subjects.
Upper secondary school education 8.1.c.iv
Sami pupils from all over Sweden can apply to the Sami branch of the Bokenskolan
Secondary School, in the municipality of Jokkmokk. At Bokenskolan it is possible to carry
out ordinary upper secondary studies with a Sami specialisation.
Technical and vocational training 8.1.d.iv
Bokenskolan, mentioned under 8.1.c.iv, also offers vocational training with a Samispecialisation. In contrast to the secondary education the pupils at the vocational training do
not have any language studies.
University education 8.1.e.iii
Study and research on Sami is carried out at the universities of Umeå and Uppsala and teacher
training education in Sami is offered at the Technical University of Luleå.
Adult and continuing education 8.1.f.iii
The Sami Education Centre (Samernas utbildningscentrum) in the municipality of Jokkmokk
offers adult education at the Centre and distance tuition. The courses are generally of one to
two years of length. They offer technical and vocational courses, as Sami handicraft, Sami
entrepreneurship, Sami tourism and Sami language and culture.
17

Ensure teaching of history and culture 8.1.g.
The Swedish Government consider it vital that all pupils in the Swedish school, from children
to adult students, learn about the history of the country’s national minorities, their culture,
language and religion. The school curricula (Lpo 94 and Lpf 94) have therefore been amended
to include instruction on national minorities and minority languages. National minorities and
minority languages have also been taken into account in the recent revision of school
syllabuses.
In addition to that, the folk high schools (independent adult education colleges) and the adult
education associations play an important role in disseminating knowledge about national
minorities and their languages.
Teacher training 8.1.h
The Technical University of Luleå is commissioned by the Government to offer teacher
training education for compulsory school in Sami, Finnish and Meänkeili.
The Ordinance of Higher Education (SFS 1993:100) enables high schools to instruct teacher
training students about national minorities and minority languages. Regulations for the
examination system ensures that teachers who have passed examination have the knowledge
required to fulfil the goals of the curricula decided by the Government.
Supervision 8.1.i
As part of its supervisory responsibility, the National Education Agency is required in its
regulating instrument to monitor the development of bilingual and mother tongue instruction
for national minorities.
The Sami School Board is an administrative authority for the National Sami schools and other
activities belonging to and regulated by the Sami School ordinance. The Sami School Board
deals with the following type of Sami education forms: pre-school, Sami primary school and
integrated Sami education in the primary school. The board has total responsibility for school
operations, its political steering and finances. The Sami School Board determines a plan of
operations.
A special Working Group has been set up by the Norrbotten County Administrative Board to
ensure that measures are implemented at regional level. The Group consists of representatives
from the local and regional authorities and from the national minorities. The Group shall
report to the Government once a year.
Education outside the regional territories 8.2
University education and research in Sami is available at Uppsala University, which is outside
the regional territory of the Sami language.
The adult education associations offer courses in the Sami language at a number of places in
Sweden outside the administrative districts for Sami.

18

Article 9 – Judicial authorities
Sweden has undertaken to ensure the use of Sami before judicial authorities as follows:
1. The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents using the
regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to the situation of each of
these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the present paragraph is not
considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of justice
a. in criminal proceedings:
ii) to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or minority language; and/or
iii) to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not be considered
inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a regional or minority language; and/or
iv) to produce, on request, documents connected with legal proceedings in the relevant regional
or minority language, if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations involving no extra
expense for the persons concerned
b. in civil proceedings:
ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she may use his
or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional expense; and/or
iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages, if
necessary by the use of interpreters and translations
c. in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she may use his
or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional expense; and/or
iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages, if
necessary by the use of interpreters and translations
d. to take steps to ensure that the application of sub-paragraphs i and iii of paragraphs b and c above and
any necessary use of interpreters and translations does not involve extra expense for the persons
concerned
2. The Parties undertake:
a. not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because they are drafted in a
regional or minority language; or
3. The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or minority languages the most important national
statutory texts and those relating particularly to users of these languages, unless they are otherwise
provided.

The right to use Sami in criminal proceedings, civil proceedings and proceedings before
courts concerning administrative matters 9.1
According to Section 4 of the Act on the right to use Sami in administrative authorities and
courts of law, anybody who is a party or alternate for a party in a judicial procedure in a court
of law is entitled to use Sami in the proceedings, if the judicial procedure has a connection to
the administrative district for Sami. This right applies to district and city courts, county
administrative courts, certain special courts and to courts of appeal.
According to Section 5 of the Act the right to use Sami includes the right to speak any form of
Sami when a person appears before the court, to present both oral and written requests,
evidence and other documents connected with the proceedings in Sami and to have requests,
evidence and documents in another language orally translated to Sami. It is for the court to
ensure that documents and evidence are translated into Swedish, if it is not obviously
unnecessary.
If somebody wishes to use Sami in a judicial procedure, according to Section 6 of the act, he
or she has to make a request for this in connection to when the procedures are initiated. If
such a request is made later, it may be refused. A request may also be refused if it is obvious
that the request has an improper purpose. This right is not associated with any costs for the
19

accused in criminal procedures or a litigant in civil procedures or proceedings concerning
administrative matters.
Translation and interpretation involves no extra expense for the persons concerned. Costs
related to translation and interpretations are paid for by the court. To cover translation as
pursuant to the Acts 1999:1175 and 1176, the Government has provided one million Swedish
kronor to the courts administration.
Validity of legal documents 9.2
According to Swedish legislation the validity of a legal document cannot be denied on
account of it being drafted in a regional or minority language.
Important national statutory texts 9.3
The Act on the right to use Sami in administrative authorities and courts of law has been
translated into the Sami varieties, North-, Lule- and South Sami and has been made available
to the public through a booklet free of charge and on the Ministry’s homepage
(www.naring.regeringen.se).
The National Courts Administration has also translated information related to the legislation
on the right to use Sami in courts into the three Sami varieties.

Article 10 – Administra tive authorities and public services
Sweden has undertaken to ensure the use of Sami before administrative authorities and public
services as follows:
1. Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of regional
or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the situation of each
language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
a.iii) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit or al or written applications
and receive a reply in these languages;
a.v) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document in these
languages
c) to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in a regional or minority language
2.b the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written applications
in these languages
2.c the publication by regional authorities of their official documents also in the relevant regional
or minority languages
2.d the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in the relevant regional or
minority languages
2.g the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official language(s), of
traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or minority languages
4. With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the Parties
undertake to take one or more of the following measures
a. translation or interpretation as may be required
5. The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or minority languages,
at the request of those concerned

Use of Sami in public 10.1.a.iii, 10.1.a.v, 10.1.c and 10.2.b
Section 2 of the Act on the right to use Sami in administrative authorities and courts of law
entitles a person to use Sami in his or her dealings – both oral and written - with
administrative authorities in a case that involves exercise of official power concerning him or
20

her. If the person concerned in a case uses Sami in any form, the authority in question is
obliged to respond orally in Sami. Moreover, a written decision in such a case must contain
information in Sami that the decision can be translated orally into Sami by the authority upon
request. The Act also states that authorities should strive to answer Sami-speaking people in
Sami. The authorities may decide to receive Sami-speaking visitors and phone calls from
Sami-speaking people in certain hours during the week.
This right applies to dealings with local and regional state authorities, such as county
administrative boards, regional public prosecution offices, police authorities, tax authorities
and employment offices and to county council and municipal administrative authorities.
Moreover, municipalities in the administrative district for Sami are required to offer care
services for the elderly in which some or all activities are conducted in Sami.
Publication in regional languages 10.2.c, 10.2.d
The Government states (1998/99:143) that statutes that especially concern the rights of Sami
as a national minority should be translated into Sami.
The Act on the right to use Sami in administrative authorities and courts of law has been
translated into the Sami varieties, North-, Lule- and South Sami and has been made available
to the public through a booklet free of charge and on the Ministry’s homepage
(www.naring.regeringen.se).
Traditional forms of place- names 10.2.g
The Riksdag has decided 7 that great attention must be paid to the Sami and Finnish minorities
in northern Sweden when establishing names on maps and when raising road sign. When
place-names shall be established in multi- lingual areas they are to be produced in the
languages spoken in the region. The minorities’ way of spelling should be adopted.
The maps produced by the National Land Survey mark place-names, beside Swedish, also in
Sami and Finnish. The National Road Administration started in 1995 gradually to supplement
signs of place-names in Norrbotten and Västerbotten with names in Sami and Finnish.
Translation and interpretation 10.4.a
The regional municipalities and county councils shall provide translation or interpretation as
may be required for the fulfilment of the above listed provisions of paragraphs. A state
subsidy is given to cover costs related to the Act 1999:1176. The Norrbotten County
Administrative Board administer the state grant.
Family names 10.5
There is nothing in Swedish legislation that impedes individuals to keep their family name or
surname.
The Names Act (SFS 1982:670) contains rules on how names are acquired. If a person wishes
to adopt the last name of one or both of his or her parents, he or she can do so by a
notification to the local tax office. Those who otherwise want to change family names can
apply to the Swedish Patent and Registration Office, which deal with applications for change
of names and amendment of names. Newly created family names must have a pronunciation
and spelling and such a linguistic correctness that it is suitable as a family name in Sweden.

7

Government Bill 1984/85:100

21

When considering appropriateness, the Sami and Finnish language constructions are
considered to comprise national parlance.

Article 11 - Media
Sweden has undertaken to ensure the use of Sami in the media as fo llows:
1. The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in which
those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that the public
authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the
principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
a.iii) to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer programmes in the regional or minority
languages
d) to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual works in
the regional or minority languages
e.i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one newspaper in the
regional or minority languages
f.ii) to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions in the
regional or minority languages
2. The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television broadcasts from
neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language,
and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in
such a language. They further undertake to ensure that no restric tions will be placed on the freedom of
expression and free circulation of information in the written press in a language used in identical or similar
form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of the above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with
it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are
prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial
integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for
the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for preventing disclosure of information received in
confidence, or for maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary

Provision of programmes in Sami on TV and radio 11.1.a.iii
The public service companies in Sweden have as one of their duties to provide programmes
for TV and radio in minority languages. Sami along with Finnish and Meänkieli must be
given special status. TV-programmes are produced in different genres as children
programmes, news etc. In 1999, Swedish Television broadcasted 21 hours in Sami.
Sámi Radio broadcasts daily news in Sami. In 1999, Sámi Radio produced 204 hours of radio
programmes.
The public service companies in Finland, Norway and Sweden have agreed upon co-operation
in the field of programmes in Sami. One ambition is to accomplish a common radio channel
in Sami languages.
Filmpool Nord is a regional resource centre for film and video production in the county of
Norrbotten and a regional film production centre. Short films and documentary film about the
Sami people have been produced by Sami and other Swedes. Filmpool Nord has been
assigned by the Swedish Film Institute the task of being a regional actor to co-produce
regional films.

22

Encouragement and facilitation of production and distribution 11.1.d
State funded broadcasting licences for public service companies, Swedish Television, the
Swedish Broadcasting Company and the Swedish Educational Broadcasting Company require
that these companies take the needs of national minorities and their languages into account. In
the broadcasting licence it is stated that Sami must be given special status.
Encouragement of conditions for newspapers 11.1.e.i)
The terms and conditions governing public subsidies for the press include special rules on the
allocation of funds to newspapers that address minorities in their own languages. Newspapers
in Sami can obtain state subsidies through the Sami Parliament.
The National Council for Cultural Affairs is responsible for the allocation of funds and shall
give special consideration to minorities when allocating public funds to cultural publications.
Equal financial support for media using Sami 11.1.f.ii)
Refer to 11.1.d.
Right to reception of media from neighbouring countries 11.2
There are no restrictions whatsoever on the freedom of direct reception of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a
regional or minority language, nor on the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from
neighbouring countries in any language.

Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Sweden has undertaken to ensure the use of Sami in cultural activities and facilities as follows:
1. With regard to cultural activities and facilities - especially libraries, video libraries, cultural centres,
museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production,
vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries, including inter alia the use of
new technologies - the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used and to the
extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this field:
a)

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority languages
and foster the different means of access to works produced in these languages

b)

to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in regional or
minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and
subtitling activities

c)

to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages by
aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;

d)

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of
various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of
regional or minority languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for
which they provide backing;

e)

to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting
cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of the regional or
minority language concerned, as well as of the language(s) of the rest of the population

f)

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or
minority language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities

g)

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for collecting,
keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the regional or minority
languages

23

h)

if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and terminological research
services, particularly with a view to maintaining and developing appropriate administrative,
commercial, economic, social, technical or legal terminology in each regional or minority
language

2. In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are traditionally
used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow,
encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in accordance with the preceding
paragraph

Encouragement of cultural activities 12.1.a
The Sami people have a rich historic culture, which is closely linked to nature. It consists of
dance and music, handicraft, clothing, an oral tradition with long historical roots, etc.
The fundamental duty of the Sami Parliament is to promote a vital Sami culture. The Sami
Parliament Culture Council allocates governmental subsidies, resources from the Sami Fund
and also from other means made available to the Sami, to Sami culture and Sami
organisations. Among the receivers are the Sami Theatre, the Sami Handicraft Foundation, the
Sami Library and the Sami newspaper Tidningen Samefolket.
The Swedish Film Institute takes part in an investigation initiated by the municipality of
Kiruna concerning the establishment of a resource centre for Sami and Tornedal film
production. The investigation shall also consider in what way film culture and film production
promote the minority languages. The result will be presented at the Umeå Film Festival in
September 2001.
See also 12.1.a in the Finnish section.
To foster access to works produced in regional languages 12.1.b
The National Council for Cultural Affairs should give special consideration to minorities
when allocating public funds to literature and cultural publications.
The National Council for Cultural Affairs proposes that the Filmpool Nord (se under
11.1.a.iii) probably could be a resource in the future to encourage new ways to write and
produce texts. Manus writing and development of manus would probably promote interest
especially among youth, states the Swedish Film Institute.
To foster access to works produced in other languages 12.1.c
Refer to 12.1.b regarding the National Council for Cultural Affairs.
Within the Sami Theatre works produced in other languages have been translated and
performed in Sami, reshaped to a Sami performance.
Ensure bodies responsible for organising cultural activities 12.1.d
The National Council for Cultural Affairs is responsible for cultural support in Sweden that
includes the national minorities. The Sami Parliament Culture Council plays an important role
concerning the Sami culture as is mentioned in 12.i.a.

24

Promote measures to ensure staff speaking Sami 12.1.e
Within the Sami Parliament, there is a Council for Cultural Affairs that handles most of the
questions related to Sami cultural activities. The Parliament serves as a public authority and is
at the same time a representative body for the Sami. The staff of the Sami Parliament has a
command of Sami and of Swedish. Several of the employees have knowledges in the minority
languages Finnish and Meänkieli as well.
Encouragement of participation by Sami representatives 12.1.f
The Sami have a far-reaching autonomy in the cultural field thanks to the Sami Parliament.
The Parliament receives a state grant to cultural activities, which is distributed by the Council
for Cultural Affairs within the Sami Parliament. The Sami Parliament can freely raise and
make suggestions in any area which the Parliament deems of special interest to a vital Sami
culture.
The non-governmental organisation the Sami Council is also a forum for the Sami to
influence issues that concern them.
See also 12.1.f in the Finnish section.
Archives 12.1.g
In the year 2000, the Government set up a comission to investigate archive-related issues. One
aim of the investigation is to find suitable forms to preserve documents in minority languages.
As a starting point the investigation shall describe where documents are today, their form and
under what conditions they are available for the general public.
The investigator shall present the result 30 November 2001.
Language councils etc.12.1.h
For further explanation of the Sami Language Council, refer to Part I, 4.
Cultural activities outside the region 12.2
One of the goals of the National Council for Cultural Affairs is to promote cultural diversity
and exchange of cultures between different cultures in the country. 8
The Government consider it vital that all pupils in the Swedish school, from children to adult
students, learn the history of the country’s national minorities, their culture, language and
religion. The school curricula (Lpo 94 and Lpf 94) have therefore been amended to include
instruction on national minorities and minority languages. National minorities and minority
languages have also been taken into account in the recent revision of school syllabuses.

Article 13 – Economic and social life
Sweden has undertaken to ensure the use of Sami in economic and social life as follows:
1. With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole country:
a)

8

to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without justifiable
reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to economic or social
life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical documents such as instructions for
the use of products or installations

Government Bill 1996/97:3, Government Communication 19996/97:129.

25

There is no legislation in Sweden that prohibits or limits the use of regional or minority
languages in documents relating to economic or social life.

Article 14 - Transfrontier exchange
Sweden has undertaken:
a)

to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the States in which
the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if necessary to seek to conclude such
agreements, in such a way as to foster contacts between the users of the same language in the
States concerned in the fields of culture, education, information, vocational training and
permanent education

b)

for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or promote co-operation
across borders, in particular between regional or local authorities in whose territory the same
language is used in identical or similar form

Co-operation concerning all national minorities
The Nordic countries 9 have concluded agreements on co-operation in the field of culture, on
co-operation between local authorities and on the right of a citizen of a Nordic country to use
his or her own language in the other Nordic countries.
The co-operation between Finland, Sweden and Norway in the fields of education and culture
is included in the 1971 cultural co-operation treaty of all the five Nordic countries. The cooperation is realised by institutions and committees operating under the Nordic Council of
Ministers. The major part of the measures taken by the Nordic Council of Ministers concern
the various sectors of culture, information services and education, where language is a central
element. These projects include, for example, the financial support for translating literature,
the co-operation between the Nordic languages boards and the platform of language
instruction, NORDMÅL. The Nordic Council of Ministers has a specific language
programme.
Initial contacts have taken place between Sweden and both Finland and Norway concerning
exchange of experiences of policy-making on national minorities.
Co-operation especially concerning the Sami
Transnational exchanges are common among the Sami especially in the border region
between Finland, Sweden and Norway where Sami is spoken. The Sami Parliaments of
Finland, Sweden and Norway co-operate in several fields. As far as languages are concerned
the Sami language councils play an important role. Each national Sami Parliament has its
own language council which, together with the Samis in Russia, co-operates in a common
Sami Language Council. One important task for the language council is to develop common
standards for the Sami languages in Sápmi, e.g. harmonizing the varities spoken in the
different countries and the terminology.
Other fora for transnational co-operation are the non- governmental organisations, the Sami
Council and the Nordic Sami Institute (Nordiskt Samiskt institut).

9

Finland, Sweden, Denmark, Norway and Iceland.

26

The activities of the Sami Council is being financed by the Nordic Council of Ministers. It is a
common non- governmental body for the Sami in Finland, Norway, Russia and Sweden with
the task to safeguard the interests of the Sami people in economic, social and cultural fields.
The Nordic Sami Institute has as one of its missions to improve the situation for the Sami
population socially, judicially and economically through research and information.
The Nordic countries have agreed upon joint co-operation in radio broadcasting and
production of TV programmes in Sami.

27

Language: FINNISH
Article 8 – Education
Sweden has undertaken to provide education in Finnish as follows:
1.With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used,
according to the situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the official
language(s) of the State:
a.iii) to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those pupils whose
families so request and whose number is considered sufficient; or
b.iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils whose
families so request and whose number is considered sufficient
c.iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils who, or
where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number conside red sufficient
d.iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils who, or
where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered sufficient;
f.iii) if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult education, to favour
and/or encourage the offering of such languages as subjects of adult and continuing
education;
g.) to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected
by the regional or minority language;
h.) to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of
paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;
i.)

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken and
progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority languages
and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.

2. With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority
languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority
language justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the regional or minority language at all
the appropriate stages of education.

Pre-school activities, 8.1.a.iii
The Act on the right to use Finnish in administrative authorities and courts of law requires
municipalities in the administrative districts for Finnish to offer parents or guardians of a
child the option of placing their children in pre-schools where parts or all of the activities are
conducted in Finnish.
The administrative district for Finnish comprises the municipalities of Gällivare, Haparanda,
Kiruna, Pajala and Övertorneå, which are all situated in the north of Sweden.
Primary and secondary education 8.1.b.iv and 8.1.c.iv
Finnish may be taught as the mother tongue in both primary and secondary education. In the
school year 1999/2000 tuition in Finnish as mother tongue took place in 111 out of 289
municipalities at compulsory school level.
Eight private Swedish-Finnish schools conduct bi- lingual education in the school year
1999/2000.
28

Bilingual Swedish-Finnish classes in schools provided by the municipalities were widely
spread just a decade ago. Their numbers were almost 300 in the beginning of the 90s,
compared to 76 in 1997. The negative trend for this form of education will probably continue,
according to the National Agency for Education10 .
Technical and vocational training 8.1.d.iv)
Mother tongue instruction should be offered to all pupils for whom Finnish is a language used
within the family and if the number of pupils demanding mother tongue instruction in Finnish
is five or more in the same municipality. The offer of mother tongue instruction applies to the
compulsory school, and upper secondary school, including technical and vocational training.
Adult and continuing education 8.1.f.iii
The National Association of Finns in Sweden has close relations to three folk high schools
(independent adult education colleges) that offer courses in Finnish; Swedish-Finnish Folk
High School in Haparanda, Axevalla Folk High School in Skövde and Finnish Folk High
School in Gothenburg.
The Swedish- Finnish minority participates to a great extent in the activities carried out by the
adult education associations. The National Association of Finns in Sweden co-operates with
one of the adult education associations, ABF (Workers’ Educational Association), and is
represented on its board. The minorities that took part in the activities of the adult education
associations to achieve a completed nine- year compulsory education were mainly the Swedish
Finns and the so called Finnish Roma.
Ensure teaching of history and culture 8.1.g.
Refer to 8.1.g in the Sami section.
Teacher training 8.1.h
Refer to 8.1.h in the Sami section.

Supervision 8.1.i
Refer to 8.1.i in the Sami section.
Education outside the regional territories 8.2
Due to the large immigration inflows of Finns in the 60s and 70s, there are a considerable
number of Swedish-Finns outside the administrative regions in northern Sweden. Education in
Finnish is found at all levels outside the regional territories.
One of the aims for the Finnish-Swedish Education Council (Finsk-svenska utbildningsrådet)
is to facilitate the educational situation for the Finnish minority in Sweden.
Article 9 – Judicial authorities
Sweden has undertaken to ensure the use of Finnish before judicial authorities as follows:
1. The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents using the
regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to the situation of each of
these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the present paragraph is not
considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of justice

10

Skolverket (File ref. 97:1292)

29

a. in criminal proceedings:
ii) to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or minority language; and/or
iii) to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not be considered
inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a regional or minority language; and/or
iv) to produce, on request, documents connected with legal proceedings in the relevant regional
or minority language, if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations involving no extra
expense for the persons concerned
b. in civil proceedings:
ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she may use his
or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional expense; and/or
iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages, if
necessary by the use of interpreters and translations
c. in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she may use his
or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional expense; and/or
iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages, if
necessary by the use of interpreters and translations
d. to take steps to ensure that the application of sub-paragraphs i and iii of paragraphs b and c above and
any necessary use of interpreters and translations does not involve extra expense for the persons
concerned
2. The Parties undertake:
a. not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because they are drafted in a
regional or minority language; or
3. The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or minority languages the most important national
statutory texts and those relating particularly to users of these languages, unless they are otherwise
provided.

The right to use Finnish in criminal proceedings, civil proceedings and proceedings before
courts concerning administrative matters 9.1
According to Section 4 of the Act on the right to use Finnish in administrative authorities and
courts of law, anybody who is a party or alternate for a party in a judicial procedure in a court
of law is entitled to use Finnish in the proceedings, if the judicial procedure has a connection
to the administrative district for Finnish. This right applies to district and city courts, county
administrative courts, certain special courts and to courts of appeal.
According to Section 5 of the Act the right to use Finnish includes the right to speak Finnish
when a person appears before the court, to present both oral and written requests, evidence
and other documents connected with the proceedings in Finnish and to have requests,
evidence and documents in another language orally translated to Finnish. It is for the court to
ensure that documents and evidence are translated into Swedish, if it is not obviously
unnecessary.
If somebody wishes to use Finnish in a judicial procedure, according to section 6 of the Act,
he or she has to make a request for this in connection to when the procedures are initiated. If
such a request is made later, it may be refused. A request may also be refused if it is obvious
that the request has an improper purpose. This right is not associated with any costs for the
accused in criminal procedures or a litigant in civil procedures or proceedings concerning
administrative matters.
Translation and interpretation involves no extra expense for the persons concerned. Costs
related to translation and interpretations are paid for by the court. To cover translation
pursuant to the Acts 1999:1175 and 1176 the Government has provided one million Swedish
kronor to the courts administration.
30

Validity of legal documents 9.2
According to Swedish legislation the validity of a legal document cannot be denied on
account of it being drafted in a regional or minority language.
Important national statutory texts 9.3
The Act on the right to use Finnish in administrative authorities and courts of law has been
translated into Finnish and has been made available to the public through a booklet free of
charge and on the Ministry’s homepage (www.naring.regeringen.se).
The National Courts Administration has also translated information related to the legislation
on the right to use Finnish in courts into Finnish.

Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
Sweden has undertaken to ensure the use of Finnish before administrative authorities as
follows:
1. Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of regional
or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the situation of each
language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
a.iii) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written applications
and receive a reply in these languages;
a.v) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document in these
languages
c) to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in a regional or minority language
2.b the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written applications
in these languages
2.c the publication by regional authorities of their official documents also in the relevant regional or
minority languages
2.d the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in the relevant regional or
minority languages
2.g the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official language(s), of
traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or minority languages
4. With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the Parties
undertake to take one or more of the following measures
a translation or interpretation as may be required
5. The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or minority languages,
at the request of those concerned

Use of Finnish in public 10.1.a.iii, 10.1.a.v, 10.1.c and 10.2.b
Section 2 of the Act on the right to use Finnish in administrative authorities and courts of law
entitles a person to use Finnish in this or her dealings – both oral and written - with
administrative authorities in a case that involves exercise of public authority concerning him
or her. If the person concerned in a case uses Finnish, the authority in question is obliged to
respond orally in Finnish. Moreover, a written decision in such a case must contain
information in Finnish that the decision can be translated orally into Finnish by the authority
upon request. The Act also states that authorities should strive to answer Finnish-speaking
people in Finnish. The authorities may decide to receive Finnish-speaking visitors and phone
calls from Finnish-speaking people in certain hours during the week.

31

This right applies to dealings with local and regional state authorities, such as county
administrative boards, regional public prosecution offices, police authorities, tax authorities
and employment offices and to county council and municipal administrative authorities.
Moreover, municipalities in the administrative district for Finnish are required to offer care
services for the elderly in which some or all activities are conducted in Finnish.
Publication in regional languages 10.2.c, 10.2.d
The Government states (1998/99:143) that statutes that especially concern the rights of
national minorities should be translated into Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli.
The Act on the right to use Finnish and Meänkieli in administrative authorities and courts of
law has been translated into Finnish and Meänkieli and has been made available to the public
through a booklet free of charge and on the Ministry’s homepage (www.naring.regeringen.se).
Traditional forms of place- names 10.2.g
Refer to 10.2.g in the Sami section.
Translation and interpretation 10.4.a
Refer to 10.4.a in the Sami section.
Family names 10.5
Refer to 10.5 in the Sami section.

Article 11 - Media
Sweden has undertaken to ensure the use of Finnish in the media as follows:
1. The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in which
those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that the public
authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the
principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
a.iii) to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer programmes in the regional or minority
languages
c.i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least one television channel in the regional or
minority languages; or
d. to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual works in
the regional or minority languages
e.i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one newspaper in the
regional or minority languages
f.ii) to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions in the
regional or minority languages
2. The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television broadcasts from
neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language,
and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in
such a language. They further undertake to ensure that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of
expression and free circulation of information in the written press in a language used in identical or similar
form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of the above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with
it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are
prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial
integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for
the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for preventing disclosure of information received in
confidence, or for maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary

32

Provision of programmes in Finnish on TV and radio 11.1.a.iii
The broadcasting licences for public service companies, Swedish Television, the Swedish
Broadcasting Company and the Swedish Educational Broadcasting Company, require that
these companies take the national minorities and their languages into account. Finnish along
with Sami and Meänkieli must be given special status. Swedish Television broadcast daily
programmes in Finnish. Programmes in Finnish are produced in different genres such as news
broadcast, children programmes and documentary films etc. In the year 1999, Swedish
Television broadcasted 107 hours in Finnish.
The production of radio programmes in Finnish is extensive. Swedish Radio give special
consideratio n to Finnish as a result of the historic links between Sweden and Finland and to
the large number of Swedish Finns in Sweden. Swedish Radio broadcasted 4 487 hours in
Finnish/Meänkieli in 1999. Since 1998, Radio P 7 Finnish is broadcasted by the digital ne t.
Encouragement of a TV channel in Finnish 11.1.c.i
In the Radio and TV Act (SFS 1996:844) there is a provision for terrestrial transmission of a
Finnish TV-channel via Stockholm. The transmission is carried out through an agreeement of
reciprocity. Finland bears the costs for a Swedish programme channel in Finland and for the
transmission of a Finnish programme channel to Sweden. Correspondingly, Sweden bears the
costs for a Finnish programme channel in Sweden and for the transmission of the Swedish
channel to Finland. In 1998, the Finnish TV broadcasted to the entire Stockholm region and 26
localities in the country via a cable. In total these broadcasts have a potential audience of 2.5
million.
Encouragement and facilitation of production and distribution 11.1.d
Refer to 11.1.a.iii in this section.
Encouragement of conditions for newspapers 11.1.e.i)
The terms and conditions governing public subsidies for the press include special rules on the
allocation of funds to newspapers that address minorities in their own languages. Finnish
language newspaper Ruotsin Suomalainen, and Haparandabladet, which is partly written in
Meänkieli, can receive support via the Press Subsidies Council.
The National Council for Cultural Affairs shall give special consideration to minorities when
allocating public funds to cultural publications.
Equal financial support for media using Finnish 11.1.f.ii)
Refer to 11.1.a.iii in the Finnish section.
Right to reception of media from neighbouring countries 11.2
There are no restrictions on the freedom of direct reception of radio and television broadcasts
from neighbouring countries in a langua ge used in identical or similar form to a regio nal or
minority language, nor on the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from
neighbouring countries in any language.

33

Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Sweden has undertaken to ensure the use of Finnish in cultural activities and facilities as
follows:
1. With regard to cultural activities and facilities - especially libraries, video libraries, cultural centres,
museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production,
vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries, including inter alia the use of
new technologies - the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used and to the
extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this field:
a.) to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority languages and
foster the different means of access to works produced in these languages
b.)

to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in regional or
minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and
subtitling activities

c.)

to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages by
aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;

d.) to foster access in regional or minority languages to works produced in other languages by
aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;
f.)

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or minority
language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities

g.) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for collecting,
keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the regional or minority
languages
h.)

if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and terminological research
services, particularly with a view to maintaining and developing appropriate administrative,
commercial, economic, social, technical or legal terminology in each regional or minority
language

2. In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are traditionally
used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow,
encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in accordance with the preceding
paragraph

Encouragement of cultural activities 12.1.a
The Swedish National Council for Cultural Affairs is responsible for implementing the
national cultural policy determined by the Government and Riksdag. The Council shall
allocate national- government funds to cultural operators in cultural areas as drama, dance,
music, literature, public libraries, cultural periodicals, museums, exhibitions and art. One task
is to promote meetings between different cultures within Sweden.
The National Council for Cultural Affairs should give special consideration to minorities
when allocating public funds to literature and cultural publications. With this aim, from the
beginning of 2000, the allocation was increased by SEK 1 million.
The Finnish Language Council in Sweden and the Finnish Theatre are two important
Swedish-Finnish cultural institutions that are financed by means of the Swedish Government.
For the fiscal year 2001, the financial support to the Finnish Theatre was increased by 100
000 Swedish kronor. The Ministry of Culture has in its Terms of Reference 11 for 2001

11

=Regleringsbrev

34

directed Sweden’s Nationwide Theatre to increase the offer of Finnish theatre through cooperation with the Finnish theatre.
One of the aims of the Swedish and Finnish Cultural Foundation is to promote the Finnishspeaking culture in Sweden.
A publishing house, Finn Kirja, exists for the Swedish Finns and is mainly run on a non-profit
bais. Finn Kirja has over the years received financial support from the National Council for
Cultural Affairs.
In addition, the National Council for Cultural Affairs has, at the request of the Government,
examined ways of affording the Sami, Finnish, Tornedal Finnish, Roma and Jewish cultures
sufficient space in Swedish cultural life. The report 12 was submitted to the Government in the
spring 2001 and is to be considered.
To foster access to works produced in regional languages 12.1.b
Since 1961 Sweden has supported, through an agreement between Sweden and Finland, the
translation into Swedish of some specialist literature written in Finnish. The work is carried
out by the Committee of Experts for transla tion of Finnish specialist literature into Swedish
(Expertkommittén för översättning av finsk facklitteratur till svenska).
The task of the National Council for Cultural Affairs to give special consideration to
minorities when allocating public funds to literature and cultural publications is also of
importance in this context.
There is a lively writing activity among the Swedish Finns on an amateur level. The nongovernmental organisation the Swedish Finns Writers Association (Föreningen Sverigefinska
Skribenter) has occasionally published anthologies with support from the National Council for
Cultural Affairs.
To foster access to works produced in other languages 12.1.c
The supply at Swedish libraries meets the needs of Swedish Finns for access to literature
originally produced in Swedish or other languages, translated into Finnish.
The National Council for Cultural Affairs has in two reports 13 to the Government suggested
that a post for a Finnish library consultant with special responsibility for the library sector for
the Finnish language should be created. The Government will in due course consider this
proposal.
Ensure bodies responsible for organising cultural activities 12.1.d
By financing the Swedish National Council for Cultural Affairs, a central government
authority responsible for cultural support in Sweden, which also includes the national
minorities, Sweden meets the needs for bodies responsible for organising cultural activities.
One task of the Council is to promote meetings between different cultures within Sweden.

12

De nationella minoriteterna och kulturlivet (2001:4) Statens Kulturråd.
”Har Pekka slutat läsa?”, Göteborgs bibliotek (1995), De nationella minoriteterna och kulturlivet (2001:4)
Statens Kulturråd.
13

35

Encouragement of participation by Finnish representatives 12.1.f
Sweden has a long tradition of involving non-governmental organisations through
participation in parliamentary committees. That is also true regarding organisations
representing national minorities.
An important part of Sweden’s policy on national minorities is that those affected by the
policy are able to make their views and wishes known before decisions are made. The
consultative meetings between representatives of the Government and minority organisations
are of particular value.
Representatives for the national minorities shall to some extent be involved in activities
concerning them, as was the case with the recently produced reports from e.g., National
Council for Cultural Affairs and the National Agency for Education.
In order to monitor regional measures a Regional Working Group has been set up under
Norrbotten county Administrative Board, made up of representatives of municipalities, county
councils and users of Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli.
Special funds have been allocated for organisations representing national minorities in order
to strengthen their influence in areas and issues that concern them.
Archives 12.1.g
Finlandshuset in Stockholm, an institute for Finnish culture, is financed by the Finnish state
with a contribution from the Swedish state. Finlandshuset has a Swedish-Finnish library.
As regards the investigation of archive-related issues, see also Article 12.g in the Sami
section.
The Swedish Finns has for several years had their own archive: the Swedish-Finns Archive
(Sverigefinländarnas arkiv) The archive, which exists since 1977, receives annually financial
support from the National Archives. The archive is, according to the National Association of
Finns in Sweden (Sverigefinska Riksförbundet), merely an embryo of an archive.
Language councils etc. 12.1.h
The Language Council of the Finnish Language in Sweden was established in 1975. The
Language Council has three language experts employed. The main task of the council is to
protect and promote the Finnish language in Sweden. The Language Council co-operates with
the Language Council for the Swedish Language and with its counterpart in Finland for the
Finnish language.
Cultural activities outside the region 12.2
A large group of Finns immigrated to Sweden at the end of the 60s and the 70s and they
settled all over Sweden. The National Association of Finns in Sweden (Sverigefinska
Riksförbundet) is divided into 10 districts, which house around 155 clubs that take care of
social, cultural and other needs of their members. The National Association of Finns in
Sweden receives financial support from the National Integration Office.
See also 12.2 in the Sami section.

36

Article 13 – Economic and social life
Sweden has undertaken to ensure the use of Finnish in economic and social life as follows:
1. With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole country:
a) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without justifiable
reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to economic or social
life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical documents such as instructions for
the use of products or installations

There is no legislation in Sweden that prohibits or limits the use of regional or minority
languages in documents relating to economic or social life.
Article 14 - Transfrontier exchange
Sweden has undertaken:
a)

to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the States in which
the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if necessary to seek to conclude such
agreements, in such a way as to foster contacts between the users of the same language in the
States concerned in the fields of culture, education, information, vocational training and
permanent education

b)

for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or promote co-operation
across borders, in particular between regional or local authorities in whose territory the same
language is used in identical or similar form.

Finland and Sweden has a long history in common. The two countries were one state from
1100 to 1809. The countries also have common languages. Swedish is an official language in
Finland and Finnish is a minority language in Sweden. Therefore, it is natural that the
language councils that exist for Finnish and Swedish in the both countries co-operate.
The Finnish-Swedish Education Council (Finsk-svenska utbildningsrådet), has been assigned
the task of facilitating the educational situation for the Finnish minority in Sweden and
promoting increased knowledge and understanding for the common history and cultural
heritage of Finland and Sweden.
There are current plans to create a Finnish-Swedish Working Group at governmental level.
The Working Group will, among other things, focus on the situation for the Finish language in
Sweden and the Swedish language in Finland and other questions of common interest
regarding the national minorities.
Since decades, co-operation is carried out over the borders between Swedish-Finnish
organisations in Sweden and organisations in Finland, e.g. Pohjola-Norden,
Finlandssamfundet and Svenska Finlands Folkting. Such co-operation is important for the
Swedish-Finnish minority in Sweden in order to preserve and develop its language and
culture.
Transfrontier co-operation in the cultural fields is mentioned under Article 12.
See also Article 14 in the Sami section; co-operation concerning all national minorities.

37

Language: MEÄNKIELI
Article 8 – Education
Sweden has undertaken to provide education in Meänkieli as follows:
1. With regard to education, the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used,
according to the situation of each of these languages, and without prejudice to the teaching of the official
language(s) of the State:
a.iii) to apply one of the measures provided for under i and ii above at least to those pupils whose
families so request and whose number is considered sufficient; or
b.iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils whose
families so request and whose number is considered sufficient
c.iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils who, or
where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered sufficient
d.iv) to apply one of the measures provided for under i to iii above at least to those pupils who, or
where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number considered sufficient;
f.iii) if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult education, to favour
and/or encourage the offering of such languages as subjects of adult and continuing
education;
g.) to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is reflected
by the regional or minority language;
h.) to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of
paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;
i.)

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken and
progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority languages
and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.

2. With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority
languages are traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority
language justifies it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of the regional or minority language at all
the appropriate stages of education.

Pre-school activities, 8.1.a.iii
The Act on the right to use Meänkieli in administrative authorities and courts of law requires
municipalities in the administrative districts for Meänkieli to offer parents or guardians of a
child the option of placing their children in pre-schools where parts or all of the activities are
conducted in Meänkieli
The administrative district for Meänkieli comprises the municipalities of Gällivare,
Haparanda, Kiruna, Pajala and Övertorneå, which are all situated in the north of Sweden.

Primary education 8.1.b.iv
Mother tongue instruction in Meänkieli is offered in three out of five of the administrative
districts concerned by the law mentioned under 8.1.a.iii. (1999:1176). One municipality stated
that there is no demand for language tuition in Meänkieli.
In the Pajala and Övertorneå municipalities, were both Finnish and Meänkieli is taught, the
number of participants was about the same for the two languages.
38

Upper secondary education 8.1.c.iv
One municipality offered tuition in Meänkieli at upper secondary school level before the 1
April 2000 when the Act entered in to force. Two municipalities offer Meänkieli at that level
after that date.
No upper secondary pupil took part in mother tongue instruction in Meänkieli in the school
year 2000.
Technical and vocational training 8.1.d.iv
Refer to 8.1.d.iv. in the Finnish section.
Adult and continuing education 8.1.f.iii
Refer to 8.1.f.iii in the Finnish section. Meänkieli is sometimes integrated in the ordinary
instruction in Finnish at the Finno-Ugric institutions.
In the 90s 16 students passed their exams in courses in Meänkieli at the Technical University
of Luleå (courses of five to twenty weeks of length). Courses in “The language and history of
Tornedalen” were offered in 1996 – 1999. 12 students passed these courses during the years.
At folk high school level, Tornedalens Folk High School has close co-operation with
Meänkieli-speaking Tornedalers.
Ensure teaching of history and culture 8.1.g.
Refer to 8.1.g. in the Sami section.
Teacher training 8.1.h
Refer to 8.1.h in the Sami section.
Supervision 8.1.i
Refer to 8.1.i. in the Sami section.
Education outside the regional territories 8.2
Meänkieli-speakers are to a large extent concentrated to the administrative district of the Act
1999:1176. There has not been any demand for providing education in Meänkieli outside the
region. Yet the language has received more interest since it got status as a minority language
in December 1999.
Adult education associations have sometimes offered courses in Meänkieli outside the
regional territories.
The organisation Meän Akateemi/Academia Tornedaliensis offers language courses in
Meänkieli and operates in the whole region of Nordkalotten.

Article 9 – Judicial authorities
Sweden has undertaken to ensure the use of Meänkieli before judicial authorities as follows:
1. The Parties undertake, in respect of those judicial districts in which the number of residents using the
regional or minority languages justifies the measures specified below, according to the situation of each of
these languages and on condition that the use of the facilities afforded by the present paragraph is not
considered by the judge to hamper the proper administration of justice

39

a. in criminal proceedings:
ii) to guarantee the accused the right to use his/her regional or minority language; and/or
iii) to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not be considered
inadmissible solely because they are formulated in a regional or minority language; and/or
iv) to produce, on request, documents connected with legal proceedings in the relevant regional
or minority language, if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations involving no extra
expense for the persons concerned
b. in civil proceedings:
ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she may use his
or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional expense; and/or
iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages, if
necessary by the use of interpreters and translations
c. in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
ii) to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she may use his
or her regional or minority language without thereby incurring additional expense; and/or
iii) to allow documents and evidence to be produced in the regional or minority languages, if
necessary by the use of interpreters and translations
d. to take steps to ensure that the application of sub-paragraphs i and iii of paragraphs b and c above and
any necessary use of interpreters and translations does not involve extra expense for the persons
concerned
2. The Parties undertake:
a.) not to deny the validity of legal documents drawn up within the State solely because they are
drafted in a regional or minority language; or
3. The Parties undertake to make available in the regional or minority languages the most important national
statutory texts and those relating particularly to users of these languages, unless they are otherwise
provided.

The right to use Meänkieli in criminal proceedings, civil proceedings and proceedings before
courts concerning administrative matters 9.1
According to Section 4 of the Act on the right to use Meänkieli in administrative authorities
and courts of law, anybody who is a party or alternate for a party in a judicial procedure in a
court of law is entitled to use Meänkieli in the proceedings, if the judicial procedure has a
connection to the administrative district for Meänkieli. This right applies to district and city
courts, county administrative courts, certain special courts and to courts of appeal.
According to Section 5 of the Act the right to use Meänkieli includes the right to speak
Meänkieli when a person appears before the court, to present both oral and written requests,
evidence and other documents connected with the proceedings in Meänkieli and to have
requests, evidence and documents in another language orally translated to Meänkieli. It is for
the court to ensure that documents and evidence are translated into Swedish, if it is not
obviously unnecessary.
If somebody wishes to use Meänkieli in a judicial procedure, according to Section 6 of the
Act, he or she has to make a request for this in connection to when the procedures are
initiated. If such a request is made later, it may be refused. A request may also be refused if it
is obvious that the request has an improper purpose. This right is not associated with any costs
40

for the accused in criminal procedures or a litigant in civil procedures or proceedings
concerning administrative matters.
Translation and interpretation involves no extra expense for the persons concerned. Costs
related to translation and interpretations are payed for by the court. To cover translation
pursuant to the Acts 1999:1175 and 1176 the Government has provided one million Swedish
kronor to the courts administration.
Validity of legal documents 9.2
According to Swedish legislation the validity of a legal document cannot be denied on
account of it being drafted in a regional or minority language.
Important national statutory texts 9.3
The Act on the right to use Meänkieli in administrative authorities and courts of law has been
translated into Meänkieli and has been made available to the public through a booklet free of
charge and on the Ministry’s homepage (www.naring.regeringen.se).
The National Courts Administration has also translated information related to the legislation
on the right to use Meänkieli in courts into Meänkieli.

Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
Sweden has undertaken to ensure the use of Meänkieli before administrative authorities as
follows:
1. Within the administrative districts of the State in which the number of residents who are users of regional
or minority languages justifies the measures specified below and according to the situation of each
language, the Parties undertake, as far as this is reasonably possible:
a.iii) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may submit oral or written applications
and receive a reply in these languages;
a.v) to ensure that users of regional or minority languages may validly submit a document in these
languages
c)

to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in a regional or minority language

2.b the possibility for users of regional or minority languages to submit oral or written applications
in these languages
2.c the publication by regional authorities of their official documents also in the relevant regional
or minority languages
2.d the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in the relevant regional or
minority languages
2.g the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official language(s), of
traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or minority languages
4. With a view to putting into effect those provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 accepted by them, the Parties
undertake to take one or more of the following measures
a) translation or interpretation as may be required
5. The Parties undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in the regional or minority languages,
at the request of those concerned

41

Use of Meänkieli in public 10.1.a.iii, 10.1.a.v, 10.1.c and 10.2.b
Individuals are entitled to use Meänkieli in dealings with administrative authorities in the
administrative district for Meänkieli according to the Act mentioned under Article 9 (SFS
1999:1176). This right applies to dealings with local and regional State authorities (such as
county administrative boards, regional public prosecution offices, police authorities, tax
authorities and employment offices), county council and municipal administrative authorities.
In the administrative district for Meänkieli individuals are entitled to communicate with
administrative authorities in Meänkieli. The authority must give oral replies in Meänkieli and
generally endeavour to respond in Meänkieli.
Moreover, municipalities in the above- mentioned administrative districts are required to offer
care services for the elderly in which some or all activities are conducted in Meänkieli.
The administrative district for Meänkieli comprises the municipalities of Gällivare,
Haparanda, Kiruna, Pajala and Övertorneå.
Publication in regional languages 10.2.c, 10.2.d
Refer to 10.2.c. in the Finnish section.
Traditional forms of place- names 10.2.g
Refer to 10.2.g in the Sami section
Translation and interpretation 10.4.a
Refer to 10.4.a in the Sami section.
Family name 10.5
Refer to 10.5 in the Sami section.

Article 11 - Media
Sweden has undertaken to ensure the use of Meänkieli in the media as follows:
1. The Parties undertake, for the users of the regional or minority languages within the territories in which
those languages are spoken, according to the situation of each language, to the extent that the public
authorities, directly or indirectly, are competent, have power or play a role in this field, and respecting the
principle of the independence and autonomy of the media:
a.iii) to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer programmes in the regional or minority
languages
d)

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and audiovisual works in
the regional or minority languages

e.i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one newspaper in the
regional or minority languages
f.ii)

to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions in the
regional or minority languages

2. The Parties undertake to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television broadcasts from
neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority language,
and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in
such a language. They further undertake to ensure that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of
expression and free circulation of information in the written press in a language used in identical or similar
form to a regional or minority language. The exercise of the above-mentioned freedoms, since it carries with

42

it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are
prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial
integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for
the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for preventing disclosure of information received in
confidence, or for maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary

Provision of programmes in Meänkieli on TV and radio 11.1.a.iii
The public service companies in Sweden have as one of their duties to provide programmes
on TV and radio in the minority languages.Meänkieli along with Finnish and Sami must be
given special status. Programmes are produced in different genres such as children
programmes, news, etc.
Swedish Television broadcasted 5 hours in Meänkieli in 1999.
The Swedish Radio editorial office in Norrbotten and “Riksradions finska sändingar”
broadcasts some programmes in Meänkieli.

Encouragement and facilitation of production and distribution 11.1.d
Broadcasting licences for public service companies, Swedish Television, the Swedish
Broadcasting Company and the Swedish Educational Broadcasting Company require that
these companies take the needs of national minorities and their languages into account.
Meänkieli must be given special status.
Encouragement of newspapers 11.1.e.i
Refer to 11.1.e.i. in the Finnish section.
Equal financial support for media using Meänkieli 11.1.f.ii
Refer to 11.1.f.ii in the Sami section.
Right to reception of media from neighbouring countries 11.2
Tornedalers are interested in receiving media produced in Finnish. That stated under 11.2 in
the Finnish section concerning the freedom of direct reception of radio and tele vision
broadcasts from neighbouring countries, also applies for Meänkieli.

Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Sweden has undertaken to ensure the use of Meänkieli in cultural activities and facilities as
follows:
1. With regard to cultural activities and facilities - especially libraries, video libraries, cultural centres,
museums, archives, academies, theatres and cinemas, as well as literary work and film production,
vernacular forms of cultural expression, festivals and the culture industries, including inter alia the use of
new technologies - the Parties undertake, within the territory in which such languages are used and to the
extent that the public authorities are competent, have power or play a role in this field:
a.) to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to regional or minority languages and
foster the different means of access to works produced in these languages
b.) to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in regional or
minority languages by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and
subtitling activities;

d.) to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural activities of various
kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and use of regional or

43

minority languages and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for which they
provide backing;
f.)

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of a given regional or minority
language in providing facilities and planning cultural activities

g). to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for collecting,
keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in the regional or minority
languages
2. In respect of territories other than those in which the regional or minority languages are traditionally
used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of a regional or minority language justifies it, to allow,
encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in accordance with the preceding
paragraph

Encouragement of cultural activities 12.1.a
Refer to 12.1.a in the Finnish section.
The Tornedal Theatre is an active amateur theatre in the region of Tornedalen and performe
plays in Meänkieli and in Swedish. The National Council for Cultural Affairs has proposed
that the Government should support the theatre in the next fiscal year.
The Swedish Film Institute takes part in an investigation initiated by the Municipality of
Kiruna concerning the establishment of a resource centre for Sami and Tornedal film. The
investigation shall also consider in what way film culture and film production promotes the
minority languages. The result will be presented at the Umeå Film Festival in September
2001.
To foster access to works produced in regional languages 12.1.b
The National Council for Cultural Affairs should give special consideration to minorities
when allocating public funds to literature and cultural publications.
Ensure bodies responsible for organising cultural activities 12.1.d
The National Council for Cultural Affairs is responsible for cultural support in Sweden. That
includes the national minorities, refer to 12.1.d in the Finnish section.
Meän Akateemi/Academia Tornedaliensis is a foundation that offers different cultural
activities, language courses and publishing in Meänkieli. The foundation is a kind of informal
language council for Meänkieli. The National Council for Cultural Affairs has proposed to
give financial support to language council activities in Meänkieli in the next fiscal year.
Encouragement of participation by Meänkieli representatives 12.1.f
Refer to 12.1.f in the Finnish section.
Archives 12.1.g
Refer to 12.1.g under the Sami section.
Cultural activities outside the region 12.2
The Tornedal-related cultural activities mainly occur in the region of Tornedalen.
See also 12.2 in the Sami section.

44

Article 13 – Economic and social life
Sweden has undertaken to ensure the use of Meänkieli in economic and social life as follows:
1. With regard to economic and social activities, the Parties undertake, within the whole country:
a.) to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without justifiable
reasons the use of regional or minority languages in documents relating to economic or social
life, particularly contracts of employment, and in technical documents such as instructions for
the use of products or installations

There is no legislation in Sweden which prohibits or limits the use of regional or minority
languages in documents relating to economic or social life.
Article 14 - Transfrontier exchange
Sweden has undertaken to:
a)

to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the States in which
the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if necessary to seek to conclude such
agreements, in such a way as to foster contacts between the users of the same language in the
States concerned in the fields of culture, education, information, vocational training and
permanent education

b)

for the benefit of regional or minority languages, to facilitate and/or promote co-operation
across borders, in particular between regional or local authorities in whose territory the same
language is used in identical or similar form

In Tornedalen, co-operation is carried out through Tornedal Council (Tornedalsrådet) and
between the border municipalities Torneå in Finland and Haparanda in Sweden. Bilateral cooperation is carried out under the treaty in the Administration of the Border River Torne 14 .
See also Article 14 in the Sami section.

14

Gränsälvsöverenskommelsen om förvaltningen av Torneälv.

45

APPENDICES
Appendix 1

Sametinget
The Sami Parliament
Bergmästaregatan 6
S- 981 33 KIRUNA, SWEDEN
Telephone: + 46 980 780 30
Telefax: + 46 980 780 31
E- mail: information@sametinget.se
www.sametinget.se

Sverigefinska språknämnden
The Language Council of the Finnish Language in Sweden
Box 20057
S-104 60 STOCKHOLM, SWEDEN
Telephone: + 46 8 - 462 06 16 (counselling), +46 8 - 462 92 32
Telefax: + 46 8 442 42 15
E- mail: konttori@kielilautakunta.se
www.spraknamnd.se

46

Appendix 2

Reports submitted to the Government in the spring 2001 concerning national minorities:
•

The National Agency for Education (Statens skolverk)
Undervisning i och på de nationella minoritetsspråken – kartläggning av situationen
2001 [Teaching in and on national minority langugaes – a survey of the situation 2001]
(2001:3438)

•

National Council for Cultural Affairs (Statens kulturråd)
De nationella minoriteterna och kulturlivet [The national minorities and cultural life]
(2001:4)

•

The Swedish National Council of Adult Education (Folkbildningsrådet)
En rapport om nationella minoriteters deltagande in folkbildningen [A report on the
participation of national minorities in adult education] (2001)

•

The County Administrative Board of the County Norrbotten (Länsstyrelsen i
Norrbottens län)
Uppföljning och utvärdering av regionala åtgärder för nationella minoriteter [Follow- up
and evaluation of regional measures for national minorities] (2001)

47

Appendix 3

Sweden has ratified the following Articles in the European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages, Section III

Sami
8.1.a.iii)
8.1.b.iv)
8.1.c.iv)
8.1.d.iv)
8.1.e.iii)
8.1.f.iii)
8.1.g
8.1.h
8.1.i
8.2

Finnish
8.1.a.iii)
8.1.b.iv)
8.1.c.iv)
8.1.d.iv)
8.1.e.iii)
8.1.f.iii)
8.1.g
8.1.h
8.1.i
8.2

Meänkieli
8.1.a.iii)
8.1.b.iv)
8.1.c.iv)
8.1.d.iv)
8.1.e.iii)
8.1.f.iii)
8.1.g
8.1.h
8.1.i
8.2

9.1.a.ii)
9.1a.iii)
9.1.a.iv)
9.1.b.ii)
9.1.b.iii)
9.1.c.ii)
9.1.c.iii)
9.1.d
9.2
9.3

9.1.a.ii)
9.1.a.iii)
9.1.a.iv)
9.1.b.ii)
9.1.b.iii)
9.1.c.ii)
9.1.c.iii)
9.1.d
9.2
9.3

9.1.a.ii)
9.1.a.iii)
9.1.a.iv)
9.1.b.ii)
9.1.b.iii)
9.1.c.ii)
9.1.c.iii)
9.1.d
9.2
9.3

Judicial
authorities

10.1.a.iii)
10.1.a.v
10.1.c
10.2.b
10.2.c
10.2.d
10.2.g
10.4.a
10.5

10.1.a.iii)
10.1.a.v)
10.1.c
10.2.b
10.2.c
10.2.d
10.2.g
10.4.a
10.5

10.1.a.iii)
10.1.a.v)
10.1.c
10.2.b
10.2.c
10.2.b
10.2.g
10.4.a
10.5

Administrative
authorities and
public services

11.1.a.iii)

11.1.a.iii)
11.1.c.i)
11.1.d
11.1.e.i)
11.1.f.ii)
11.2

1.1.a.iii)

Media

11.1.d
11.1.e.i)
11.1.f.ii)
11.2

11.1.d
11.1.e.i)
11.1.f.ii)
11.2

48

Education

12.1.a
12.1.b
12.1.c
12.1.d
12.1.e
12.1.f
12.1.g
12.1.h
12.2
13.1.a

14.a
14.b
46

12.1.a
12.1.b
12.1.c
12.1.d

12.1.a
12.1.b

Cultural activities
and facilities

12.1.f
2.1.g
12.1.h
12.2

12.1.f
12.1.g

13.1.a

3.1.a

Economic
and social life

14.a
14.b
46

14.a
14.b
43

Transfrontier
exchange

12.1.d

12.2

49

