Government Offices of Sweden

Sweden’s report to the Council of
Europe on the European Charter for
Regional or Minority Languages
presented in accordance with Article 15 of the
Charter, fourth Periodical Report

2

Foreword
During 2009 Sweden adopted a new strategy for minority policy in order to
attain the minority policy objectives in a more efficient manner and to secure
the possibility for national minorities to retain their individuality, culture
and language. The strategy was presented in the government bill From
Recognition to Empowerment – the Government’s Strategy for the National
Minorities (bill 2008/09:158). It was established in the bill that the measures
which were taken in conjunction with Sweden’s ratification of the Council
of Europe minority conventions need to be supplemented and the level of
ambition must be increased. Consequently the commitments towards the
national minorities have been expressed in concrete terms and the special
position of the national minorities in the Swedish society has been clarified
so that decision-makers and officials at various levels within society can
acquire deeper knowledge and understanding of Sweden’s international
obligations and to ensure that the decisions which are taken fulfil these
obligations. The government’s overall strategy for minority policy also
highlights the preservation perspective and the need to increase the
participation of national minorities. The national minorities need to be
equipped with better tools which allow them to assimilate, develop, preserve
and reclaim their languages.
A great deal of work remains at a central and local level before the strategy
for minority policy achieves its full impact. I hope that the work which is
now underway will strengthen the empowerment of the national minorities
and thereby provide them with better conditions to shape their own future.
Sweden hereby submits its fourth report on the measures which have been
taken up until 1 September 2010 in order to fulfil the commitments in
accordance with the Council of Europe’s Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages. The report has been set out and the answers given in accordance
with the instructions specified by the Council of Europe in its guidelines.
The report discusses the measures implemented and the changes that have
occurred since Sweden submitted its last report, but also tries to reply to the
comments made and questions asked by the Council of Europe in its reports
about Sweden. An account of the measures implemented is given article by
article.
Stockholm, September 2010
Nyamko Sabuni
Minister responsible for Sweden’s policy on national minorities

3

Table of contents
PART I ........................................................................................................................................ 5
PART II ..................................................................................................................................... 26
PART III ................................................................................................................................... 41
Languages: SAMI, FINNISH and MEÄNKIELI....................................................................... 41
Article 8 – Education........................................................................................................ 42
Article 9 – The legal system............................................................................................. 55
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services ........................................ 59
Article 11 – Media ............................................................................................................ 62
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities.................................................................. 65
Article 13 – Economic and social life .............................................................................. 69
Article 14 – Transfrontier exchange............................................................................... 69
APPENDICES .......................................................................................................................... 70
Appendix 1 – Ratified Articles in the Charter............................................................................ 70
Appendix 2 – National Legislation ............................................................................................ 72
Act (2009:724) on National Minorities and National Minority Languages............................... 72
Language Act (2009:600)........................................................................................................... 77
Discrimination Act (2008:567) .................................................................................................. 79
Social Services Act (2001:453)................................................................................................ 103
Law on System of Choice in the Public Sector (2008:962) ..................................................... 104
Heritage Conservation Act (1988:950) etc............................................................................... 111
Sami Parliament Act (1992:1433)............................................................................................ 112
Compulsory School Ordinance (1994:1194)............................................................................ 112
Education Act (2010:800) ........................................................................................................ 114
The Health and Medical Service Act (1982:763)..................................................................... 115

4

PART I
Introductory comments
Sweden’s fourth report to the Council of Europe on the European Charter
for Regional or Minority Languages, submitted in accordance with Article 15
of the Charter, adheres to the revised outline for periodical reports which
was adopted by the Committee of Ministers during the 1056th meeting on 6
May 2009. Special attention has been given to the issues highlighted by the
Committee of Experts in its third evaluation report ECRML (2009) 3. The
government has chosen presentation option B for presenting part IIT.
In order to avoid repeating information provided in previous reports, the
government has chosen to refer to the third report for obligations which
have not witnessed any relevant changes. The same applies to the obligations
which in its report the Committee of Experts did not consider to require a
revised assessment or another account on the implementation.
A new strategy for minority policy
In June 2009 the Riksdag (Swedish Parliament) adopted the bill From
Recognition to Empowerment – the Government’s Strategy for the National
Minorities (Government Bill 2008/09:158, Committee Report
2008/09:KU23, Government Communication 2008/09:272). The new
strategy was implemented in January 2010.
The strategy contains measures for:
• ensuring stricter adherence to the Council of Europe’s charter on
minorities,
• improved follow-up of the implementation of minority policy,
• combating discrimination against and the vulnerability of the national
minorities,
• strengthening the empowerment and influence of national minorities,
as well as
• supporting the preservation of the national minority languages.
The judicial regulation of the rights of the national minorities has been
clarified by means of the new Act (2009:724) on National Minorities and
National Minority Languages. The Act entered into force on 1 January 2010
and applies nationwide. Further information on the Act can be found below.
Based on experience it can be stated that the recognition of the national
minorities, which was determined by the Riksdag in December 1999 has not
been accompanied by sufficient resolute measures in order to allow the
national minorities to derive maximum benefit of their rights. Several areas
warrant improvement. According to the Government, the goals of the
Swedish minority policy must be increased considerably. It involves, inter
5

alia, creating a structure which allows the minority policy to be realised in a
more efficient manner. An important premise concerning the reformation
efforts has been the strengthening of the empowerment of the national
minorities and the prerequisites which are necessary to preserve and
revitalise their language and culture.
As of 2010 the budget for minority policy has been increased to
approximately SEK 80 million per year. The previous budget was set at SEK
10 million per year.
Combating discrimination, negative attitudes and vulnerability
The new Discrimination Act (2008:567), which replaced the previous seven
Discrimination Acts, provides the Equality Ombudsman (DO) with the
necessary prerequisites to continue to promote equal rights and
opportunities for national minorities, by among other things increasing the
awareness of discriminatory issues among these groups. In the strategy for
minority policy the government has stated that the work initiated by the
Equality Ombudsman to support national minorities should continue.
The strategy has also established that the methodological work managed by
the Delegation for Roma Issues aimed at improving the situation of the
Roma and combating their vulnerability in the Swedish society needs to
continue after the Delegation has concluded its work. The County
Administrative Board in the County of Stockholm is working on the issue
while the Government Offices of Sweden prepare the proposal. The
delegation presented its commission on 30 July 2010 via the report Romers
rätt – en strategi för romer i Sverige (The Rights of the Roma – a Strategy for the
Roma in Sweden, Swedish Government Official Reports Series No. 2010:55).
While the County Administrative Board in the County of Stockholm waits
for the Government Offices of Sweden to prepare the delegation’s proposal,
the Board shall support the municipalities which have initiated development
work with regard to the Roma minority and strengthen communication
between the Roma minority and authorities.
The work which commenced in 2008 within the area of equality in order to
strengthen the position and empowerment of women from national
minorities will also continue during 2010. Funds amounting to SEK 5
million have been allocated for 2010.
Monitoring and management of minority policy
The lack of commitment and willingness to take responsibility impedes the
implementation of obligations for minorities and the management and
implementation needs to be improved at a national and local level. Therefore,
a state monitoring system has been introduced in order to monitor

6

adherence to the Act (2009:724) on National Minorities and National
Minority Languages as well as the effects of the minority policy.
The monitoring system is comprised of the following parts:
The minority policy objectives will be expressed in concrete terms and divided
into a number of separate areas
The effects of the minority policy should be monitored within each separate
area for the continued work. The minority policy objectives also need to be
integrated in a clearer manner in other policy areas which concern the
national minorities and the prerequisites which allow them to retain their
culture and language.
The responsibility for monitoring is introduced
The responsibility of authorities in terms of the minority policy needs to be
clarified. The County Administrative Board in the County of Stockholm and
the Sami Parliament (Sametinget) have been commissioned the
responsibility for monitoring the implementation of the minority policy on a
national level. Moreover, through consultation, information and similar
operations these authorities shall support other public authorities in their
application of the Act (2009:724) on National Minorities and National
Minority Languages. The aim is to facilitate the work at a municipal level.
Improved coordination between authorities
The County Administrative Board in the County of Stockholm and the Sami
Parliament have been commissioned with the coordination responsibility for
the objectives of the minority policy. During a three-year period a number
of authorities will monitor, analyse and present their initiatives based on the
objectives of minority policy. These authorities include the National Police
Board, the National Board of Health and Welfare, the Swedish National
Institute of Public Health, the Swedish National Agency for Education, the
Swedish Schools Inspectorate, the Swedish National Agency for Higher
Education, Lantmäteriet (the Swedish mapping, cadastral and land
registration authority), the Equality Ombudsman, the Swedish National
Board for Youth Affairs, the Election Authority and the Swedish Arts
Council. The County Administrative Board in the County of Stockholm and
the Sami Parliament have been assigned the responsibility of submitting an
overall assessment of the adherence to the Act (2009:724) on National
Minorities and National Minority Languages.
Measures aimed at increasing awareness
Knowledge and awareness of the international obligations, the national
minorities and the rights of minorities needs to be increased in order to
ensure stricter compliance. The County Administrative Board in the County
of Stockholm and the Sami Parliament have been assigned the responsibility
of implementing measures aimed at increasing awareness. The Sami
Parliament has been commissioned to create and manage a website
7

concerning the national minorities. The new website (www.minoritet.se) was
launched in December 2009.
A new Act on National Minorities and National Minority Languages
The judicial regulation of the rights of the national minorities has been
clarified by means of the new coherent Act which applies on a national level,
rather than just in certain parts of the country. The new Act (2009:724) on
National Minorities and National Minority Languages replaces the previous
Acts on the right to use Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli. The Act entered into
force on 1 January 2010.
All the national minorities are addressed in the new Act (by referring to the
Language Act, see below).
The general provisions have been introduced with the aim of clarifying the
responsibilities of society. The new judicial regulation also clarifies the
unique position of the national minorities in Sweden partly in relation to the
obligations in the Framework Convention and partly part II of the Charter
for Regional and Minority Languages. These obligations should be
implemented and complied with throughout the country for all national
minorities. These obligations have not been closely regulated by Swedish law
in the past. General provisions have been introduced with regard to the
information obligation for all state and municipal public authorities, the
responsibility of public institutions to promote the opportunity for national
minorities to retain and develop their languages and culture and the
obligation to consult the national minorities.
The obligation to provide information on the rights has been introduced.
Administrative authorities shall, when this is needed, provide information to
the national minorities in an appropriate manner on their rights in
accordance with the new Act (2009:724) on National Minorities and
National Minority Languages.
An obligation to promote the language and culture of the national minorities
has been introduced. The public institutions have a specific responsibility to
protect and promote the opportunity for the national minorities to maintain
and develop their culture in Sweden. The development of a cultural identity
for children and their own minority language should be promoted in
particular.
The influence of the national minorities is strengthened and regulated by
law
The improved possibilities for the national minorities to achieve enhanced
influence are essential in order to highlight the groups’ importance in society
and is a prerequisite for Sweden to be able to fulfil the obligations in the
8

Charter for Regional and Minority Languages. The government has reached
the conclusion that the measures which have been taken to date are not
sufficient to secure influence and therefore a number of measures have been
taken in order to strengthen the influence of the minorities.
The administrative authorities should provide the national minorities the
opportunity to exert influence on issues which concern them and as far as
possible consult with the representatives of the minorities on such issues
(Section 5 of the Act (2009:724) on National Minorities and National
Minority Languages). It is particularly important to initiate efficient
communication in the municipalities as many of the important decisions
concerning the national minorities are taken at a local level.
Financial aid for the organisations which represent the national minorities
has been increased by an additional SEK 2 million to SEK 6 million per year
in order to strengthen the empowerment of the national minorities.
According to the government, at this stage it is essential to particularly
prioritise the prerequisites for national minorities which allow them to create
well-functioning consultation models within the administrative area in which
strengthened minority rights apply concerning Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli
respectively.
The government intends to initiate a dialogue with the youth associations
for the national minorities at a national level with the purpose of improving
opportunities for youth associations to exert greater influence.
The role of the Sami Parliament has been clarified. The Sami Parliament shall
determine the objectives, rather than simply manage the Sami language work.
The increased responsibility of the Sami Parliament will be expressed by
changes in the Sami Parliament Act (1992:1433). The Riksdag and the
government can formulate overall objectives for the national language policy
but according to the government the responsibility of conveying the
objectives for the internal work on the Sami language lies with the Sami
Parliament, as an organ elected by popular vote. The objectives for
promoting, maintaining and developing the Sami language requires a
democratic foundation in the group which an organ elected by popular vote
can provide.
The strengthened minority protection is extended
In accordance with part III of the Charter for Regional and Minority
Languages strengthened protection is now provided within the
administrative areas, except for the right to mother tongue tuition which
applies nationwide. A greater number of individuals benefit from access to
strengthened minority protection by the administrative areas for Finnish and
the Sami languages being extended to cover additional municipalities. The
minority strategy has ascertained that in the areas which require
9

strengthened protection the opportunity for individuals to derive benefits
from their rights needs to be improved.
Consequently, government subsidies to municipalities and county councils
within the administrative areas have increased for 2010 to approximately
SEK 50 million (the previous amount was SEK 6 million for seven
municipalities).
The administrative area for the Finnish language were extended on 1 January
2010 to include 18 municipalities – Botkyrka, Eskilstuna, Hallstahammar,
Haninge, Huddinge, Håbo, Köping, Sigtuna, Solna, Stockholm, Södertälje,
Tierp, Upplands Väsby, Upplands-Bro, Uppsala, Älvkarleby, Österåker and
Östhammar. The municipalities of Gällivare, Haparanda, Kiruna, Pajala and
Övertorneå were previously included.
The administrative areas for the Sami language were extended on 1 January
2010 to include 13 municipalities – Arvidsjaur, Berg, Härjedalen, Lycksele,
Malå, Sorsele, Storuman, Strömsund, Umeå, Vilhelmina, Åre, Älvdalen and
Östersund. The municipalities Arjeplog, Gällivare, Jokkmokk and Kiruna
were previously included.
The administrative areas for Meänkieli have not been extended. The
administrative areas include the municipalities Gällivare, Haparanda, Kiruna,
Pajala and Övertorneå.
There are reasons to take advantage of the commitment of the municipalities
and consequently the opportunity for municipalities to voluntarily join an
administrative areas has been introduced. Such a municipal commitment can
also be pursued by the national minorities’ own local efforts and by wellfunctioning communication being initiated between the municipal
representatives and the national minorities. The decision on whether a
municipality may join an administrative areas is taken by the government.
Additional municipalities are also entitled to government subsidies, i.e.
government aid for additional costs incurred by the strengthened minority
protection. Following an application the administrative areas for Finnish
have been extended on 1 May 2010 to include the municipalities Borås,
Surahammar and Västerås and the Sami administrative areas have been
extended to include the municipality of Krokom. Discussions on voluntary
inclusion are currently underway in a number of municipalities and the
government has received applications from additional municipalities.
Measures to facilitate the extension of the administrative areas have been
taken. The County Administrative Board in the County of Stockholm and
the Sami Parliament have been commissioned to support and coordinate the
implementation of the strengthened minority protection in the new
municipalities within the administrative areas. During 2010 these authorities
have received specific funds to attain these objectives and for initiatives
10

aimed at increasing awareness as well as information. The experiences and
competency from the municipalities in the original administrative areas
should also be used in the continued work.
In conclusion, the administrative areas for Finnish include the following
municipalities: Borås, Botkyrka, Eskilstuna, Gällivare, Hallstahammar,
Haninge, Haparanda, Huddinge, Håbo, Kiruna, Köping, Pajala, Sigtuna,
Solna, Stockholm, Surahammar, Södertälje, Tierp, Västerås, Upplands Väsby,
Upplands-Bro, Uppsala, Älvkarleby, Österåker, Östhammar and
Övertorneå.
The administrative areas for Sami include the following municipalities:
Arjeplog, Arvidsjaur, Berg, Härjedalen, Gällivare, Jokkmokk, Kiruna,
Krokom, Lycksele, Malå, Sorsele, Storuman, Strömsund, Umeå, Vilhelmina,
Åre, Älvdalen and Östersund.
The administrative areas for Meänkieli include the following municipalities:
Gällivare, Haparanda, Kiruna, Pajala and Övertorneå.
The right to use Finnish, Meänkieli and Sami within authorities
Within administrative areas individuals have the right to use minority
languages in their oral and written communication with a public authority
with a geographical operational area which is completely or partly covered by
the administrative area, in cases which an individual is a party or represents a
party, given that the case is linked to the area. If the individual uses Sami,
Finnish or Meänkieli in such a case, the authority is required to provide an
oral reply in the same language. Individuals who do not have a legal
representative are also entitled, upon a request, to receive a written
translation of the ruling in the case in Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli
respectively. In line with previous practice, authorities shall in general strive
to communicate with individuals in the language of their choice. Individuals
now have the right to written translation.
Individuals have the right to use Finnish, Meänkieli and Sami outside the
administrative areas during their oral and written communication with cases
in public authorities, in which an individual is a party or represents a party, if
the case is administered by personnel who are proficient in the minority
language. This is a new provision.
Individuals always have the right to use Finnish and Sami in their written
communication with representatives of the Parliamentary Ombudsman, the
Office of the Chancellor of Justice, the Social Insurance Office, the Swedish
Tax Agency and the Equality Ombudsman in cases in which an individual is
a party or represents a party. This is a new provision.

11

An obligation to drive the recruitment of multilingual personnel has been
introduced: the public authorities should ensure that staff with knowledge of
Finnish, Meänkieli and Sami respectively are available when needed during
communication with the authority. This is a new provision.
The right to use Finnish, Meänkieli and Sami within courts of law
With regard to the right to use Finnish, Meänkieli and Sami respectively the
right is not extended to cover additional courts, as this is not deemed to be a
priority at this stage. However, this entitlement will continue to remain in
the original administrative area (i.e. seven municipalities in Norrbotten). A
recent development is the entitlement for a party or representative of a party
who lacks legal representation to, upon request, receive a written translation
of the court’s judgement and grounds for the judgement, or ruling and
reasons for the ruling to any of the current languages.
Pre-school activities
Children have the right to pre-school activities being conducted entirely or
partly in Sami, Finnish or Meänkieli respectively within the administrative
areas. The extension of the administrative areas for Finnish and Sami means
that a greater number of children can benefit from such pre-school activities.
Elderly care
The elderly are entitled to elderly care being conducted entirely or partly in
Sami, Finnish or Meänkieli respectively within the administrative areas. The
extension of the administrative areas to Finnish and Sami means that a
greater number of the elderly can benefit from such elderly care.
The same applies for municipalities which lie outside an administrative areas,
if the municipality has access to personnel who are proficient Finnish,
Meänkieli or Sami. The municipality should ensure that personnel with
knowledge of Finnish, Meänkieli or Sami are available within elderly care in
areas where this is needed. This has involved an amendment to the Social
Services Act (Chapter 5, Section 6) as of 1 January 2010.
The education sector
In order to strengthen the survival of the Sami language the access to
integrated Sami education should be improved. Consequently, an additional
SEK 1 million has been provided.
Strong revitalisation initiatives
The ongoing language shif needs to be reversed if the national minority
languages are to be preserved as living languages. Some of the minority
12

languages, such as South Sami, are under such a severe threat that immediate
measures are required.
On 23 March 2010 the government decided to appoint a special reference
group within the Government Offices of Sweden in order to provide
competence and experience on issues which concern the revitalisation of the
national minority languages. Comprehensive communication with the
various stakeholders in society also needs to be initiated in order to
strengthen the revitalisation of the national minority languages. The
reference group members were appointed in May 2010 and the reference
group will present the final report of its commission in June 2012.
Strong revitalisation initiatives are needed to strengthen the survival of the
national minority languages. Funds have been allocated for specific
revitalisation initiatives for the national minority languages. The funds will
be distributed by the Swedish Institute for Language and Folklore following
applications from organisations. SEK 3.4 million will be distributed between
the various revitalisation projects during 2010. There has been a great deal of
interest in applying for such funds.
Two Sami language centres will be established in the South Sami area, in
Östersund and Tärnaby respectively. Sami in this context refers to all the
varieties of the language within the Swedish part of Sápmi. The aim is to
strengthen the revitalisation of the Sami language. The Sami Parliament is
the authority in charge of these language centres. They shall actively
promote and stimulate the increased use of Sami in society, provide
competence, develop methods for strengthening the conditions for
individuals to converse in Sami and reclaim the language, as well as spread
knowledge on revitalisation. As of 2010, SEK 6 million is annually allocated
for these language centres. During 2010 the Sami Parliament has initiated the
efforts for the establishment of these language centres.
Knowledge of revitalisation among the national minorities needs to be
increased and in order to facilitate the preservation of the national minority
languages individuals belonging to the national minorities should be
provided with improved information on additive bilingualism and
revitalisation. According to the government the new website concerning
national minorities, which relates to this should be used in an innovative
manner to disseminate knowledge which supports the preservation of the
national minority languages.
The government has also sanctioned a grant to Uppsala University in order
to provide youths from national minorities the opportunity to participate
in an international research conference in October 2010 concerning
revitalisation. The goal is to encourage youth associations to actively
participate in the revitalisation efforts and to increase awareness on active
revitalisation among youths.
13

An additional SEK 700, 000 has been allocated for increased language
cultivation (language planning) for the national minority languages.
Measures concerning Meänkieli have been specifically prioritised at this
stage.
Active visibility of the national minorities
The current and historical presence of the national minorities and their
language and culture requires them to be actively visible in the Swedish
society as a part of the common Swedish cultural heritage.
The place names in minority languages are a valuable part of the cultural
heritage which should be strongly upheld by the representatives of society.
In order to emphasise this cultural heritage the work involving signs
displaying the place names in minority languages is being intensified. As a
part of their operations state and municipal authorities should safeguard the
place names in minority languages and emphasise the presence of minority
languages by means of signs and other markings. Where appropriate,
established place names in minority languages should be adopted.
Initiatives concerning equality among the national minorities
From 2008-2010 the government is undertaking special initiatives in order to
strengthen the position of women from national minorities in society.
A new Language Act
A new Language Act (2009:600) was adpoted by the Riksdag during 2009
and the Act entered into force on 1 July 2009. The Act states that the
minority languages include Finnish, Yiddish, Meänkieli, Romani Chib and
Sami. Moreover, it states that public institutions have a specific
responsibility to promote and protect the national minority languages.
Individuals from national minorities should be given the opportunity to
learn, develop and use the minority languages. The Swedish Institute for
Language and Folklore monitors the application of the Act through its
department the Language Council. The Sami Parliament has also been
commissioned to monitor the Language Act with regard to Sami.
A reformed Constitution
In December 2009 the government submitted the bill, A reformed
Constitution (bill 2009/10:80) to the Riksdag. It has been proposed that the
provisions in Chapter 1, Section 2 of the Instrument of
Government on protection for certain minorities are amended in order to
allow specific reference to be made to the Sami people. Moreover, it has been
proposed that the provisions are determined as being an obligatory objective,
14

i.e., the opportunity to preserve and develop a cultural and social life of their
own. Thus, the word “ought” is replaced by “shall”. It has been proposed
that the amendments should enter into force on 1 January 2011.
Amendments to the Constitutions require that the Riksdag takes two
identical decisions with elections to the Riksdag in between these.
Measures which have been taken in order to fulfil the recommendations
of the Committee of Ministers.
It is implicit that detailed information on the measures which have been
taken in order to execute the recommendations of the Committee of
Ministers with regard to the adherence to the Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages will be included in the report. Despite this a summary
of the measures for each recommendation follows.
1. To in collaboration with speakers of minority languages define the areas in
which Finnish and Sami are covered by part III of the charter and apply the
relevant provisions of the charter in those areas.
As mentioned above, strengthened protection in accordance with part III of
the Charter for Regional or Minority Languages is currently provided within
the administrative areas. The administrative areas for the Finnish and Sami
languages were extended on 1 January 2010 to include an additional 18 and
13 municipalities respectively, and the opportunity to voluntarily join an
administrative area has been introduced. Government Inquiry and the
Government Offices of Sweden have communicated with the relevant
authorities during the reformation work. Proposals submitted by the Inquiry
have also been forwarded to the Sami Parliament and organisations which
represent the national minorities. Following a decision in 2010 by the
government to approve four applications for voluntary enrollment, the
Finnish administrative area has been extended by an additional three
municipalities and the Sami administrative areas includes one additional
municipality.
Government subsidies to municipalities and county councils within the
administrative areas have been increased in 2010 to approximately SEK 50
million (the previous figure was SEK 6 million for seven municipalities).
The County Administrative Board in the County of Stockholm and the Sami
Parliament have been commissioned to support and coordinate the
implementation of the new municipalities within the administrative areas.
These authorities have been provided specific funds in 2010 in order to carry
out this objective and for undertaking measures aimed at increasing
awareness and to disseminate information.
2. To actively strengthen teaching in the minority languages, partly through
adapting the mother tongue tuition to the provisions in Article 8 of the charter
15

and in temporary cases arranging bilingual teaching, partly through developing
appropriate basic and further training for teachers.
Equal entitlement to teaching in all national minority languages was
introduced on 1 July 2008. In contrast to mother tongue tuition in other
languages, there is no longer the requirement for at least five pupils in a
municipality requesting teaching in a minority language. The requirement for
the language to represent daily means of interaction (dagligt umgängesspråk)
in the home has also been removed. Moreover, the limitation of teaching
being conducted for a maximum of seven years has also been eradicated for
all minority languages.
There have been two measures to support publishing books and other
teaching material written in and about the national minority languages. In
2008 the Swedish National Agency for Education was assigned the task of
investigating the requirement and supporting the development and
production of books and other teaching material for the national minorities.
A total of SEK 10 million was allocated for the commission. The Swedish
National Agency for Education initiated the commission by contacting the
target groups and dividing the resources of the different minorities. The
division has, inter alia, been based on the number of pupils in each language
group. The Sami Education Board received an additional SEK 1 million for
developing teaching material in Sami. The current year 2010 will witness SEK
1 million being allocated to the devising of teaching material in Romani Chib
and Sami.
Since 2007 the government has carried out various initiatives aimed at
devising teaching in the national minority languages. The government has
commissioned Linköping University the responsibility of teaching in
Romani Chib, whereas Lund University is responsible for teaching in
Yiddish, Uppsala University and Stockholm University are in charge of the
teaching in Finnish and Umeå University for teaching in Meänkieli and
Sami. In addition, Luleå University of Technology has been commissioned
to provide teacher training specialising in Finnish, Meänkieli and Sami. Prior
to 2010 the government commissioned Luleå University of Technology to
report on the work which is being carried out in order to increase the
number of applicants for teacher training.
The government has also commissioned the Swedish National Agency for
Higher Education (reference number U2010/3886/UH) to propose
measures on how the number of teachers who can teach in and about the
national minority languages can be increased. Furthermore, the commission
entails that the Swedish National Agency for Higher Education shall, if
deemed to be necessary, after communication with the relevant higher
education institutions, propose changes for the current allocation of
responsibilities between the higher education institutions which organise
teaching in the national minority languages. The Swedish National Agency
16

for Higher Education will present the the proposals no later than 30 April
2011.
3. To establish a structured policy for promoting university education or other
forms of higher education to be conducted in Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli.
Refer to the answer under recommendation 2 above.
4. To as a priority, undertake flexible and innovative measures to preserve South
Sami.
The Sami language centres in Östersund and Tärnaby shall actively promote
and stimulate the increased use of Sami in society. The language centres are
located in the South Sami areas. The language centres shall undertake work
aimed at changing attitudes and increasing the status, and also support
municipalities, authorities, the educational system and society in general
with initiatives which promote the development of languages. It is not
intended that the language centres should take over the assignments of the
municipalities and authorities, but instead the language centres should assist
with knowledge and resources which allow the public authorities to integrate
Sami in an efficient manner, one which is adapted to the relevant and cultural
conditions.
The government’s strengthening of the integrated Sami teaching is also
deemed to be beneficial for the preservation of the smaller Sami varieties.
South Sami is taught at four of the five Sami schools and in four
municipalities within the integrated teaching. Teaching material in South
Sami has been devised and a Sami school has participated in a South Sami
immersion project. The mother tongue theme website Tema Modersmål
(www.modersmal.net) has a specific page dedicated to South Sami.
5. To devise a structured policy and undertake organisational measures to
promote the use of Sami, Finnish, and Meänkieli, in oral and written
communication with the judicial system and public authorities within the
defined administrative areas.
The County Administrative Board in the County of Stockholm and the Sami
Parliament being commissioned the responsibility for monitoring the
implementation of the Act (2009:724) on National Minorities and National
Minority Languages on a national level has meant an improvement in the
conditions which support the municipal work on promoting the right to use
Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli. Within their administrative areas the
municipalities should be capable of providing service in minority languages.
The government has allocated specific resources so that through
coordination, efforts aimed at increasing awareness, measures for
information and training purposes, these authorities shall assist the
17

municipalities and county councils within the administrative areas. The
purpose is to increase knowledge and awareness of the minorities policy
objectives in this manner. It also provides an opportunity to specifically
work towards providing assistance by sharing competence, concerning for
instance pre-school activities and elderly care in minority languages. These
authorities have had the opportunity to submit suggestions on specific
measures which they could derive benefit from at the conferences organised
by the County Administrative Board and the Sami Parliament for
municipalities and county councils in 2009 and 2010.
With regard to the right to use Finnish, Meänkieli and Sami respectively the
right is not extended to cover additional courts, as this is not deemed to be a
priority at this stage. However, this entitlement will continue to remain in
the original administrative areas. The right to use Sami, Finnish and
Meänkieli in courts is regulated in the new Act (2009:724) on National
Minorities and National Minority Languages.
6. To facilitate the establishment of newspapers in Sami and Meänkieli.
The terms and conditions governing public press subsidies include special
rules on the allocation of funds to newspapers that address minorities in
their own languages. In December 2008 the government decided on
amendments to the press subsidies which are based on proposals which
Presskommittén (the Swedish Press Committee) of 2004 submitted in
January 2006 in the report Diversity and Scope (Swedish Government
Official Reports Series No. 2006:8). One of the amendments constitutes
that the limit for a newspaper subscription to be granted financial support
was decreased from 2000 to 1500 copies, an important step which facilitates
the establishment of newspapers in minority languages.
On 2 June 2010, the Riksdag decided on the new terms and conditions for
aid to the daily press in view of the government bill Nya villkor för stödet till
dagspressen (New terms and conditions for aid to the daily press, bill
2009/10:199). In the bill the government has established that an initiative
should be taken for cooperation with the relevant authorities and
stakeholders in Finland and Norway in order to facilitate the publication of
transnational newspapers in Meänkieli and Sami. Such a collaboration may
include an investigation into the prerequisites for transnational newspaper
cooperation in the current languages.
The Swedish Press Committee of 2004 has also proposed that a specific
provision be introduced in the Press Subsidies Act in order to facilitate the
publication of newspapers in Sami and Meänkieli. However, similar to the
representatives of the relevant language groups, in the bill New terms and
conditions for aid to the daily press (bill 2009/10:199) the government has
made the assessment that it is uncertain whether the proposal will lead to the

18

establishment of new newspapers, and therefore the government is of the
opinion that the proposal should not be carried through.
The questions and recommendations of the Committee of Experts with
regard to the general provisions (part I) in the Minority Languages
Charter
10. State which measures have been taken to, in cooperation with speakers of
minority languages, obtain reliable information on the number of speakers of the
various minority languages and their geographical distribution.
As stated in the previous report, Sweden does not compile official statistics
on people’s ethnic grouping, apart from their citizenship and country of
birth, since there are no methods of calculating ethnic grouping that are both
ethically acceptable and scientifically reliable. There are hence no official
statistics on ethnic, linguistic or cultural background.
Please refer to the previous report for estimates on the number of speakers
of minority languages and how they are geographically distributed.
14. (box) Which measures have been taken to, in cooperation with speakers of
minority languages, define all the areas where Lule Sami, North Sami and South
Sami are traditionally spoken in Sweden and to apply the charter in these areas?
The issue of the geographical scope of the administrative areas has been
partly investigated in Utredningen om finska och sydsamiska språken (The
Inquiry on the Finnish and South Sami languages), the reports Rätten till
mitt språk (The right to my language, Swedish Government Official Reports
Series No. 2005:40) and Att återta mitt språk (Reclaiming my language,
Swedish Government Official Reports Series No. 2006:19), partly at the
Ministry of Integration and Gender Equality, the Ministry memorandum
Nationella minoritetsspråk vid domstolar och myndigheter – ett alternativ (Ds
2008:26, National minority languages in courts and authorities – an alternative,
Ministry Publication Series 2008:26)]. Both investigations initiated
communication between the relevant national minorities. The investigative
work forms the basis of the government’s strategy for minority policy
which, inter alia, involves an extension of the Sami administrative area in the
traditional South Sami area.
17. State additional information on the development with regard to the
handbooks which have been produced and whether similar handbooks are
planned for the other minority languages.
The handbook ”Mänskliga rättigheter..? Jag vet att dom finns och jag tror att
Sverige är bra på dom – Handbok i mänskliga rättigheter på kommunal nivå”
(Human rights..? I know that they exist and I believe that Sweden is good at
recognising them – Handbook of human rights at a municipal level) was
19

published in 2008. The handbook was devised by the University of
Gothenburg under the direction of the Government Offices of Sweden and
contains a section concerning national minorities.
In 2008 the Sami Parliament, under the authority of the Government Offices
of Sweden, also published ”Språkhandbok för att bevara samiskan” (Language
Handbook for preserving Sami). The handbook contains concrete proposals
on how to efficiently work at a municipal level towards strengthening Sami
in the municipal operations.
There are no plans at present for additional handbooks.
18. Provide additional information on how persons who speak Sami, Finnish
and Meänkieli can derive benefit from the entitlement to pre-school education
and elderly care, completely or partially in their languages, and the right to use
their language during communication with authorities and courts.
Pre-school education
It has been regulated in the pre-school curriculum (Lpfö4) that pre-schools
should participate in ensuring that children who have a mother tongue other
than Swedish be given the opportunity to develop their fluency of both the
Swedish language and their mother tongue. Awareness of your cultural
heritage and participation in the culture of others should contribute to
children developing their ability to understand and adapt to the values and
conditions of others. The pre-school should contribute to ensuring that
children from national minorities and foreign backgrounds are supported to
develop a sense of multicultural belonging. One of the objectives includes
the pre-school striving to ensure that every child whose mother tongue is
not Swedish develops his/her cultural identity and is capable of
communicating both in Swedish and his/her mother tongue.
The Swedish National Agency for Education, under the authority of the
government, works towards promoting the access to teaching material which
is intended to be used as support for mother tongue tuition in the preschool. During 2009, the Swedish National Agency for Education has
successively gathered material on the website Tema Modersmål
(www.modersmal.net) within the framework of the commission. The
website includes recommendations for books, translations, audio books and
brochures of varying degrees of difficulty which are useful in the daily
activities of pre-schools.
The Swedish National Agency for Education has devised material for
reference and methodology purposes titled Flerspråkighet i förskolan
(Multilingualism in the pre-school). This material contains examples of what
can be done and which resources can be linked to the pre-school in order to

20

support the growth of the various languages of all the children. The aim is to
allow the material to be used in all the pre-schools.
The new Education Act (2010:800) which enters into force on 1 July 2011
covers rules for supporting mother tongue tuition in the pre-schools and it
also covers the pre-school classes, which is a recent development. The Act
stipulates that children who have a mother tongue other than Swedish
should have the opportunity to develop both the Swedish language and their
mother tongue.
It has been established in the revised pre-school curriculum, which enters
into force on 1 July 2011, that the pre-school can contribute towards
providing support for children of national minorities to develop a sense of
multicultural belonging. (SKOLFS 1998:16).
Children have the right to pre-school activities being conducted entirely or
partly in Sami, Finnish or Meänkieli respectively within the administrative
areas.
Elderly care
As mentioned previously, in the new strategy for the national minorities the
government has highlighted the need for elderly care to be provided in the
national minority languages.
An amendment was made on 1 January 2010 in the Social Services Act
(2001:453) which involves municipalities striving towards ensuring that
personnel with knowledge of Finnish, Meänkieli or Sami are available for the
care of the elderly when this is deemed to be necessary (Chapter 5 Section 6
of the Social Services Act).
Section 18 of the Act (2009:724) on National Minorities and National
Minority Languages states that a municipality in an administrative area shall,
upon request by an individual, offer the opportunity to receive the entire or
parts of the service and care offered within the framework for elderly care by
making use of personnel who are proficient Finnish, Meänkieli or Sami
respectively. The same applies to municipalities which lie outside an
administrative area, if the municipality has access to personnel who are
proficient in the language.
In accordance with the new Act on National Minorities and National
Minority Languages, additional municipalities may also apply to the
government for voluntary inclusion to an administrative area and thereby be
granted targeted government subsidies. It also provides new opportunities
for municipalities to work with these issues.

21

On 1 January 2009 municipalities were granted the right to use the system of
choice in the public sector in accordance with the Act on System of Choice
in the Public Sector (2008:962). The Act involves a type of procurement in
which the municipality sets a fixed level of quality and price and the
executors who are willing to provide the service at the fixed price and quality
compete for the customers/users. Thus, the purpose is for the executors to
compete based on the highest quality instead of the lowest price. An
important purpose of the Act is to promote diversity among the executors.
On 1 June 2010 the National Board of Health and Welfare presented a
report which establishes that in municipalities where the system of choice in
the public sector has been introduced, every other respondent states that
executors with a specific specialisation are operational within the
municipality. The most common scenario is for executors to promote
themselves by providing personnel who speak Finnish or other European or
non-European languages.
A provision will be introduced in the Social Services Act (2001:453) on 1
January 2011 which stipulates that elderly care provided by the social
services should be tailored towards providing the elderly the opportunity of
leading a dignified life and experience well-being. It is evident from the
government bill Värdigt liv i äldreomsorgen (Dignified life within elderly care)
which was adopted by the Riksdag in May 2010 that among other things the
amendment to the law entails that the social services should be attentive to
the unique conditions and requirements of every individual. Care which is
adapted to each individual may involve, inter alia, taking into consideration
the various cultural and ethical conditions, which can for instance involve
providing care in a language which an elderly individual comprehends or
which is associated with the elderly person’s identity.
The right to use your language in communication with public authorities
Within administrative areas individuals have the right to use Sami, Finnish
and Meänkieli in their oral and written communication with a public
authority with a geographical operational area which is completely or partly
covered by the administrative area, in cases which an individual is a party or
represents a party, given that the case is linked to the area. If the individual
uses Finnish, Meänkieli or Sami in such a case, the authority is required to
provide an oral reply in the same language. Individuals who do not have a
legal representative are also entitled, upon a request, to receive a written
translation of the ruling in the case in Finnish, Meänkieli and Sami
respectively. In line with previous practice, authorities shall in general strive
to communicate with individuals in the language of their choice. Individuals
now have the right to written translation.
Individuals have the right to use Finnish, Meänkieli and Sami respectively
outside the administrative areas during their oral and written communication
with cases in public authorities, in which an individual is a party or
22

represents a party if the case is administered by personnel who are proficient
in the minority language. This is a new provision.
Individuals always have the right to use Finnish and Sami in their written
communication with representatives of the Parliamentary Ombudsman, the
Office of the Chancellor of Justice, the Social Insurance Office, the Swedish
Tax Agency and the Equality Ombudsman in cases in which an individual is
a party or represents a party. This is a new provision.
An obligation to drive the recruitment of multilingual personnel has been
introduced. The public authorities should ensure that staff with knowledge
of Finnish, Meänkieli and Sami respectively are available when necessary
during communication with the authority. This is a new provision.
The right to use your language during communication with courts
The Act (2009:724) on National Minorities and National Minority
Languages also regulates the right to use Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli in
courts.
Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli may be used in administrative courts, a
District/City Court, an environmental and land court, a maritime law court
or a rent and tenancy tribunal which has a court district which is completely
or partially covered by the municipalities Arjeplog, Gällivare, Haparanda,
Jokkmokk, Kiruna, Pajala or Övertorneå if the case or matter is linked to
any of these municipalities. The Swedish National Courts Administration
has made the assessment that in this context the rent and tenancy tribunal
ought to be covered by what is stated in the law about courts. Sami, Finnish
and Meänkieli may also be used in those courts in which a judgement or
ruling in a case or matter where these languages could have been used is
appealed.
In order for it to be possible to use Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli it is
necessary that the case or matter is linked to the municipalities
Arjeplog, Gällivare, Haparanda, Jokkmokk, Kiruna, Pajala or Övertorneå. In
this case, the link refers to, for instance, that the party lives or resides within,
or that the case or matter concerns a property situated in, any of these
municipalities.
A party or representative of a party in a case or matter in a court or rent and
tenancy tribunal is entitled to use Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli during the
processing of the case or matter. Representative in this context refers to, for
example, the custodian of a child, a trustee or an individual who represents a
legal person, however not counsel.
The right to use Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli covers the right to provide
documentation and written evidence in Sami, the right to receive the
23

documentation pertaining to the matter or case verbally translated to Sami,
Finnish and Meänkieli and the right to speak Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli
during oral proceedings or a session in a court or the rent and tenancy
tribunal. Unless it is clearly unnecessary, the courts and rent and tenancy
tribunal should translate the documentation which has been submitted to
Swedish. These authorities should also, in general, strive to communicate
with parties or representatives of parties who speak Sami, Finnish and
Meänkieli in their language. Compensation for interpreters and translation is
paid by public funds.
It is important that courts and the rent and tenancy tribunal are able to make
plans for appointing interpreters and translators. Therefore, a request to use
Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli should be submitted in conjunction with the
initiation of the case or matter or the first time a party presents its
statement. A request which is presented at a later stage or which clearly has
an inappropriate purpose may be rejected.
20. (box) Provide information about the development with regard to clarifying
Elfdalian’s position and whether authorities have intensified their
communication with regard to this with the speakers of Elfdalian.
Advocates of Elfdalian – representatives of the organisation Ulum Dalska
(an association for the preservation of Elfdalian) and representatives of the
municipality of Älvdalen – have on several occasions requested to the
government and expressed a desire for Elfdalian to be recognised as a
minority language in Sweden. In conjunction with the reformation work in
February 2008 the Government Offices of Sweden have communicated with
the representatives of the organisation Ulum Dalska and representatives of
the municipality of Älvdalen. Thereafter, the issue of the status of Elfdalian
was addressed in the government bill 2008/09:158 page 61. At this stage the
government finds no reason to draw a different conclusion concerning the
number of recognised minority languages than that conclusion reached in
conjunction with the ratification of the Council of Europe’s Framework
Convention and Charter for Regional and Minority Languages.
Experience shows that the measures which have been taken to date to
preserve the recognised minority languages and to protect the recognised
minorities have not been sufficient to fulfil the intentions of the legislators
and additional measures will be needed. Consequently, the ongoing and
planned initiatives for minority policy must therefore focus on actively
preserving the recognised minority languages and protecting the recognised
minorities so that Sweden fulfils its pledged international commitments.
However, the government is of the opinion that it is extremely valuable for
Elfdalian, irrespective of whether it is considered to be a language or a
dialect, to be preserved as a part of the Swedish cultural heritage and that it is
desirable for Elfdalian to be transferred to younger generations. Thus, the
work which the Swedish Institute for Language and Folklore is already
24

undertaking to preserve the Swedish dialects and local dialects should
continue. As is already the case, the municipality of Älvdalen may support
the preservation of Elfdalian in numerous ways as part of the standard
operations of the municipality and provide children with the opportunity of
learning Elfdalian. The framework of adult education should also cover the
prerequisites for preserving Elfdalian.
21. Provide information on the position and promotion of Ume Sami.
Ume Sami faces a strong threat and the number of speakers has diminished.
At present the Ume Sami group is actively pursuing initiatives to preserve
their language and they have, among other things, formed a new organisation
Álgguogåhtie to attain this goal.
Sweden’s ratification of the Charter for Regional and Minority Languages
concerns Sami. This obligation also includes the Ume Sami variety. The
measures which have been taken as part of the new minority strategy also
cover Ume Sami.
The administrative area for Sami also covers the districts where Ume Sami is
still spoken, including Storuman, Lycksele, Sorsele, Arjeplog, Arvidsjaur,
Malå and Umeå. Within the administrative areas individuals are, inter alia,
entitled to pre-school activities being conducted entirely or partially in Sami.
Support for Sami in pre-schools is considered to be an important measure
for the preservation of Sami. Municipalities within the administrative areas
may even strengthen and increase the visibility of Sami in other ways. As a
part of this work the municipality of Umeå has initiated cooperation with
the organisation Álgguogåhtie.
The Sami language centres which are currently being established in
Östersund and Tärnaby shall meet the requirements of the Sami – both the
youths and the elderly – to reclaim their language. The language centres shall
work with all varieties of the language. They shall actively promote and
stimulate the increased use of Sami in society, provide competence, develop
methods to strengthen the prerequisites for individuals to use and reclaim
the Sami language and spread knowledge of the revitalisation. Efforts which
focus on children and the youths shall particularly be prioritised. The
language centre in Tärnaby has recruited Ume Sami competence.
The Ume Sami group also has the opportunity to apply for new government
resources for the revitalisation initiatives from the Swedish Institute for
Language and Folklore. During 2010 SEK 3.4 million will be allocated to the
various language projects.

25

PART II
Article 7 Objectives and principles
Article 7.1.a – Recognition of regional or minority languages as an
expression of cultural wealth
As mentioned earlier in part I, in June 2009 the Riksdag adopted the
government bill, From Recognition to Empowerment – the Government’s
Strategy for the National Minorities (bill 2008/09:158). The new strategy was
implemented in January 2010.
The strategy contains measures for:
•
•
•
•
•

ensuring stricter adherence to the Council of Europe’s charter on
minorities,
improved follow-up of the implementation of minority policy,
combating discrimination against and the vulnerability of the national
minorities,
strengthening the empowerment and influence of national minorities,
as well as
supporting the preservation of the national minority languages.

The judicial regulation of the rights of the national minorities has been
clarified by means of the new Act (2009:724) on National Minorities and
National Minority Languages. The Act entered into force on 1 January 2010
and applies nationwide. The new judicial regulation also clarifies the unique
position of the national minorities in Sweden partly in relation to the
obligations in the Framework Convention and partly part II of the Charter
for Regional and Minority Languages. These obligations should be
implemented and complied with throughout the country for all national
minorities. These obligations have not been closely regulated by Swedish
law.
Refer to part I above for further information on the new strategy for
minority policy and the new Act.
As mentioned earlier under part I, a new Language Act (2009:600) was
determined by the Riksdag during 2009 and the Act entered into force on 1
July 2009. The Act states that the minority languages include Finnish,
Yiddish, Meänkieli, Romani Chib and Sami. Moreover, it states that public
institutions have a specific responsibility to promote and protect the
national minority languages. Individuals from national minorities should be
given the opportunity to learn, develop and use the minority languages. The
Swedish Institute for Language and Folklore monitors the application of the

26

Act through its department, the Language Council. The Sami Parliament has
also been commissioned to monitor the Language Act with regard to Sami.
The new strategy for minority policy, Act (2009:724) on National Minorities
and National Minority Languages and the Language Act (2009:600) are an
additional recognition of the national minority languages as an important
part of Sweden’s cultural heritage and thereby an expression of cultural
wealth.
Article 7.1.b – Respect for the geographical region of every regional
or minority language
Please refer to the previous report for information on this obligation.
Article 7.1.c – Measures to promote regional or minority languages
26. Provide information on the plans to increase support for protection and
promotion of minority languages in Sweden annually up until 2012.
Minority policy
The budget for minority policy described earlier under part I is
approximately SEK 80 million per year. The budget was previously SEK 10
million per year. The estimated appropriations for 2011 and 2012 are also
estimated as approximately SEK 80 million per year.
State subsidies
Among other things, in 2010 SEK 8 million will be allocated by the Swedish
Arts Council for promoting national minority languages and culture.
Language cultivation
The Swedish Institute for Language and Folklore (SOFI) has been
commissioned to develop and promote the cultivation (corpus planning) of
national minority languages. The Institute also gathers, preserves and
undertakes research on dialects, place names and personal names as well as
folklore.
As mentioned above, the new Language Act entered into force on 1 July
2009. The Swedish Institute for Language and Folklore monitors the
application of the Act through its department, the Language Council, in
addition to Sami, which the Sami Parliament is commissioned to monitor. In
2010 the Swedish Institute for Language and Folklore is allocating SEK 0.9
million for language conservation activities for the national minority
languages in order to, inter alia, manage language cultivation activities for the
national minority languages Finnish, Meänkieli, Romani Chib and Yiddish as
well as the revitalisation of the national minority languages.
27

28. Information is requested on the distribution of funds to the Swedish-Finnish
Language Council and on the structural problems with regard to youth
organisations for Finnish speakers who must compete for support with youth
organisations in society in general. Comments are also requested on the
allegation that associations of Finnish speakers have witnessed a decrease in
support by the Swedish authorities and consequently these associations are
experiencing financial problems.
With regard to the Swedish-Finnish Language Council it has been
amalgamated with the unit Language Council within the Swedish Institute
for Language and Folklore. The funds have not been subject to a special
allocation for definite language groups. Since 2008 four employees have been
involved with language conservation for Finnish. The work includes advisory
services via e-mail, telephone and the website, work with dictionaries,
documentation of Finnish in Swedish and monitoring how the situation of
Finnish has changed in Sweden. In 2008 a Finnish language source was added
to the website. In 2009 it received approximately 1,130 searches. Information
on the website is submitted in Finnish. The language conservation journal
Kieliviesti publishes four editions per year.
There is no information to suggest that Finnish associations have received
relatively less support, nor is there information on the structural problems
with regard to youth organisations for Finnish speakers. By means of the
minority policy reform, government assistance for organisations which
represent national minorities has been increased (see part I above), among
other things the National Association of Finns has thereby benefited from
the increased support.
Article 7.1.d – Facilitating and/or encouraging use of regional or
minority languages in public and private life
38. Which developments can be reported with regard to the opportunities to
provide radio broadcast in Yiddish?
The preliminary work for the formulation of the broadcasting licenses to
Sveriges Radio AB (SR), Sveriges Television AB (SVT) and Sveriges
Utbildningsradio AB (UR) on operations for linguistic and ethnic minorities
with regard to Yiddish states that there are too few speakers of Yiddish in
Sweden to justify the group being given a special place in the public service
companies’ range of programmes. However, public service companies should
take into consideration that Yiddish has the status of representing a minority
language in Sweden.
Pursuant to the broadcasting licenses SR, SVT and UR may divide the
responsibility of various types of operations for linguistic and ethnic
minorities among themselves. The public service companies’ agreement on
the operations for 2009 states that SR has an extended commission to
28

highlight Yiddish. In accordance with SR’s public service report for 2009,
SR’s strategy is to, as far as possible, address issues related to Yiddish as a
natural part of the daily running of programmes. During the year SR has,
among other things, reflected the Muslim Yiddish culture. In 2009 UR also
broadcast programmes about Yiddish.
33. State which measures have been taken to improve the situation with regard
to health and medical care in Meänkieli/Romani Chib/Sami/Yiddish.
The Health and Medical Service Act (1982:763) stipulates that the objective
of health and medical care is good health and care for the entire population
on equal terms. Care on equal terms for the entire population means that it
should be possible for all – irrespective of where they reside in the country –
to when necessary and on equal terms receive the services of health and
medical care. The opportunity to receive care should not be affected by such
conditions as age, gender, the ability to take initiative, education, capacity to
pay, nationality or cultural differences. In accordance with the Health and
Medical Service Act the patient should be provided with information, which
has been adapted to him/her, on his/her medical condition and the methods
for examination, care and treatment which are available. The Act also states
that the site which manages health and medical care should be equipped with
the necessary personnel, premises and equipment to allow for the provision
of a good standard of care. The Health and Medical Service Act is
formulated in such a manner that it covers all patient groups without
referring to any specific patient group based on, for instance, language. As
the legislation is formulated in this manner, all groups in the population are
guaranteed the same good level of care without the risk of any group
particularly being referred to or excluded.
The National Board of Health and Welfare has devised an information sheet
on what the new Act (2009:724) on National Minorities and National
Minority Languages will entail for health and medical care and the social
services (5/2010 new Act on National Minorities and National Minority
Languages). The information sheet will serve to provide support within the
profession. The National Board of Health and Welfare also has plans to
devise an information folder on the Act which will be tailored towards
persons from national minorities. The aim is to provide information to these
persons on their rights and the folder shall also facilitate their
communication with authorities, health and medical care etc.
The Swedish National Institute of Public Health has been commissioned, in
consultation with the National Board of Health and Welfare and
representatives of the national minorities as well as the Delegation for Roma
Issues, to investigate the health situation among the national minorities and
submit proposals for how the health promotion and preventative public
health work concerning the national minorities should be managed. The

29

Government Offices of Sweden are currently preparing the results of the
investigation.
34. State which steps have been taken to investigate whether the obligations with
regard to the use of minority languages within health and medical care and
elderly care shall be included in an extended ratification instrument.
There is no news to report in this respect.
Article 7.1.e – cooperation between speakers of the same language
and other languages
40. State whether SWEBLUL (the Swedish Bureau for Lesser Used Languages)
is still financed by the Swedish authorities and what developments have taken
place with regard to other commitments between groups which use different
minority languages in Sweden.
Within the framework of the government commission concerning equality
among the national minorities, the government has encouraged cooperation
and exchange of knowledge between the national minorities.
SWEBLUL does not receive state subsidies at present.
Article 7.1.f – Education in and studies of regional or minority languages
at all appropriate levels
42. State whether mother tongue tuition has increased and provide up-to-date
statistics on the number of pupils who attend mother tongue tuition.
The number of pupils entitled to participate in mother tongue tuition for
each language:
Nine-year
compulsory school:
Finnish
Yiddish
Sami
Romani Chib
Meänkieli

2007/08
eligible/participants
8 229 / 3 033
13 / 0
570 / 384
1 241 / 360
1 043 / 153

2008/09
eligible/participants
8 603 / 3 576
16 / 10
485 / 301
1 448 / 345
978 / 71

43. State which measures have been taken to increase the scope of teaching in
Sami and Sami as a subject and to prevent negative consequences for South
Sami.

30

Teaching in government Sami schools is conducted based on the Sami
variety which the children belong to, i.e., South Sami as well. Pupils in the
Sami schools in Karesuando, Kiruna, Gällivare and Tärnaby are taught in
South Sami.
Teaching is conducted in South Sami in the schools in the municipality of
Vilhelmina and Härjedalen, which provide integrated Sami teaching. Since
the autumn of 2009 South Sami has also been taught in the municipalities of
Berg and Krokom.
The government has commissioned the Swedish National Agency for
Education to devise books and other teaching material in the national
minority languages. With regard to Sami this commission has been executed
in cooperation with the Sami Education Board. A great deal of teaching
material in South Sami has been devised.
In collaboration with the County Governor in Nordland, Norway the Sami
school in Tärnaby has participated in a language immersion project for pupils
in South Sami.
The website Tema Modersmål (www.modersmal.net) has been updated and
improved and now includes a page for Sami, including all three varieties
thereof.
Umeå University has been commissioned by the government to provide
education in Sami. In its annual report for 2009 the University reported that
the entire language range in the Sami language and Sami studies constitutes
distance learning with online support or purely online courses. Recent years
have witnessed a sharp rise in the number of full-time pupils. In 2009 the
number of applicants was roughly 300 for approximately 300 seats.
Beginner and advanced courses in both South and North Sami were offered
at the University. During the spring of 2010 the course Examensarbete för
magisterexamen (Thesis for Master’s degree) in the Sami language was
offered.
Luleå University of Technology has been commissioned to offer teacher
training specialising in Sami, Meänkieli and Finnish. In its annual report for
2009 the University reported that practising teachers and others who are
interested in languages may also apply for the course. The number of
applicants in 2009 for Finnish was at the same level as previous years
(approximately 15 applicants). The courses in Sami and Meänkieli were
cancelled as no applications were received for these courses. Prior to 2010
the government commissioned Luleå University of Technology to report on
the work which is being carried out to increase the number of applicants for
the course.

31

The government has also commissioned the Swedish National Agency for
Higher Education (reference number U2010/3886/UH) to propose
measures on how the number of teachers who can teach in and about the
national minority languages can be increased. Furthermore, the commission
entails that the Swedish National Agency for Higher Education shall, if
deemed to be necessary, after communication with the relevant higher
education institutions, propose changes for the current allocation of
responsibilities between the higher education institutions which organise
teaching in the national minority languages. The Swedish National Agency
for Higher Education will present the commission no later than 30 April
2011.
44.Provide information on teaching in Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli at the level
of pre-school classes.
Currently there is no regulation of mother tongue support at the pre-school
level and consequently there are not either any national statistics or
summary. However, there has been voluntary mother tongue support in
several pre-school classes, both within the state Sami schools, municipal
schools and independent schools. This primarily applies to schools which
provide bilingual teaching in nine-year compulsory schools. The new
Education Act which enters into force on 1 July 2011 covers rules for
mother tongue support in the pre-school classes.
45. State how large the support is for mother tongue tuition in Sami, Finnish,
Meänkieli and Romani Chib at pre-school level.
The available statistics on support for mother tongue support at pre-school
level have not been divided based on the various languages, for example
minority languages. The Swedish Schools Inspectorate monitors and reviews
that the children’s requirements of mother tongue support adhere to the
national guidelines in place.
All state Sami schools have pre-schools where children receive mother
tongue support in their Sami variety. Furthermore, there are Finnish preschools in several municipalities, for example in Haninge, Stockholm and
Örebro. There are also municipalities which have, or intend to open, Sami
and Finnish pre-schools after the extension of the Sami and Finnish
administrative areas.
The extension of the administrative areas appears to have increased the
interest in pre-school activities in a large number of the new municipalities.
For information on the Roma pre-school Musikanten, refer to the article
under question 49 below.

32

47. State which measures have been taken, in collaboration with speakers of
Romani, to find innovative solutions for the lack of Romani teachers.
The government has carried out several investments in education and the
allocation of responsibilities for education between the various higher
education institutions with regard to the so-called small languages and
national minority languages. For instance, the government has assigned the
responsibility of teaching in Romani Chib to Linköping University. At
present, there is no other teaching in Romani Chib at university level in
Sweden. However, there are folk high schools which offer Roma specialisms.
In its annual report for 2009, Linköping University has stated that the
course in Romani Chib has few applicants. According to information
provided by the University, it invited several Roma representatives to
meetings at an early stage, namely when the planning for the first course was
initiated. According to the information received at that stage it became
apparent that one of the problems for the Roma is that they generally have a
low level of schooling, which is why there are very few Roma with sufficient
qualifications for university studies. Thus, an explanatory factor for the low
number of applicants may be that there are few Roma individuals who
qualify for university studies. The course has been publicised in various ways
for the different target groups but there has been a weak response. In
addition to the usual communication channels, the University has also
targeted Roma associations, etc. with information on the courses. The
University is satisfied with the structure of the course and has not received
any negative feedback on the course. The course will be evaluated by the
Faculty in 2010.
With regard to localisation and forms of work, there has been a discussion in
the University regarding the option of offering distance learning. However,
the University has reached the conclusion that this option should not be
made available because if the pupils do not have a good level of previous
knowledge then it will probably be difficult to study distance courses at
university level.
49. Provide supplementary information with regard to the work which is being
managed by the Swedish Institute for Language and Folklore (SOFI)
concerning the standardisation and codification of Romani and proposals for
future language policies for Romani. Also provide information on pre-school
education for Romani speaking children in Malmö.
In February 2008 Swedish Institute for Language and Folklore ,SOFI
presented a commission on the situation of the Romani Chib language, with
a review of the varieties of Romani Chib which are spoken in Sweden and the
prerequisites for them being preserved in the future, and which language
conservation initiatives are important. Among others, a reference group
including representatives of Roma participated in the work. The report
33

illustrated that promising language cultivation work had been initiated
through the appointment of two Romani Chib speaking language
consultants on 1 July 2007. The results were used in the government bill,
From Recognition to Empowerment – the Government’s Strategy for the
National Minorities (2008/09:158), and led to among other things, the
decision on the revitalisation of initiatives and on the national minority
languages in the Language Act of 2009.
In accordance with the report’s proposal, the Language Council’s operations
within language advisory services in Romani Chib cover communication
with mother tongue teachers and representatives of the various Romani
Chib varieties, by, among other things, holding regular meetings with
reference groups for Romani Chib and devising glossaries which are
gradually added to the authority’s website. The Swedish National Agency for
Education has commissioned the initiation of two projects in Romani Chib,
involving the inventorying of teaching material in Romani Chib and the
formulating of basic school grammar in Romani Chib as resources for
mother tongue teachers. In collaboration with the Swedish National Agency
for Education, the Institute arranged a seminar on language cultivation in
Romani Chib in May 2009 and another in November 2009 focusing on work
involving terminology in Romani Chib. A specific reference group with
representatives of various Romani Chib varieties has been formed. The work
has been structured in progressive stages and has focused on information on
the website and work involving glossaries and dictionaries.
In 2006 the Roma Youth Center opened the country’s first Roma preschool. The pre-school Musikanten primarily caters for children whose
parents, for various reasons, are reluctant to register their children in
traditional pre-schools. The pre-school Musikanten aims to provide Roma
children with the opportunity to develop and receive the important basic
knowledge which is necessary for starting school without any major
obstacles. The pre-school Musikanten offers Roma children and parents the
opportunity to choose pre-school activities which are adapted to the
children’s requirements and conditions. The staff includes Roma and
Swedes who together pave the way for new objectives and development.
Children have the opportunity to strengthen their knowledge of the Swedish
language whilst simultaneously developing the Romani Chib language. The
pre-school Musikanten has a total of 15 seats, full-time or half-time,
depending on the requirements of the parents. The pre-school Musikanten
can, as an independent pre-school, offer places to children residing all over
the Skåne region.
51. (box) State which measures have been taken to increase the accessibility of
teaching in Yiddish or Yiddish as a subject, particularly in Göteborg, Stockholm
and Malmö.

34

The opportunities for mother tongue tuition in Yiddish have improved as a
result of the new rules for mother tongue tuition introduced in 2008. In the
academic year 2008/2009 it was estimated that 16 pupils were entitled to
mother tongue tuition in Yiddish, and of these 10 pupils have participated.
There are three schools in Sweden which offer Jewish as a specialism, one in
Göteborg and two in Stockholm. All three schools have chosen to offer
Hebrew as a language rather than Yiddish. One of the schools in Stockholm
has recently introduced teaching in Yiddish. Malmö does not have any
schools with Jewish as a specialism. Stockholm, Malmö and Göteborg have
pre-schools with Jewish as a specialism.
Lund University is responsible for offering teaching in Yiddish at university
level, for further information refer to Article 7.1.h below.
Article 7.1.g – Opportunities for those who do not speak a regional or
minority language, and who live in the region where the regional or
minority language in question is used, to learn that language if they so
wish;
The Sami Education Centre manages language teaching for all three varieties
of part-time (50 per cent) distance courses. Part-time (25 per cent) webbased courses have also been offered for the past two years. Sami and
Finnish for beginners can also be studied at folk high schools and adult
educational associations across the country.
Article 7.1.h – Promotion of studies and research in regional or
minority languages at universities or corresponding educational
establishments
55. State which measures have been taken to, in cooperation with the speakers,
create structured policies for higher education in Finnish, Meänkieli and Sami.
Since 2007 the government has carried out several investments in education
and the allocation of responsibilities for education between the various
higher education institutions with regard to the so-called small languages
and national minority languages. For example, the government has assigned
the responsibility of teaching in Finnish to Uppsala University and
Stockholm University. Umeå University is responsible for teaching in
Meänkieli and Sami. Luleå University of Technology has been commissioned
to provide teacher training specialising in the national minority languages
Finnish, Meänkieli and Sami.
The government is of the opinion that it is essential that the higher
education institutions which have been commissioned to organise teaching
in the national minority languages actively work towards attaining a good
influx of pupils for these courses. The division of the languages has taken
place based on written communication to the government (2006) from the
35

University of Gothenburg, Linköping University, Lund University,
Stockholm University, Umeå University and Uppsala University. The
proposals in the written communication were devised by the Association of
Swedish Higher Education.
One specific obligation entails that a higher education institution must offer
teaching in this language, but not that other higher education institutions
may not offer equivalent teaching. Every higher education institution is
entitled to initiate any teaching it prefers, as long as it lies within the
framework of the areas it is entitled to award a degree in. For example, both
Umeå University and Mälardalen University offer teaching in Finnish without specifically being commissioned by the government to do so.
Many language courses, including Finnish, can also be taken as distance
courses. Thus, the fact that a large number of higher education institutions
offer a certain course is not an end in itself. Naturally, Finnish can also be
studied in Finland.
As mentioned earlier, the government has commissioned the Swedish
National Agency for Higher Education (reference number
U2010/3886/UH) to propose measures on how the access to teachers who
can teach in and about the national minority languages can be increased.
Furthermore, the commission entails that the Swedish National Agency for
Higher Education shall, if deemed to be necessary, after communication
with the relevant higher education institutions, propose changes for the
current allocation of responsibilities between the higher education
institutions which organise teaching in the national minority languages. The
Swedish National Agency for Higher Education shall present the proposals
no later than 30 April 2011.
57. State which measures have been taken to safeguard the future of the study
and research programme in Romani at Linköping University.
Since 2007 the government has commissioned Linköping University every
year to offer teaching in Romani Chib. The structure of the teaching is at the
discretion of the University. There was no teaching in Romani Chib at
university level in Sweden prior to 2007 and it takes time to build up the
environments for teaching and research. In Sweden the higher education
institutions are entitled to allocate the basic grant for research as they see fit
and they are free to choose which subject areas should undergo development
by way of research programmes. The higher education institutions and sites
may also apply for research funds from external financers, both nationally
and internationally.
Refer to Article 7.1.f above.

36

59. State which measures have been taken to safeguard the future of the study
and research programme in Yiddish at Lund University.
Every year the government commissions Lund University to offer teaching
in Yiddish. In the annual report for 2009 Lund University stated that for the
six newly started courses in Yiddish in 2009 there were a total of 159
applicants for the 120 seats which were planned. As mentioned earlier, in
Sweden the higher education institutions are entitled to allocate the basic
grant for research as they see fit and thus they are free to choose which
subject areas should undergo development by way of research programmes.
Article 7.1.i – Promotion of transnational exchanges
Please refer to the previous report for information on this obligation.
Article 7.2 – Prohibitions, unjustified distinctions, exclusions, restrictions
or preferences applying to the use of regional or minority languages
Please refer to the previous report for information on this obligation.
Article 7.3 – Promote mutual understanding between all linguistic groups
in the country
61. (box) State which measures have been taken to improve awareness and
understanding of minority languages in the general teacher training, in teaching
at nine-year compulsory schools, upper secondary schools and in Swedish society
in general.
Nine-year compulsory schools and upper secondary schools
An anthology – “10 pinnar i luften” (“10 sticks in the air”) – has been
published by the Swedish National Agency for Education for children in
Finnish, Yiddish, Meänkieli, Romani Chib and Sami. It is primarily intended
for use in nine-year compulsory school in order to provide all pupils
increased knowledge of the national minorities and their languages. Another
new teaching material includes “Miritza & Sebastian”, which caters both for
the Romani and Swedish personnel in three languages, namely Kale Romani,
Finnish and Swedish.
The curricula for nine-year compulsory school are currently under review.
The curricula for Swedish B in upper secondary school states that one of the
grading criteria for a pass mark on a course is the pupil being able to make
observations and reflect on the situation of minority languages in Sweden. In
order to attain a pass mark with distinction on the same course the pupil
must be capable of presenting the minority languages and their situation in

37

Sweden. Swedish B is referred to as a core subject, one which is compulsory
for all pupils in upper secondary school.
Teacher training specialising in minority languages
Luleå University of Technology has been commissioned by the government
to provide teacher training every academic year specialising in Sami, Finnish
and Meänkieli. The University should also report on the work which is being
carried out in order to increase the number of applicants for teacher training.
The government intends to reform the current teacher training. The new
teacher training will be launched in the autumn of 2011. In the government
bill, Top of the class - new teacher education programmes (bill 2009/10:89),
which was adopted by the Riksdag (reference 2009/10:UbU16, Government
Communication 2009/10:248), the government states that in order for it to
be possible to provide teacher training in minority languages the opportunity
of studying national minority languages as subjects within the framework of
teacher-training programmes for upper-secondary school teachers should
exist and it should be possible to validate real knowledge in the languages.
As mentioned earlier, on 23 June 2010 the government commissioned the
Swedish National Agency for Higher Education (reference number
U2010/3886/UH) to propose measures on how the access to teachers who
can teach in and about the national minority languages can be increased.
Furthermore, the commission entails that the Swedish National Agency for
Higher Education shall, if deemed to be necessary, after communication
with the relevant higher education institutions, propose changes for the
current allocation of responsibilities between the higher education
institutions which organise teaching in the national minority languages. The
Swedish National Agency for Higher Education shall present the
commission no later than 30 April 2011.
Teacher training in general
The degree description for a teaching degree, the Higher Education
Ordinance (1993:100), appendix 2, states that in order for students to obtain
a teaching degree they should illustrate the ability to convey and anchor the
fundamental values of society and democracy. This requirement should be
interpreted as implying that knowledge and understanding of national
minority languages is a prerequisite.
Information activities under the new strategy on minority policy
The new website www.minoritet.se shall be used to disseminate knowledge
on the national minorities and the rights of minorities to these groups, to
decision-makers and officials as well as the public in general. The
government is of the view that increased knowledge on the national
38

minorities, their language and culture, in society will increase understanding
of these groups. The government has also emphasised that the national
minority languages and culture are a part of the Swedish cultural heritage.
Article 7.4 – Participation and influence
As mentioned above in part I, the new strategy on minority policy involves
the rights of the national minorities to exert influence being regulated by
law.
The public authorities should provide the national minorities the
opportunity to exert influence on issues which concern them and as far as
possible consult with the representatives of the minorities on such issues. It
is particularly important to initiate efficient communication in the
municipalities, as many of the important decisions concerning the national
minorities are taken at a local level.
Financial aid for the organisations which represent the national minorities
has been increased by an additional SEK 2 million to SEK 6 million per year
in order to strengthen the empowerment of the national minorities.
According to the government, at this stage it is essential to particularly
prioritise the prerequisites for national minorities which allow them to create
well-functioning coordination models within the administrative areas.
The government intends to initiate a dialogue with the youth associations
for the national minorities at a national level with the purpose of improving
opportunities for youth associations to exert greater influence.
The role of the Sami Parliament has been clarified. The Sami Parliament shall
determine the objectives, rather than simply manage the Sami language work.
The increased responsibility of the Sami Parliament will be expressed by
changes in the Sami Parliament Act (1992:1433). The Riksdag and the
government can formulate overall objectives for the national language policy,
but according to the government the responsibility of conveying the
objectives for the internal work on the Sami language lies with the Sami
Parliament, as an organ elected by popular vote. The objectives for
promoting, maintaining and developing the Sami language require the
democratic foundation in the group which an organ elected by popular vote
can provide.
64. State to what extent the Delegation for Roma Issues covers the aspects which
concern the promotion of Romani.
The Delegation for Roma Issues has been commissioned to submit proposals
on how the living conditions of the Roma in society should be improved.
The Delegation submitted its final report on 30 July 2010 and presented a

39

model for a strategy intended to safeguard the human rights of the Roma in
Sweden. The proposed strategy has three overall objectives:
• to bridge the welfare gap between the Roma and other groups,
• to reverse the disadvantageous situation of the Roma in terms of
power, and
• to rebuild the confidence of the Roma in the majority society and
bridge the credibility gap.
The Delegation is of the opinion that the objectives can be achieved within
20 years – the equivalent of a generation. The strategy includes, inter alia, a
number of proposals which concern Romani Chib.
The report is currently being prepared within the Government Offices of
Sweden.
Article 7.5 – Non-territorial languages
By means of the new Language Act (2009:600) and the government’s
strategy on minority policy, the position of the non-territorial minority
languages – Romani Chib and Yiddish – has also been strengthened in
Sweden. In accordance with the Language Act, the public sector (i.e.,
authorities and decision-making bodies) has a particular responsibility to
protect and promote the national minority languages(section 8). Persons
belonging to a national minority are to be given the opportunity to learn,
develop and use the minority language(section 14) and the public
institutions is responsible for ensuring that the individual is given access to
his/her minority language (section 15). In comparison to the previous
Swedish objectives for language policies, the provision in section 14 entails
strengthened protection as it includes the term “learn”. The objective for
language policies has previously only included the term “develop and use”.
The general provisions in the new Act (2009:724) on National Minorities
and National Minority Languages also cover the non-territorial languages.
The protection of these languages has been strengthened by means of
section 4. The provisions refer to the Language Act and additionally state
that public institutions should also in general promote the opportunities for
the national minorities to maintain and develop their cultures in Sweden.
The development of children’s cultural identity and the use of their minority
language should particularly be promoted. This means that the responsibility
of society to preserve the national minority languages has been clarified.
The revitalisation tools which have been made available for language projects
may also be sought for non-territorial languages.

40

PART III
Languages: SAMI, FINNISH and MEÄNKIELI
General question from the Committee of Experts
198. Provide information on the execution of a language plan for Meänkieli and
how the Swedish authorities support initiatives which have been taken by
speakers of Meänkieli to standardise their language and for plans for the
establishment of a Language Council for Meänkieli.
With regard to standardisation, in 2010 the Swedish Institute for Language
and Folklore (SOFI), similarly to the previous Swedish Arts Council, will
provide financial support for an extensive project aimed at devising a large
dictionary for Meänkieli which takes into account the different varieties of
the language. Stiftelsen Meän Akateemi (Meän Akateemi Foundation) is the
initiator and project owner. During the year, the Institute will also formulate
a brief informational guide on grammar, which will be published on the
Institute’s website.
With regard to a Language Board for Meänkieli, in collaboration with the
department the Language Council, SOFI is responsible for managing this
language conservation. Different reference groups for each minority
language have been established within the framework of the operations. In
terms of Meänkieli, the current reference group’s mandate has expired and
the Institute is planning on establishing a new one with a clearer linguistic
profile.
Within the administrative area for Meänkieli, in 2010 SOFI has also held a
seminar on place names, focusing particularly on Meänkieli and Sami, and is
planning on hosting a wide language conference in December in
collaboration with Korpilombolo kulturförening (Korpilombolo Cultural
Association) and Stiftelsen Meän Akateemi.
In addition to these initiatives, for some years the Institute has had a
research archivist for Meänkieli, which among other things works on
documenting the language, gathering material about and recordings of the
language as well as building a reference library with literature about and in
Meänkieli. In the long-run, planning for the establishment of a new service, a
pure language consultant for Meänkieli is underway. SOFI is also
continuously working to strengthen the communication with the language
users, particularly through Svenska Tornedalingars Riksförbund –
Tornionlaaksolaiset, STR-T (the Swedish association for Tornedalers).

41

Article 8 – Education
General Article 8
71. (box) State which measures have been taken within the area of education in
order to preserve the South Sami language.
The education in state Sami schools is based on the Sami variety to which the
children belong, i.e., South Sami as well. Teaching in the Sami schools in
Karesuando, Kiruna, Gällivare and Tärnaby is conducted in South Sami.
The integrated Sami teaching in the schools in the municipalities of
Vilhelmina and Härjedalen is conducted in South Sami. The municipalities of
Berg and Krokom have also had teaching in South Sami since the autumn of
2009.
The government has commissioned the Swedish National Agency for
Education to devise teaching material in Sami. This commission has been
executed in cooperation with the Sami Education Board. Within the
framework of the commission teaching material in South Sami has been
devised. In collaboration with the County Governor in Nordland, Norway
the Sami school in Tärnaby has participated in a language immersion project
for pupils in South Sami.
The website Tema Modersmål (www.modersmal.net) has been updated and
improved, for example, it now includes a page for South Sami.
Distance tuition in nine-year compulsory school is not regulated.
Regulations for allowing distance tuition in certain cases are currently being
prepared within the Government Offices of Sweden.
SEK 1 million has been provided to the Sami Education Board during the
2010 budgetary year in order to extend the opportunities for integrated
Sami teaching. The Sami Education Board has provided support and
assistance to additional schools in the municipality of Berg (two locations)
and the municipalities of Krokom and Gällivare.
Article 8.1.a.iii – Pre-school activities
74. (box) State which measures have been taken to promote pre-school
education in Sami.
For several years all state Sami schools have also had Sami pre-schools.

42

Within the administrative area for Sami, children are entitled to pre-school
activities being conducted completely or partially in Sami. Within the new
municipalities which are now a part of the extended administrative area for
Sami, parents have requested that Sami pre-schools be established. The
municipalities receive government subsidies so as to allow them to fulfil
these wishes.
138. (box) State which measures have been taken to promote pre-school
education in Finnish.
Within the administrative area for Finnish, children are entitled to preschool activities being conducted completely or partially in Finnish. Within
the new municipalities which are now a part of the extended administrative
area for Finnish, parents have requested that Finnish pre-schools be
established. The municipalities receive government subsidies so as to allow
them to fulfil these requests.
201. State the number of pupils in pre-schools with mother tongue support in
Meänkieli at the five municipalities in question.
There is no information on the number of pupils in pre-school with mother
tongue support in Meänkieli. The statistics which are available for mother
tongue support in pre-schools have not been divided according to the
various languages, for example minority languages.
201. (box) What progress can be reported with regard to the provision of preschool teaching in Meänkieli in the entire area where the language is
traditionally spoken?
The municipalities which are a part of the administrative area for Meänkieli
receive government subsidies in order to fulfil the requests for pre-schools in
Meänkieli.
Article 8.1.b.iv – Nine-year compulsory school education
141. State which concrete measures have been taken in order to provide the
teaching material which is specifically adapted to teaching about Finnish or in
Finnish as a minority language. State which measures have been taken so as not
to solely rely on mother tongue tuition.
The government has commissioned the Swedish National Agency for
Education to devise teaching material in Finnish. This commission has been
carried out in cooperation with Sverigefinländarnas’ delegation (Delegation
of the Sweden Finns), Sveriges finska lärarförbund (the Finnish teachers’
association in Sweden) and mother tongue teachers. Between 2008-2010
teaching books in print and on the internet have been published, a
conference for Finnish teachers in Sweden has been organised, distance
43

learning courses for Finnish have been developed and the Finnish webpage
of the website Tema Modersmål was launched.
204. (box) State which concrete measures have been taken for the provision of
mother tongue tuition in all the relevant municipalities and in order to develop
bilingual tuition in Meänkieli as an alternative to mother tongue tuition.
Rules on the entitlement to mother tongue tuition are included in the
Compulsory School Ordinance (1994:1194). An information brochure
pertaining to this has been sent to all municipalities. The Swedish Schools
Inspectorate monitors and ensures that the municipalities and schools offer
mother tongue tuition to pupils in the national minority languages, for
example, Meänkieli. The regular supervision involves an assessment stage for
both independent nine-year compulsory schools and upper secondary
schools as to whether mother tongue tuition is offered in accordance with
the provisions. The municipalities which do not offer mother tongue tuition
to pupils are subject to written criticism and are monitored by the Swedish
Schools Inspectorate.
In accordance with applicable rules, a school may organise bilingual tuition
in grades 1-6. For pupils who have Finnish as a mother tongue, this also
applies to grades 7-9. Pre-school activities for grades 7-9 have existed since
2003. Between 2006-2007 a specific incentive allowance was introduced for
pre-school activities which, inter alia, focused on increasing awareness of the
teaching of subjects in mother tongue and on skills development
opportunities for bilingual teachers. In 2008 the Ordinance was extended
until 2011.
Article 8.1.c.iv – Upper secondary school education
77. (box) State which measures have been taken to introduce Sami in the higher
grades in nine-year compulsory schools and upper secondary schools in other
municipalities where Sami is used.
As of 2010 additional funds have been allocated for integrated Sami teaching.
SEK 1 million has been provided to the Sami Education Board during the
2010 budgetary year in order to extend the opportunities for integrated Sami
teaching. The Sami Education Board has provided support and assistance to
additional schools in the municipality of Berg (two locations) and the
municipalities of Krokom and Gällivare.
In Lapplands Kommunalförbund (Lapland’s municipal federation) LKF
(Kiruna, Pajala, Jokkmokk and Gällivare) collaboration has begun on, among
other things, mother tongue tuition by means of distance learning. Several
minority languages, including Sami, are covered here. For example, in Kiruna
all pupils must have knowledge of the culture, language, religion and history
of the national minorities. The municipalities within LKF tend to provide
44

information on the entitlement to mother tongue tuition. There is a
language centre in Kiruna for minority languages.
Bokenskolan is an upper secondary school in the municipality of Jokkmokk
with national recruitment and specialises in Sami.
145. (box) Which measures have been taken, in both nine-year compulsory
schools and upper secondary schools, in order to develop bilingual Finnish
tuition as an alternative to mother tongue tuition?
It is possible to manage bilingual tuition in Finnish in all grades in nine-year
compulsory school. There are five municipal nine-year compulsory schools
and seven independent Swedish-Finnish schools which run tuition in both
Swedish and Finnish.
The independent Sverigefinska skolan i Stockholm (Swedish-Finnish school
in Stockholm)has run upper secondary education of a Natural Science
Programme and mathematics with a Swedish-Finnish specialisation and a
Social Science - Arts Programme with a Swedish-Finnish specialisation, as of
the “support year” 1 2007 in accordance with permission granted by the
Swedish National Agency for Education in 2006. As a result of the declining
number of pupils, Swedish-Finnish teaching is not offered in upper
secondary schools as of the autumn term of 2010.
207. (box) State whether strategies have been devised in order to strengthen the
provision of Meänkieli in the upper grades in nine-year compulsory schools and
upper secondary schools , including the supply of teaching material.
The government has commissioned the Swedish National Agency for
Education to devise teaching material in Meänkieli, with the purpose of
facilitating teaching of Meänkieli. This commission has been carried out in
cooperation with the Swedish Tornedalian Association, the Swedish
Institute for Language and Folklore, the municipalities of Kiruna and Pajala,
and others. Among other things, the commission has resulted in a teaching
book for mother tongue tuition, supplemented by digital audio recordings, a
communication seminar on Meänkieli, a book on the alphabet for younger
children and the digital publication of new texts. The website Tema
Modersmål (www.modersmal.net) covers all minority languages, i.e.,
Meänkieli as well. The website includes suggestions on how to use the
language with the pupils. The website also contains web based teaching
material which can be downloaded.
Article 8.1.d.iv –Technical and vocational training

1

A “support year” corresponds to the government’s budgetary year.

45

80. State what developments have taken place with regard to strengthening the
provision of Sami within technical and vocational training.
As mentioned earlier, the Sami Education Centre manages, inter alia,
vocational training for the Sami individuals and language courses in the Sami
language. The school receives an annual government subsidy for its
educational activities.
147. Provide specific information on the structure of and the number of persons
studying the programme for technical and vocational training for school
recreation leaders and bilingual teaching assistants and to what extend the
teaching takes place in Finnish.
The National Association of Finns in Sweden (SFRF) is the principal for
Axevalla folkhögskola (Axevalla folk high school) which manages liberal adult
education and adult education in Finnish and Swedish. The school represents
one of the corner stones of the development of Swedish-Finnish culture.
The objective is to increase awareness among Swedish Finns so that those
who are active minority members can have an impact on the Swedish-Finnish
public debate in order to further the understanding of minorities as a
resource in Swedish society.
In addition to the main school in Axevalla with conventional adult education
in Swedish, there is a branch in Stockholm with activities in the Finnish
language, with approximately 35-40 participants. They offer:
• a bilingual treatment assistant programme, in Finnish and Swedish,
which is available in the Stockholm branch, and
• a general programme with a tourism specialism.
The Swedish-Finnish folk high school in Haparanda offers courses in Finnish
continuously throughout the academic year. A distance learning course is
available in Finnish and is organised twice per year. The Folk High School
organises summer courses in Finnish every summer and continuously offers
commissioned education in Finnish, which is tailor-made to suit the
requirements. In addition, different subjects can be studied in Finnish during
the academic year. The Folk High School provides study material and
computer programs in Finnish for participants. The school also offers:
•
•

assistant tuition/courses in Finnish, and
courses in interpretation for the visually impaired twice a year.

In addition, courses/tuition in Finnish or partially in Finnish are offered for
Sverigefinska synskadades förbund (the Swedish-Finnish Association for the
visually impaired), by way of, for example, summer camps every summer for
the Swedish Finns senior citizens and the course ”Data i vardagen” (IT In
everyday life) for various associations in Finnish.

46

209. Provide information on technical and vocational training in Meänkieli
and on the fulfilment of this commitment.
Tornedalen Folk High School has courses about and in Meänkieli. They have
language courses, preparatory courses and courses within tourism.
Article 8.1.e.iii – University education
As mentioned earlier, since 2007 the government has carried out several
investments in education and the allocation of responsibilities for education
between the various higher education institutions with regard to the socalled small languages and national minority languages. The government is of
the opinion that it is essential that the higher education institutions which
have been commissioned to organise teaching in the national minority
languages actively work towards attaining a good influx of pupils for these
courses. The division of the languages has taken place based on written
communication to the government (2006) from the University of
Gothenburg, Linköping University, Lund University, Stockholm University,
Umeå University and Uppsala University. The proposals in the written
communication were devised by the Association of Swedish Higher
Education.
One specific obligation entails that a higher education institution must offer
teaching in this language, but not that other higher education institutions
may not offer equivalent teaching. Every higher education institution is
entitled to initiate any teaching they prefer, as long as it lies within the
framework of the areas it is entitled to award a degree in.
As also mentioned earlier, the government has commissioned the Swedish
National Agency for Higher Education to propose measures on how the
access to teachers who can teach in and about the national minority
languages can be increased. Furthermore, within the framework of the
commission, the Swedish National Agency for Higher Education shall, if
deemed to be necessary, propose changes for the current allocation of
responsibilities for languages between the higher education institutions.
84. State which measures have been taken to adapt the financing system of higher
education based on the tuition requirements for all Sami languages and to
provide sufficient earmarked financing.
All the higher education institutions in the Swedish higher education system
are entitled to offer the education they prefer, provided that they have the
necessary authorisation to issue the degree.
The higher education institutions receive financing for higher education on a
base level, based on the number of full-time students and annual
47

performance (equivalent). The compensation for students varies depending
on their field of study. For instance, the compensation for students studying
medicine is higher than that for students studying languages.
The higher education institutions are in charge of deciding:
•
•
•
•
•

How resources shall be allocated within the institutions and how the
quality of the activities shall be safeguarded and developed.
The structure of the education programme and the course content.
Which courses should be offered at a basic level (provided that the
higher education institution has been authorised by the Swedish
National Agency for Higher Education to issue the relevant degree).
The number of seats on each education programme.
Education on a research level; which subjects should be offered, how
the teaching should be organised, etc.

151. State what developments can be reported with regard to a structured policy
for higher education in Finnish.
Since 2007 Uppsala University has been commissioned, inter alia, to offer
education in Finnish every year. In its annual report for 2009 the University
reported that all applicants on the Finnish courses were accepted (162
applicants).
Stockholm University has also been commissioned by the government to
offer education in Finnish each year. In its annual report for 2009 the
University has stated that interest in Finnish studies continues to grow. The
number of applicants in 2007 was 178, the number in 2008 was 184 and in
2009 the figure was 244. During 2007 and 2008 the number of seats offered
was 320 seats per year and the corresponding figure for 2009 was 480.
216. Provide information on the development of Meänkieli in higher education.
As mentioned earlier, the government has assigned the responsibility of
offering tuition in Meänkieli to Umeå University. Luleå University of
Technology has been commissioned to provide teacher training specialising
in the national minority languages Finnish, Meänkieli and Sami.
In its annual report for 2009 Umeå University reports that, after analysing
the trend of applications for the courses in Meänkieli, as well as the need for
teaching in various levels of the language, the Institution decided in 2008 to
reorganise the provision of courses. In the spring of 2009 a web based
beginner’s course, with a 25 per cent pace of study, which does not require
prior knowledge of the language and which focuses on basic language
proficiency, was offered. In 2010 the University allocated capital for
developing stage 2 of the Meänkieli course, which was offered for the first
time in the spring term of 2010.
48

From Umeå University’s annual report for 2009:

Sami
- seats offered
- applicants
- full-time students
- annual performance
(equivalent)

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

171
171
28
18

94
94
32
22

83
83
27
23

211
211
43
18

293
293
55
39

Meänkieli
- seats offered
21
4
24
34
41
- applicants
21
4
24
34
41
- full-time students
4
1
1
3
5
- annual performance 5
1
1
1
2
(equivalent)
Table: The number of students for Sami and Meänkieli for the years
2005-2009.
In its annual report for 2009, Luleå University of Technology states the
following with regard to teacher training specialising in Meänkieli: The
minority languages Finnish, Meänkieli and Sami are offered in the form of
specialisms within teacher training. Practising teachers and others who are
interested in languages may also apply for the course. The number of
applicants in 2009 for Finnish was at the same level as previous years. The
courses in Sami and Meänkieli were cancelled as no applications were
received for these courses. Cooperation with Umeå University is taking
place in order to offer advanced Finnish courses.
From Luleå University of Technology’s annual report for 2009:
Teacher training, specialism minority language

Number of seats
offered
Number of firstchoice applicants

2007
60
12

Finnish
2008 2009
60
30
10

14

2007
5
1

Meänkieli
2008 2009
15
15
2

0

2007
5

Sami
2008
15

2009
10

1

2

0

Luleå University of Technology has been commissioned by the government
to work towards increasing the number of applications for the course.
As also mentioned earlier, the government has commissioned the Swedish
National Agency for Higher Education to propose measures on how the
access to teachers who can teach in and about the national minority
languages can be increased. Furthermore, within the framework of the
commission, the Swedish National Agency for Higher Education shall, if
49

deemed to be necessary, propose changes for the current allocation of
responsibilities for languages between the higher education institutions.
Article 8.1.f.iii – Adult and continuing education
Please refer to the previous report for information on this obligation.
Article 8.1.g – Teaching of history and culture
The curricula for nine-year compulsory school are currently under review.
The curricula for Swedish B in upper secondary school state that one of the
grading criteria for a pass mark on a course is the pupil being able to make
observations and reflect on the situation of minority languages in Sweden. In
order to attain a pass mark with distinction on the same course the pupil
must be capable of presenting the minority languages and their situation in
Sweden. Swedish B is referred to as a core subject, one which is compulsory
for all pupils in upper secondary school.
154. Provide additional information on the practical completion of this
obligation.
The Swedish National Agency for Education’s commission is to implement
the curricula, whilst the Swedish Schools Inspectorate ensures that teaching
of the various subjects corresponds to the content of the curricula. The
Swedish National Agency for Education has published an anthology, in all
minority languages, with the aim of promoting the teaching. It is intended
for use as teaching material in nine-year compulsory school in order to
provide all pupils increased knowledge of the national minorities and their
languages. Another new teaching material includes “Miritza & Sebastian” on
Roma culture, which caters both for the Romani and Swedish personnel in
three languages, Kale Romani, Finnish and Swedish.
213. State to what extent the execution is taking place in other municipalities in
the administrative areas.
The requirement for teaching the history and culture of the national
minorities is the same for the entire country. The Government Offices of
Sweden have no information regarding to what extent the municipalities are
adhering to the requirement.
Article 8.1.h – Teacher training
The government intends to reform the current teacher training and has
therefore recently presented the bill, Top of the class – a new teacher education
programme (bill 2009/10:89), which was adopted by the Riksdag (reference
2009/10:UbU16, Government Communication 2009/10:248). The purpose
50

of the reform is to improve the quality of teacher training. It is likely that
this will lead to more individuals pursuing a teaching career. In the bill, the
government states that in order for it to be possible to provide teacher
training in minority languages, including relevant subject didactic, the
opportunity of studying national minority languages as subjects within the
framework of teacher-training programmes for upper-secondary school
teachers should exist and that it should be possible to validate real
knowledge in the languages.
With regard to mother tongue teachers, the government wants to give such
teachers the same status and position as other teachers. Therefore, it is likely
that, following the teacher training reform, mother tongue teacher training
will be integrated in teacher-training programmes for upper-secondary
school teachers. In the future it will also be possible, for those who have the
requisite subject knowledge in a mother tongue, to quickly study for a
degree in the relevant subject by way of a supplementary course lasting 1.5
years. The higher education institutions are responsible for the validation of
previous subject knowledge, both in terms of general knowledge and
knowledge of languages. If a higher education institution wishes to organise
teacher-training programmes for upper-secondary school teachers with the
mother tongue as one of the subjects, but lacks the teaching in a certain
language, it can cooperate with other higher education institutions in
Sweden or abroad.
The Inquiry on Teacher Education (Swedish Government Official Reports
Series No. 2008:109), which preceded the bill, proposed that certain higher
education institutions be given specific responsibility for teacher training in
the national minority languages. In the bill, Top of the class (bill 2009/10:89),
the government states that further clarification is required before a
standpoint can be taken in this respect. As mentioned earlier, the
government has therefore commissioned the Swedish National Agency for
Higher Education to propose measures on how the access to teachers who
can teach in and about the national minority languages can be increased.
Within the framework of the commission, the Swedish National Agency for
Higher Education shall also, if deemed to be necessary, propose changes for
the current allocation of responsibilities for languages between the higher
education institutions.
87. (box) State which measures have been taken to devise a tuition programme
for Sami teachers, including bilingual teaching and to provide incentives for
studying to become a teacher in Sami.
Luleå University of Technology has been commissioned to offer teacher
training specialising in Sami, Meänkieli and Finnish. In its annual report for
2009 the University reported that practising teachers and others who are
interested in languages may also apply for the course. The number of
applicants in 2009 for Finnish was at the same level as previous years
51

(approximately 15 applicants). The courses in Sami and Meänkieli were
cancelled as no applications were received for these courses. Prior to 2010,
the government commissioned Luleå University of Technology to report on
the work which is being carried out to increase the number of applicants for
the course.
Also, see under Article 7.1.f above.
157. State which measures have been taken, in cooperation with Finnish
speakers, to create structured policies with respect to teacher training about
Finnish and in Finnish as a subject.
Refer to the answer under this article above.
219. (box) State which measures have been taken to adopt and implement
structured policies for basic and further training for teachers about Meänkieli
and in Meänkieli as a subject.
Refer to the answer under this article above. Also, refer to the answer under
Article 8.1.e.iii.
Article 8.1.i – Supervision
89/159. Present the results of the revised methods of the Swedish National
Agency for Education for gathering statistics which allow it to state the number
of minority language speakers who are offered mother tongue tuition. Also state
whether the Swedish National Agency for Education has been commissioned to
monitor tuition in terms of minority language tuition and collating periodical
reports on its experience.
221. What developments can be reported with regard to supervision of minority
language teachers and collating periodical reports from the supervisory
authority?
At present, there is no legal support or ordinance which allows the Swedish
National Agency for Education to process information about a pupil’s
mother tongue. The reason for this is that such information also indicates a
pupil’s ethnic background, and in accordance with the Personal Data Act
(1998:204) it is, as a general rule, prohibited to process information which
reveals ethnic background. Within the Government Offices of Sweden, the
issue of how the requirement of improved data collection with regard to
pupils’ mother tongue and participation in mother tongue tuition should be
assessed alongside the risks of violating individuals’ integrity is currently
under review.
On 1 October 2008 the Swedish Schools Inspectorate was established as an
independent authority for providing supervision and quality reviews of pre52

school activities, school-age child care, schools and adult education.
Supervision and quality reviews being carried out by a specific authority
ensure that reviews of, among other things, the performance of the schools,
are carried out. The Swedish Schools Inspectorate has initiated a review of
language and skills development of children and pupils with a mother tongue
other than Swedish.
The regular supervision by the Swedish Schools Inspectorate involves
assessing whether mother tongue tuition is offered in accordance with the
provisions. Such an assessment stage applies to both municipal and
independent nine-year compulsory schools and to municipal and
independent upper secondary schools.
Article 8.2 –Education outside the administrative areas
92. State which measures have been taken to develop alternative models for
teaching in Sami, in addition to online teaching material.
In collaboration with the County Governor in Nordland, Norway the Sami
school has managed a language immersion project. All pupils in grades 5-8 in
Sweden who study South Sami as a mother tongue or who have South Sami
as a subject at the Sami school may participate, along with all pupils in
Norway in grades 6-9 who study South Sami at the school. Approximately
80 pupils have participated in the project in 2010.
Distance tuition in nine-year compulsory school is not regulated.
Regulations for allowing distance tuition in certain cases are currently being
prepared by the Government Offices of Sweden.
The Sami Education Centre manages language teaching for all three varieties
of Sami in the form of distance courses.
Higher education
Since 2007 Umeå University has been commissioned by the government to
provide education in Sami every year. The entire language range at the
University in the Sami language and Sami studies constitutes distance
courses with online support or purely online courses. Some courses are parttime (50 per cent), which allows students to work or study other subjects
simultaneously. The courses can be attended at different locations, for
example, Kiruna and Östersund.
Umeå University also organises the Summer University, and in the summer
of 2009 a course in practical North Sami and a course in traditional
knowledge was organised at the Lannavaara meeting-place.
Umeå University reports that the Sami languages which are offered include
North Sami, Lule Sami and South Sami. The studies also cover the history of
53

the Sami language. North Sami, Lule Sami or South Sami are available as
introductory and advanced courses. The Sami language (as a mother tongue)
and Sami cultural studies can be selected as the main subject in a
Bachelor’s/Master’s degree.
The courses in Sami studies offered by Umeå University during the autumn
2009/spring 2010 terms include:
• Comparative Sami grammar
• Culture, history and tourism in the Barents Region
• Sami Culture and Religion
• The Sami society and history
• Sami phonology
• Sami cultural studies A
• Sami cultural studies B
• Sami language C
• Sami, Practical Introduction to Lule Sami
• Sami language: Thesis for Master’s degree
• Sami language revitalisation study
• Sami study, Traditional Indigenous
• Sami study: Ethnicity and identity
• Sami Studies: Comparative Indigenous Studies
• Sami Studies: Comparative Indigenous Studies II
• Sami: North Sami A
• Sami: North Sami B
• Sami: North Sami, Qualification Course (level 3-4)
• Sami: North Sami for Beginners (level 1-2)
• Sami: Practical Introduction to North Sami
• Sami: South Sami A
• Sami: South Sami B
• Sami: South Sami, Qualification Course (level 3-4)
• South Sami for Beginners (level 1-2)
163. Provide additional information on the development of a system which
allows the entitlement to teaching in Finnish to be executed in practice, and
which measures have been taken to fulfil this obligation.
The newly established authority Swedish Schools Inspectorate monitors and
ensures that the children’s entitlement to mother tongue tuition adheres to
the national guidelines. The municipalities or independent schools which do
not fulfil the requirements are subject to written criticism and are monitored
by the Swedish Schools Inspectorate.
Also, refer to Article 7.1.h and 8.1.e.iii.

54

225. Provide information on which measures have been taken to comply with
the request for mother tongue tuition in Meänkieli, as well as the demand for
such.
In accordance with applicable rules, students with a national minority
language are entitled to receive mother tongue tuition if they have basic
knowledge of the language and wish to pursue such tuition. The Swedish
Schools Inspectorate monitors and ensures that the children’s entitlement
to, inter alia, mother tongue tuition adheres to the national guidelines. The
municipalities or independent schools which do not fulfil the requirements
are subject to written criticism and are subsequently monitored by the
Swedish Schools Inspectorate. A number of schools have received criticism
due to deficiencies in their mother tongue tuition.
With regard to higher education, refer to Article 8.1.e.iii.
Article 9 – The legal system
Article 9.1 –The right to use Sami in criminal proceedings, civil
proceedings and proceedings in the administrative courts
Article 9.1.a.ii
The Act (2009:724) on National Minorities and National Minority
Languages regulates the right to use Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli in courts.
Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli may be used in administrative courts, a
District/City Court, an environmental and land court, a maritime law court
or a rent and tenancy tribunal which has a court district which is completely
or partially covered by the municipalities of Arjeplog, Gällivare, Haparanda,
Jokkmokk, Kiruna, Pajala or Övertorneå provided the case or matter is
linked to any of these municipalities. The Swedish National Courts
Administration has made the assessment that in this context the rent and
tenancy tribunal ought to be covered by what is stated in the law about
courts.
Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli may also be used in those courts in which a
judgement or ruling in a case or matter where these languages could have
been used is appealed.
In order for it to be possible to use Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli it is
necessary that the case or matter is linked to the municipalities of
Arjeplog, Gällivare, Haparanda, Jokkmokk, Kiruna, Pajala och Övertorneå.
In this case, the link refers to, for instance, that the party lives or resides
within the municipalities of Arjeplog, Gällivare, Jokkmokk or Kiruna or that
the case or matter concerns a property situated in these municipalities.

55

A party or representative of a party in a case or matter in a court or rent and
tenancy tribunal is entitled to use Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli during the
processing of the case or matter. Representative in this context refers to, for
example, the custodian of a child, a trustee or an individual who represents a
legal person, however, not counsel.
The right to use Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli covers the right to provide
documentation and written evidence in Sami, the right to receive the
documentation pertaining to the matter or case verbally translated to Sami,
Finnish and Meänkieli and the right to speak Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli
during oral proceedings or a session in a court or the rent and tenancy
tribunal. Unless it is clearly unnecessary, the courts and rent and tenancy
tribunal should translate the documentation which has been submitted to
Swedish. These authorities should also, in general, strive to communicate
with parties or representatives of parties who speak Sami, Finnish and
Meänkieli in their language. Compensation for interpreters and translation is
paid by public funds.
It is important that courts and the rent and tenancy tribunal are able to make
plans for appointing interpreters and translators. Therefore, a request to use
Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli should be submitted in conjunction with the
initiation of the case or matter or the first time a party presents its
statement. A request which is presented at a later stage or which clearly has
an inappropriate purpose may be rejected.
Pursuant to a commission by the government, the Swedish National Courts
Administration has translated informational material on the entitlement to
use Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli in courts to these languages. The website of
the Swedish courts also contains informational material which has been
translated to minority languages. This material covers information about the
courts and the procedure for trials.
In accordance with a commission by the government, the Swedish
Prosecution Authority has also translated basic information on the
prosecution process to Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli. Among other things,
information for target groups who are directly affected by the prosecution
process, namely crime victims, witnesses and youths, has been translated.
As mentioned in the previous report, the police have devised an information
sheet for those who have been subjected to deprivation of liberty due to
suspicion of crime. The sheet has been translated to 42 different languages,
including the five national minority languages.
95. Provide statistics on how often interpretation to Sami is provided in
criminal proceedings, and what measures have been taken to encourage Sami
speakers to use their language in courts.

56

There are not any statistics available regarding how often Sami is used in
main hearings during criminal proceedings in courts.
228. (box) Which practical and organisational measures have been taken to
ensure that Meänkieli may be used in criminal proceedings and proceedings in
the administrative courts?
Refer to the answer under this article above.
The Public Prosecution Office in Luleå has two local units, one in
Haparanda and the other in Gällivare. At present, there are no Meänkieli
speaking personnel in the Public Prosecution Office in Luleå. However, this
does not prevent communication in Meänkieli, as, when necessary, this
occurs via interpreters and translation services. There are Meänkieli speaking
personnel within the Swedish Police.
Article 9.1.a.iii
Refer to the previous report for information on this obligation for Sami,
Finnish and Meänkieli.
Article 9.1.a.iv
99. State which measures have been taken to provide written documentation in
Sami.
166. (box) Which measures have been taken to ensure that judicial authorities,
upon request, devise documents relating to a specific cases in Finnish.
230. State which measures have been taken to devise written documentation in
Meänkieli.
The Act (2009:724) on National Minorities and National Minority
Languages regulates the right to use Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli in public
authorities and courts. The right to use these languages in courts covers the
right to receive the documentation pertaining to the matter or case verbally
translated and the right to speak the language during oral proceedings or a
session. Unless it is clearly unnecessary, the courts should translate the
documentation which has been submitted to Swedish. The courts should
also, in general, strive to communicate with parties who speak Sami, Finnish
and Meänkieli, or representatives of parties in their language. In courts
where the language may be used in accordance with the law, personnel with
proficiency in these languages may be available. Compensation for
interpreters and translation is paid by public funds.

57

As mentioned earlier, the website of the Swedish courts also contains
informational material which has been translated to minority languages. This
material covers information about the courts and the procedure for trials.
Article 9.1.b.ii
106. (box) State which measures have been taken to ensure that Sami may be
used in criminal proceedings, civil proceedings and proceedings in the
administrative courts.
See under Article 9.1.a.ii above.
Article 9.1.b.iii
Please refer to the previous report for information in this respect.
Article 9.1.c.ii
See under Article 9.1.a.ii above.
Article 9.1.c.iii
See under Article 9.1.a.ii above.
Article 9.1.d
See under Article 9.1.a.ii above.
Article 9.2.a
Please refer to the previous report for information in this respect.
Article 9.3 –Important national statutory texts
109. (box) State which measures have been taken to ensure that the most
important national statutory texts and those which specifically refer to Sami
speakers are also provided in Sami.
169. (box) State which measures have been taken to ensure that the most
important national statutory texts and those which specifically refer to Finnish
speakers are also provided in Finnish.
240. (box) State which measures have been taken to ensure that the most
important national statutory texts and those which specifically refer to Meänkieli
speakers are also provided in Meänkieli.

58

The Act (2009:724) on National Minorities and National Minority
Languages has been translated to Finnish, Meänkieli, Yiddish, Romani Kale,
Arli Romani, Kelderash Romani, North Sami, South Sami and Lule Sami. All
translations are available on the government’s website.
The Language Act (2009:600) has been translated to Finnish, South Sami,
North Sami, Lule Sami, Meänkieli, Romani and Yiddish. All translations are
available on the government’s website.
The Equality Ombudsman has published easy to understand information
regarding the Discrimination Act (2008:567) in Finnish, Yiddish, Arli
Romani, Romani Kale, Kelderash Romani, Lovari Romani, Lule Sami, North
Sami, South Sami and Meänkieli.
The website Tema Modersmål contains information in all minority languages
regarding mother tongue and mother tongue tuition. The government is also
considering translating a summary of the new Education Act to minority
languages.
The government has commissioned the Ombudsman for Children in Sweden
to translate the UN's Convention on the Rights of the Child (the Children’s
Convention) to Finnish, Meänkieli, Samiska, Romani Chib and Yiddish. The
Ombudsman for Children in Sweden will also devise a version of the
Children’s Convention, which has been adapted to suit children and will be
translated to the national minority languages. The commission shall be
presented on 31 December 2010.
The website of the Swedish courts contains informational material which has
been translated to minority languages. This material covers information
about the courts and the procedure for trials.
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
Article 10.1.a.iii – Use of spoken and written Sami
By means of the implementation of the Act (2009:724) on National
Minorities and National Minority Languages, the legal regulation of the
rights of the national minorities has been clarified, as well as the right to use
Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli when dealing with authorities.
Within administrative areas, individuals have the right to use minority
languages in their oral and written communication with a public authority
with a geographical operational area which is completely or partly covered by
the administrative area, in cases which an individual is a party or represents a
party, given that the case is linked to the area. If the individual uses Finnish,
Meänkieli or Sami in such a case, the authority is required to provide an oral
59

reply in the same language. Individuals who do not have a legal
representative are also entitled, upon request, to receive a written translation
of the ruling in the case in Finnish, Meänkieli and Sami respectively. In line
with previous practice, authorities shall in general strive to communicate
with individuals in the language of their choice. Individuals now have the
right to written translation.
Individuals have the right to use Finnish, Meänkieli and Sami respectively
outside the administrative areas during their oral and written communication
with public authorities, in cases to which an individual is a party or
represents a party, if the case is administered by personnel who are able to
comprehend the minority language. This is a new provision.
Individuals always have the right to use Finnish and Sami in their written
communication with representatives of the Parliamentary Ombudsman, the
Office of the Chancellor of Justice, the Social Insurance Office, the Swedish
Tax Agency and the Equality Ombudsman in cases in which an individual is
a party or represents a party. This is a new provision.
112. (box) State which measures have been taken to increase the share of Sami
speaking personnel in the relevant public administration offices, to devise
adequate tuition plans, and to equip personnel with incentives to improve their
knowledge of Sami.
Pursuant to the new Act (2009:724) on National Minorities and National
Minority Languages, public authorities should ensure that staff with
knowledge of Finnish, Meänkieli and Sami respectively are available when
necessary during communication with the authority. This is a new provision.
It is too early to assess whether the new provision has had the desired effect
and the government is aware of the difficulties in recruiting personnel who
are proficient in different languages, especially as regards Sami speakers.
171. Provide information on the use of Finnish, particularly in writing, within
state authorities outside of Norrbotten.
On 1 January 2010 the administrative area for Finnish was extended by 18
municipalities and an additional 3 municipalities were included on 1 May
2010. Within these municipalities, individuals have the right to use Finnish
during communication with authorities. Individuals throughout the country
have the right to use Finnish in their written communication with certain
state authorities, see under Article 10.a.iii above.
It is assessed that, outside the administrative areas, the language is used very
rarely during communication with authorities.
243. State which measures have been taken to ensure that Meänkieli speakers
may submit oral or written applications and receive replies in Meänkieli.
60

Refer to the answer under this article above.
Article 10.1.a.v
Refer to the previous report for information on this obligation with regard
to Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli.
Article 10.1.c
See under Article 10.1.a.iii above.
Article 10.2.b/c/d
115. (box) State which additional concrete measures have been taken in
collaboration with Sami speakers to fulfil the obligations in accordance with
10.2.b, c and d.
175 (box) State which measures have been taken to fulfil this obligation with
respect to Finnish.
245./246. State which additional concrete measures have been taken in
collaboration with Meänkieli speakers to fulfil the obligations in accordance
with 10.2.b, c and d.
Refer to information under Article 10.1.a.iii.
Article 10.2.g – Place names
118. State how many places or municipalities use place names in minority
languages (Sami).
177. State how many places or municipalities use place names in minority
languages (Finnish).
There is no statistical information in this respect. The Heritage
Conservation Act (1988:950) contains a provision on good practice for place
names. The provision states, inter alia, that good practice for place names
should be taken into consideration in municipal and state activities. Swedish,
Sami and Finnish names should, as far as possible, be used on maps and signs
and other marking in multilingual districts. There is an ongoing discussion
within the Government Offices of Sweden with regard to the requirement of
adding Meänkieli in the provision. There is also a need to increase the
awareness of municipalities concerning the significance of place names in
minority languages.

61

As part of the strategy for minority policy, the government has highlighted
that place names in minority languages are a valuable part of cultural heritage
which should be strongly upheld by the representatives of society. In June
2010 the Swedish Institute for Language and Folklore, Lantmäteriet (the
Swedish mapping, cadastral and land registration authority) and the Swedish
Transport Administration organised a conference in Kiruna for
municipalities concerning place names in minority languages and good
practice for place names. The aim was to increase awareness among
municipalities on these issues.
Article 10.4.a. – interpreting or translation when necessary
120. State which measures have been taken to improve the access to translators
and interpreters for Sami in the public authorities.
See under Article 10.1.a.iii above.
Article 10.5 – Family names
As stated in the previous report, there is nothing in Swedish legislation that
prevents individuals from using or adopting Sami family names or surnames.
Please refer to the previous report for additional information on the
provisions of the Names Act (1982:670) regarding how surnames are
acquired.
Article 11 – Media
Article 11.1.a.iii –broadcasting licenses for public service companies
Public service companies have an important responsibility to consider the
needs of, among others, the national minorities. Sveriges Radio AB (SR),
Sveriges Television AB (SVT) and Sveriges Utbildningsradio AB (UR) have
been issued new broadcasting licenses for the period 2010–2013. The same
guidelines apply as per the previous license period in terms of linguistic and
ethnic minorities. This means that public service companies shall consider
the interests of linguistic and ethnic minorities. These activities should be
prioritised and access should be improved. The minority languages Sami,
Finnish, Meänkieli and Romani Chib should hold a unique position.
Furthermore, the public service companies should communicate with the
relevant groups.
Within the framework of the general terms of the broadcasting licenses, the
public service companies design their programme offerings independently.
SVT broadcasted a total of 106 hours of Sami programmes in 2009, including
the news programme Ođđasat. In 2009 SR broadcasted a total of 9582 hours
of Sami programmes on FM frequency and on web radio. SR Sameradion
62

(Sami radio) broadcasts programmes in North, South and Lule Sami as well
as in Swedish. UR has broadcast Sami TV programmes in 2009.
SVT broadcasts news, society-oriented programmes, children’s programmes,
documentaries, etc. in Finnish. In 2009 a total of 183 hours of programmes
were broadcast in Finnish on SVT. SR Sisuradio broadcast a total of 13 824
hours in Finnish in 2009. UR has broadcast Finnish programmes both on TV
and radio in 2009.
In 2009 SVT broadcast a total of 12 hours of programmes in Meänkieli.
In 2009 SR broadcast 1048 hours in Meänkieli.
180. Provide information on Sisuradio’s role in broadcasting in Finnish.
Sisuradio is an internal body of SR, and one which the government does not
interfere in.
249. State which measures have been adopted by the Swedish authorities to
resolve the issues which have been highlighted by Meänkieli speakers, for
example, the limited broadcasting time and the fact that the programmes in
Meänkieli cannot be produced by an editing department which is independent of
the Finnish department.
This is an internal issue for SR which the government does not manage indepth.
Article 11.1.c.i – Encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at least
one TV channel in the regional or minority languages (only applies to
Finnish)
Funds have been allocated in the government budget since the end of the
1980s so as to allow for the broadcasting of Finnish channels in parts of the
Swedish terrestrial network. In conjunction with the complete transition of
broadcasts in the terrestrial network to digital technology at the start of
2007, the broadcast area for the Finnish channel was extended. The National
Association of Finns allocates the state grants and concludes agreements for
distribution and copyright clearance of the channels. TV Finland is now
broadcast in the entire Mälardalen region, including Stockholm, Västerås and
Uppsala, as a free channel in the terrestrial network. An agreement between
the largest cable operator in the area, ComHem, and the National
Association of Finns has ensured that the channel can be accessed easily on
the cable network in the same area.
Article 11.1.d –Encouragement and/or facilitation of production and
distribution

63

124/186/252. State which measures have been taken to encourage and/or
facilitate production and distribution of audio and audio-visual works in
Sami/Finnish/Meänkieli.
See under Article 11.1.a.iii above.
Article 11.1.e.i –Encourage and/or facilitate conditions for
newspapers
127. (box) State which concrete measures have been taken to encourage and/or
facilitate the establishment of a newspaper in Sami.
255. (box) State which measures have been taken to encourage and/or facilitate
the establishment of a newspaper in Meänkieli.
There is at present no Sami newspaper in Sweden. However, parts of the
journal Samefolket, ten editions of which are published annually, are in Sami.
There is at present no Meänkieli newspaper in Sweden. However, parts of
the journal MET-avisi, which is distributed with the newspaper
Haparandabladet once monthly, are in Meänkieli.
As the Committee of Experts noted in its second report, there are two papers in
Sweden with Finnish content, namely Ruotsin Suomalainen, which is
published once a week and Haparandabladet, which is published three times
a week.
The terms and conditions governing public press subsidies include special
rules on the allocation of funds to newspapers that address minorities in
their own languages. In December 2008 the government decided on
amendments to the press subsidies which are based on proposals which
Presskommittén (the Swedish Press Committee) of 2004 submitted in
January 2006 in the report Diversity and Scope (Official Government
Report 2006:8). One of the amendments constitutes that the limit for a
newspaper subscription to be granted financial support was decreased from
2000 to 1500 copies, an important step which facilitates the establishment of
newspapers in minority languages.
On 2 June 2010, the Riksdag decided on the new terms and conditions for
aid to the daily press in view of the government bill Nya villkor för stödet
till dagspressen [New terms and conditions for aid to the daily press](bill
2009/10:199). In the bill, the government has established that an initiative
should be taken for cooperation with the relevant authorities and
stakeholders in Finland and Norway in order to facilitate the publication of
transnational newspapers in Meänkieli and Sami. Such collaboration may
include an investigation into the prerequisites for transnational newspaper
cooperation in the current languages.
64

The Swedish Press Committee of 2004 has also proposed that a specific
provision be introduced in the Press Subsidies Act to facilitate the
publication of newspapers in Sami and Meänkieli. However, similar to the
representatives of the relevant language groups, in the bill 2009/10:199 the
government has made the assessment that it is unclear whether the proposal
will lead to the establishment of new newspapers, and is thus of the opinion
that the proposal should not be carried through.
Article 11.1.f.ii – Financial support to TV programmes in Sami
192. State how or whether Finnish is considered in the existing measures for
financial support to audio-visual productions.
257. Provide examples of financial support for the production of TV
programmes in Meänkieli.
No special government support for the production of TV programmes,
regardless of language, has been given.
Article 11.2 – Right to reception of radio and TV broadcasts from
other countries
There are no restrictions, either on the freedom of direct reception of
radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a
language used in identical or similar form to a regional or minority
language, or on the rebroadcasting of radio and television programmes
from neighbouring countries in such a language.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Article 12.1.a –Encouragement of cultural activities
The five national minorities in Sweden receive subsidies to strengthen and
promote their structures. There is a specific reference group for assessing the
applications received.
Support has, inter alia, been allocated to Finnish speaking theatre activities,
including a new Finnish Theatre (Uusi teatteri/Nya finska teatern),
Stiftelsen Finlands kulturinstitut (the Foundation Finland’s Culture
Institute), the Swedish-Finnish library in Stockholm and the National
Association of Finns, which have been granted funds for Finnish amateur
activities, as well as Västmanlands Finska Kulturarrangörsförening
(Västmanland’s Finnish Culture Organiser’s Association) and the Jewish
Library in Stockholm. The Swedish Arts Council has, in general, continued
to prioritise support for the two Roma cultural centres located in Stockholm
and Malmö respectively, as well as approximately twenty projects of a more
65

independent nature. In addition to the specific grants for the promotion of
the national minority languages and culture, as in previous years support was
provided for issuing literature and the production of cultural journals. In
2009 a total of SEK 7.8 million was provided as support for activities
concerning the national minorities.
Between 2008-2010 the Swedish Arts Council has an extended commission
to strengthen international and intercultural perspective within the cultural
sector. In terms of the allocation of subsidies, the Swedish Arts Council
prioritises applications which contribute towards increasing cultural
diversity in a qualitative manner. The Swedish Arts Council has supported
the long-term strategic development work aimed at increasing cultural
diversity, and grants subsidies for specific measures which relate to the
development and increased participation of the audience, and the
presentation of artistic expression outside the traditional arenas. The
Tornedal Theatre is an active amateur theatre that performs plays in
Meänkieli and Swedish. Since the financial year of 2002, the Tornedal
Theatre has received financial support from the Swedish Arts Council every
year, and in 2009 this amounted to SEK 2 million in aid.
The Sami Parliament decides on the distribution of state subsidies to the
Sami culture and Sami organisations in accordance with the provisions in the
Sami Parliament Act (1992:1433) and the cultural policies action
programme. The subsidies are intended as general support for the Sami and
the Sami organisations, for Sami research and/or research education, Sami
media, Sami activities relating to theatre and handicraft, library operations
and Sami farms, as well as for project grants for cultural purposes.
The Swedish Institute for Language and Folklore (SOFI) annually arranges
regular seminars Språkrådsdagen (Language Advisory Services Day) and
Språkpolitikens dag (Language Policies Day) and participates in the
celebration of Märkesåret 1809 (1809 Memorable Year) by means of specific
websites, both in Swedish and Finnish, seminars on the language links
between Sweden and Finland and about Sweden and Finland – languages and
society in the past and present. SOFI collaborates with the Sami Parliament
on reviews of Sami place names and has even trained municipal
administrators who deal with issues concerning place names. In 2008, among
other things, a review of the place names in Meänkieli was conducted; refer
to article 10.2.g. above. The Swedish Institute for Language and Folklore
holds meetings with the reference groups for Meänkieli, communicates with
organisations and the public on revitalisation issues and language
conservation, provides specific information about Meänkieli on the website
and conducts quality assurance of the collections and register. Under the
authority of the Ministry of Integration and Gender Equality, the Institute
has carried out an investigation on the situation for Meänkieli in Sweden and
has made proposals which the authority considers would strengthen the
preservation and development of Meänkieli, partly in order to serve as
66

reference material for language conservation corpus work and partly to
monitor the varieties, fluctuations and characteristics of the development, as
well as providing a foundation for the standardisation work.
SOFI, which includes the Language Council, has language consultants for
Finnish, Romani Chib and Swedish sign language, Meänkieli speaking
personnel and language consultants in Meänkieli, as well as research
archivists specialising in Meänkieli and the culture of Tornedalen and Sami
cultural manifestations.
The activities in Romani Chib cover language advisory services,
communication with mother tongue teachers and representatives of the
various Romani Chib varieties, by way of, among other things, holding
regular meetings with reference groups for Romani Chib and devising
glossaries which are gradually added to the authority’s website.
The work with supplementing the stock of books in the department in
Umeå with literature on Meänkieli and the culture of Tornedalen has
continued. In 2009 measures were taken for the excerption of words and
expressions in Meänkieli, as well as collection of literature in Meänkieli and
expressions of the culture of Tornedalen. Extensive communication
networking work with municipalities and organisations, primarily in the five
municipalities of Tornedalen - Haparanda, Övertorneå, Pajala, Kiruna and
Gällivare - Svenska Tornedalingars Riksförbund Tornionlaaksolaiset, STR-T
(the Swedish association for Tornedalers) and Meän Akateemi -Academia
Tornedaliensis - is ongoing.
Article 12.1.b – Foster access in other languages to works produced in
regional or minority languages
260. Provide information about activities, other than support for publications,
which are relevant within this obligation, such as dubbing, post-synchronisation
and block writing (Meänkieli).
As mentioned earlier, public service companies have an important
responsibility to consider the needs of the national minorities. The section
pertaining to Article 11.1.a.iii reveals how many hours of programmes were
broadcast in Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli in 2009. However, the companies
do not report in detail about whether the programmes have been broadcast
in the original language or whether they have been dubbed to the current
language.
The Swedish Film Institute provides support for interpretation for the
visually impaired and block writing for films produced in Sweden in the
Swedish language for cinemas and DVDs. The Swedish language also covers
the national minority languages Sami, Finnish, Meänkieli, Romani Chib and
Yiddish. Furthermore, the Swedish Film Institute provides support for the
67

launch of imported quality films, which includes block writing to Swedish
or, in the case of children’s films, dubbing.
Article 12.1.c –Foster access in regional or minority languages to works
produced in other languages
Refer to the previous report in this regard.
Article 12.1.d –Allowance for incorporating knowledge and use of
regional or minority languages and cultures in productions
Refer to the previous report in this regard.
Article 12.1.e – Staff who have a full command of the regional or
minority languages concerned
Refer to the previous report in this regard.
Article 12.1.f –Participation of regional or minority language speakers
Refer to the previous report in this regard.
Article 12.1.g –Archives
Refer to the previous report in this regard.
195. State whether the Swedish authorities have provided the Swedish-Finns
archives with sufficient financial support to allow them to carry out their
assignments.
Sweden-Finns have had their own archive, the Sweden-Finns Archive
(Sverigefinländarnas arkiv) for several years. The Archive, which has
been in existence since 1977 and has its own premises and depositories at
the National Archives, receives financial support every year from the
National Archives’ Private Archives Committee. In 2010 the support
amounted to SEK 250 000.
Swedish public libraries have extensive collections of Finnish literature.
264. Provide information on how the work at the centre for Meänkieli at the
North Scandinavian Library (Nordkalottbiblioteket) is progressing.
The collection of literature published in Meänkieli is kept at the National
Library of Sweden. Furthermore, books in Meänkieli are also available in the
current area for Meänkieli and the collection at the Swedish Institute for
Language and Folklore is important for the national minority languages.
Support from the Swedish Arts Council to the North Scandinavian Library
68

(Nordkalottbiblioteket) in Övertorneå is disbursed annually to aid in
developing a centre for Meänkieli containing both archives and printed
material.
Article 12.1.h –Language conservation
Refer to the previous report in this regard.
Article 12.2 –Cultural activities outside the administrative areas
Refer to the previous report in this regard.
Article 13 – Economic and social life
Refer to the previous report in this regard.
Article 14 – Transfrontier exchange
Refer to the previous report in this regard.

69

APPENDICES
Appendix 1 – Ratified Articles in the Charter
Sweden has ratified the following articles in part III of the Charter for Regional and Minority Languages
concerning the following languages
Sami

Finnish

Meänkieli

8.1.a.iii)

8.1.a.iii)

8.1.a.iii)

8.1.b.iv)

8.1.b.iv)

8.1.b.iv)

8.1.c.iv)

8.1.c.iv)

8.1.c.iv)

8.1.d.iv)

8.1.d.iv)

8.1.d.iv)

8.1.e.iii)

8.1.e.iii)

8.1.e.iii)

8.1.f.iii)

8.1.f.iii)

8.1.f.iii)

8.1.g

8.1.g

8.1.g

8.1.h

8.1.h

8.1.h

8.1.i

8.1.i

8.1.i

8.2

8.2

8.2

9.1.a.ii)

9.1.a.ii)

9.1.a.ii)

9.1a.iii)

9.1.a.iii)

9.1.a.iii)

9.1.a.iv)

9.1.a.iv)

9.1.a.iv)

9.1.b.ii)

9.1.b.ii)

9.1.b.ii)

9.1.b.iii)

9.1.b.iii)

9.1.b.iii)

9.1.c.ii)

9.1.c.ii)

9.1.c.ii)

9.1.c.iii)

9.1.c.iii)

9.1.c.iii)

9.1.d

9.1.d

9.1.d

9.2

9.2

9.2

9.3

9.3

9.3

10.1.a.iii)

10.1.a.iii)

10.1.a.iii)

10.1.a.v

10.1.a.v)

10.1.a.v)

10.1.c

10.1.c

10.1.c

10.2.b

10.2.b

10.2.b

10.2.c

10.2.c

10.2.c

10.2.d

10.2.d

10.2.d

10.2.g

10.2.g

10.2.g

10.4.a

10.4.a

10.4.a

10.5

10.5

10.5

11.1.a.iii)

11.1.a.iii)

1.1.a.iii)

education

judicial authorities

administrative authorities and public service

media

11.1.c.i)
11.1.d

11.1.d

11.1.d

11.1.e.i)

11.1.e.i)

11.1.e.i)

11.1.f.ii)

11.1.f.ii)

11.1.f.ii)

11.2

11.2

11.2

12.1.a

12.1.a

12.1.a

12.1.b

12.1.b

12.1.b

cultural activities and facilities

70

12.1.c

12.1.c

12.1.d

12.1.d

12.1.d

12.1.f

12.1.f

12.1.f

12.1.g

12.1.g

12.1.g

12.1.h

12.1.h

12.2

12.2

12.2

13.1.a

13.1.a

13.1.a

economic and social life

14.a

14.a

14.a

transfrontier exchange

14.b

14.b

14.b

12.1.e

71

Appendix 2 – National Legislation
This appendix contains excerpts from legislation which is mentioned in this
report and has not been addressed in the previous three reports.

Act (2009:724) on National Minorities and National Minority
Languages
General provisions
Section 1 /Ceases to apply: 1 July 2011/
This Act contains provisions on national minorities, national minority
languages, administrative areas and the right to use minority languages in
administrative authorities and courts, as well as provisions on certain
obligations within pre-school activities and elderly care. The Act also
contains provisions regarding the following-up of the application of the Act.
Section 1 /Enters into force: 1 July 2011/
This Act contains provisions on national minorities, national minority
languages, administrative areas and the right to use minority languages in
administrative authorities and courts, and provisions on certain obligations
within pre-schools such as the pedagogical operations referred to in Chapter
25 of the Education Act (2010:800) which supplement, or are offered instead
of, pre-school or elderly care. The Act also contains provisions regarding the
following-up of the application of the Act. Act (2010:865).
Section 2
National minorities, according to Sweden’s undertaking within the Council
of Europe’s Framework Convention for the Protection of National
Minorities (SÖ 2000:2) and the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages (SÖ 2000:3), are Jews, Roma, Sami, Sweden Finns and
Tornedalers.
In the Language Act (2009:600), it is stated that the national minority
languages are Finnish, Yiddish, Meänkieli, Romani Chib and Sami.
Section 3
When needed, administrative authorities shall, in a suitable manner, inform
the national minorities about their rights according to this Act.
Section 4
In the Language Act (2009:600), it is stated that public institutions has a
special responsibility for protecting and promoting the national minority
languages.

72

Public institutions shall also otherwise promote the national minorities’
possibilities of maintaining and developing their cultures in Sweden.
Particular attention shall be given to promoting opportunities for children to
develop their cultural identity and the use of their own minority language.
Section 5
Administrative authorities shall give the national minorities the opportunity
to influence matters which concern them and shall, as far as is possible,
consult with representatives for the minorities in such matters.
Administrative areas
Section 6
The administrative area for Finnish includes the municipalities of Botkyrka,
Eskilstuna, Gällivare, Hallstahammar, Haninge, Haparanda, Huddinge,
Håbo, Kiruna, Köping, Pajala, Sigtuna, Solna, Stockholm, Södertälje, Tierp,
Upplands Väsby, Upplands-Bro, Uppsala, Älvkarleby, Österåker,
Östhammar and Övertorneå.
The administrative area for Meänkeli includes the municipalities of Gällivare,
Haparanda, Kiruna, Pajala, and Övertorneå.
The administrative area for Sami includes the municipalities of Arjeplog,
Arvidsjaur, Berg, Gällivare, Härjedalen, Jokkmokk, Kiruna, Lycksele, Malå,
Sorsele, Storuman, Strömsund, Umeå, Vilhelmina, Åre, Älvdalen and
Östersund.
Section 7
Other municipalities than those indicated in section 6 can after application
be included in the administrative areas for Finnish, Meänkieli or Sami. The
decision that a municipality shall be included in an administrative area is
made by the government. The government may issue regulations concerning
such a voluntary inclusion in an administrative area.
The right to use Finnish, Meänkieli and Sami in contacts with authorities
Section 8
A person shall have the right to use Finnish, Meänkieli or the Sami language
in oral and written dealings with an administrative authority the geographical
sphere of activity of which coincides completely or partly with the
administrative area of the minority language. This applies in matters in which
the individual is a party or the representative of a party, if the matter is
related to the administrative area.
If a person uses Finnish, Meänkieli or the Sami language in such a matter, the
authority is obliged to give an oral answer in the same language. In addition,
a person who lacks legal assistance shall have the right, on request, to receive
73

a written translation into Finnish, Meänkieli or the Sami language of the
decision and rationale for the decision in the matter.
The authority shall otherwise also strive to use in these languages when
dealing with such a person.
Section 9
Outside an administrative area, an individual person shall have the right to
use Finnish, Meänkieli or the Sami language in oral and written contacts in
the matters at the administrative authority of which the individual is a party
or the representative of a party, if the matter can be handled by staff who are
proficient in the minority language.
Section 10
An individual always has the right to use Finnish or Sami in written dealings
with a Parliamentary Ombudsman. The same applies to any written contact
which an individual may have with the Chancellor of Justice, the Social
Insurance Office, the Swedish National Tax Board or the Discrimination
Ombudsman in matters in which the individual is a party or the
representative of a party.
Section 11
The administrative authorities shall strive to ensure that there is access to
staff with a knowledge of Finnish, Meänkieli or Sami, where this is necessary
in contacts of individuals with the authority.
Section 12
The administrative authorities may establish special times and a special place
for receiving visits of individuals who speak Finnish, Meänkieli or Sami, and
may also have special telephone hours.
The right to use Finnish, Meänkieli or Sami in courts
Section 13 /Ceases to apply: 2 May 2011/
A person who is a party or the representative of a party in a case or matter at
an Administrative Court, District Court, Property Court, Environmental
Court or Maritime Court with a legal jurisdiction which completely or partly
coincides with the municipalities of Gällivare, Haparanda, Kiruna, Pajala, and
Övertorneå, has the right to use Finnish or Meänkieli in the administration
of the case or matter, if the case or matter has a connection to any of these
municipalities. The same applies with regard to Sami at any such Court of
Law with a jurisdiction which completely or partly coincides with the
municipalities of Arjeplog, Gällivare, Jokkmokk or Kiruna, if the case or
matter has a connection to any of these municipalities.

74

The right to use Finnish, Meänkieli or Sami also includes the Court which
hears an appeal against a judgment or a decision in a case or matter referred
to in the first paragraph. Act (2009:857).
Section 13 /Enters into force: 2 May 2011/
A person who is a party or the representative of a party in a case or matter at
an Administrative Court, District Court, Environmental and Land Court or
Maritime Court with a legal jurisdiction which completely or partly
coincides with the municipalities of Gällivare, Haparanda, Kiruna, Pajala, and
Övertorneå, has the right to use Finnish or Meänkieli in the administration
of the case or matter, if the case or matter has a connection to any of these
municipalities. The same applies with regard to Sami at any such Court of
Law with a jurisdiction which completely or partly coincides with the
municipalities of Arjeplog, Gällivare, Jokkmokk or Kiruna, if the case or
matter has a connection to any of these municipalities.
The right to use Finnish, Meänkieli or Sami also includes the Court which
hears an appeal against a judgment or a decision in a case or matter referred
to in the first paragraph. Act (2010:943).
Section 14
The right to use Finnish, Meänkieli or Sami in cases or matters in the Courts
of Law indicated in section 13 also includes the right to submit documents
and written evidence in these languages, the right to have documents which
belong to the case or matter orally translated to this language, and the right
to speak this language in an oral hearing before the court. The court shall
translate documents and written argumentation into Swedish, unless this is
obviously unnecessary.
The Court shall also otherwise strive to use the minority language in its
contacts with the parties or their representatives.
In all cases and matters which are covered by the right to use Finnish,
Meänkieli or the Sami language in the Courts of Law indicated in section 13,
the party or representative of a party who lacks legal assistance shall have the
right, on request, to have the judgment and court findings or decision and
decision motivation translated in writing to the appropriate language.
Section 15
A person who wishes to use Finnish, Meänkieli or the Sami language in the
handling of a case or a matter at a Court of Law indicated in section 13 shall
request this when the case or the matter is started or on the first occasion
when the party is to make a statement in the matter.
The request to receive a translation in accordance with section 14 third
paragraph shall be brought forward within one week from the day when the

75

judgment or decision was pronounced, if such a request has not been made
earlier in the handling of the case or matter.
If the request to use a minority language or to receive a translation is
brought forward later than is indicated in the first and second paragraphs, it
may be rejected. Such a request may also be rejected if it is obvious that it
has an improper purpose.
Section 16
If a party or the representative of a party has the right to use Finnish,
Meänkieli or Sami in a trial, an interpreter shall be appointed in accordance
with the provisions in Chapter 5 sections 6-8 and Chapter 33 section 9 of
the Code of Judicial Procedure and sections 50-52 of the Administrative
Court Procedure Act (1971:291).
Finnish, Meänkieli and Sami pre-school activities and the care of the
elderly /The heading ceases to apply: 1 July 2011/
Section 17 /Ceases to apply: 1 July 2011/
When a municipal authority in an administrative region offers a place in the
pre-school activity in accordance with Chapter 2 a sections 1 and 7 of the
School Act (1985:1100), the municipal authority shall offer a child whose
parents or guardians so request a place in the pre-school activity where the
whole or a part of the activity is carried out in Finnish, Meänkieli or Sami as
appropriate.
Finnish, Meänkieli and Sami in pre-schools, certain other pedagogical
activities and elderly care /The heading enters into force: 1 July 2011/
Section 17 /Enters into force: 1 July 2011/
When a municipal authority in an administrative area offers a place in the
pre-school or such pedagogical operations which are referred to in Chapter
25 of the Education Act (2010:800) which supplement or are offered instead
of pre-school, the municipal authority shall offer a child whose parents or
guardians so request a place in the pre-school activity where the whole or a
part of the activity is carried out in Finnish, Meänkieli or Sami as
appropriate. Act (2010:865).
Section 18
The municipal authority shall offer a person who so requests the possibility
of receiving the whole or a part of the service and care which is offered
within the framework of the care of the elderly by staff who have a
command of Finnish, Meänkieli or Sami. The same applies for municipalities
outside an administrative area if the municipal authority have access to staff
who are proficient in the language as appropriate.
Exceptions
76

Section 19
If there are special reasons, the government may issue provisions that an
authority under the jurisdiction of the government may be exempted from
the application of section 8. The same applies after the government’s
authorization for the County Council and Municipal Authority with respect
to the municipal authorities.
Follow-up etc
Section 20
The administrative authorities’ application of this act shall be followed up.
The government shall issue ordinances regarding the authority(ies)
responsible for the follow-up. This follow-up responsibility implies no
restriction in the supervisory responsibility which may rest with other
authorities.
Section 21
In addition, an authority with a follow-up responsibility shall, through an
advisory service, information and similar activities, assist other
administrative authorities in the application of the Act.
–––––––––––––––––
Enters into force on 1 January 2010

Language Act (2009:600)
Contents and purpose of the Act
Section 1
This Act contains provisions on the Swedish language, the national minority
languages and Swedish sign language. The Act also contains provisions on
the responsibility of the public sector to ensure that the individual is given
access to language and on the use of language in the public sector and in
international contexts.
Section 2
The purpose of the Act is to specify the position and usage of the Swedish
language and other languages in Swedish society. The Act is also intended to
protect the Swedish language and language diversity in Sweden, and the
individual’s access to language.
Section 3
If another act or ordinance contains a provision that diverges from this Act,
that provision applies.

77

The Swedish language
Section 4
Swedish is the principal language in Sweden.
Section 5
As principal language, Swedish is the common language in society that
everyone resident in Sweden is to have access to and that is to be usable in all
areas of society.
Section 6
The public sector has a particular responsibility for the use and development
of Swedish.
The national minority languages
Section 7
The national minority languages are Finnish, Yiddish, Meänkieli, Romani
Chib and Sami.
Section 8
The public sector has a particular responsibility to protect and promote the
national minority languages.
Swedish sign language
Section 9
The public sector has a particular responsibility to protect and promote
Swedish sign language.
The use of language in the public sector
Section 10
The language of the courts, administrative authorities and other bodies that
perform tasks in the public sector is Swedish.
Other legislation contains provisions on the right to use national minority
languages and other Nordic languages.
There are separate provisions concerning the obligation of courts and
administrative authorities to use interpreters and to translate documents.
Section 11
The language of the public sector is to be cultivated, simple and
comprehensible.
Section 12
78

Government agencies have a special responsibility for ensuring that Swedish
terminology in their various areas of expertise is accessible, and that it is
used and developed.
Swedish in international contexts
Section 13
Swedish is the official language of Sweden in international contexts.
The status of Swedish as an official EU language is to be safeguarded.
Individuals’ access to language
Section 14
All residents of Sweden are to be given the opportunity to learn, develop and
use Swedish. In addition
1. persons belonging to a national minority are to be given the opportunity
to learn, develop and use the minority language, and
2. persons who are deaf or hard of hearing, and persons who, for other
reasons, require sign language, are to be given the opportunity to learn,
develop and use Swedish sign language.
Persons whose mother tongue is not one of the languages specified in the
first paragraph are to be given the opportunity to develop and use their
mother tongue.
Section 15
The public sector is responsible for ensuring that the individual is given
access to language in accordance with Section 14.
________________
Enters into force on 1 July 2009.

Discrimination Act (2008:567)
Chapter 1. Introductory provisions
The purpose of the Act
Section 1
The purpose of this Act is to combat discrimination and in other ways
promote equal rights and opportunities regardless of sex, transgender
identity or expression, ethnicity, religion or other belief, disability, sexual
orientation or age.
The contents of the Act

79

Section 2
The first chapter of the Act contains definitions and other introductory
provisions. The second chapter contains provisions on prohibitions against
discrimination and reprisals. The third chapter contains provisions on active
measures. The fourth chapter contains provisions on supervision. The fifth
chapter contains provisions on compensation and invalidity. The sixth
chapter contains provisions on legal proceedings.
The Act is binding
Section 3
A contract or agreement that restricts someone’s rights or obligations under
this Act is of no legal effect in that regard.
Discrimination
Section 4
In this Act discrimination has the meaning set out in this Section.
1. Direct discrimination: that someone is disadvantaged by being treated less
favourably than someone else is treated, has been treated or would have been
treated in a comparable situation, if this disadvantaging is associated with
sex, transgender identity or expression, ethnicity, religion or other belief,
disability, sexual orientation or age.
2. Indirect discrimination: that someone is disadvantaged by the application
of a provision, a criterion or a procedure that appears neutral but that may
put people of a certain sex, a certain transgender identity or expression, a
certain ethnicity, a certain religion or other belief, a certain disability, a
certain sexual orientation or a certain age at a particular disadvantage, unless
the provision, criterion or procedure has a legitimate purpose and the means
that are used are appropriate and necessary to achieve that purpose.
3. Harassment: conduct that violates a person’s dignity and that is associated
with one of the grounds of discrimination sex, transgender identity or
expression, ethnicity, religion or other belief, disability, sexual orientation or
age.
4. Sexual harassment: conduct of a sexual nature that violates someone’s
dignity.
5. Instructions to discriminate: orders or instructions to discriminate against
someone in a manner referred to in points 1–4 that are given to someone
who is in a subordinate or dependent position relative to the person who
gives the orders or instructions or to someone who has committed herself or
himself to performing an assignment for that person.
Sex, transgender identity or expression, ethnicity, disability, sexual
orientation and age
Section 5
In this Act the following terms have the meaning set out in this Section.
80

1. Sex: that someone is a woman or a man.
2. Transgender identity or expression: that someone does not identify
herself or himself as a woman or a man or expresses by their manner of
dressing or in some other way that they belong to another sex.
3. Ethnicity: national or ethnic origin, skin colour or other similar
circumstance.
4. Disability: permanent physical, mental or intellectual limitation of a
person’s functional capacity that as a consequence of injury or illness existed
at birth, has arisen since then or can be expected to arise.
5. Sexual orientation: homosexual, bisexual or heterosexual orientation.
6. Age: length of life to date.
A person who intends to change or has changed the sex they belong to is
also covered by sex as a grounds of discrimination.
Chapter 2. Prohibition of discrimination and reprisals
Working life
Prohibition of discrimination
Section 1
An employer may not discriminate against a person who, with respect to the
employer,
1. is an employee,
2. is enquiring about or applying for work,
3. is applying for or carrying out a traineeship, or
4. is available to perform work or is performing work as temporary or
borrowed labour.
The prohibition of discrimination also applies in cases where the employer,
by taking reasonable support and adaptation measures, can see to it that an
employee, a job applicant or a trainee with a disability is put in a comparable
situation to people without such a disability.
A person who has the right to make decisions on the employer’s behalf in
matters concerning someone referred to in the first paragraph shall be
equated with the employer.
Section 2
The prohibition in Section 1 does not prevent
1. differential treatment based on a characteristic associated with one of the
grounds of discrimination if, when a decision is made on employment,
promotion or education or training for promotion, by reason of the nature
of the work or the context in which the work is carried out, the
characteristic constitutes a genuine and determining occupational

81

requirement that has a legitimate purpose and the requirement is appropriate
and necessary to achieve that purpose,
2. measures that contribute to efforts to promote equality between women
and men and that concern matters other than pay or other terms of
employment,
3. the application of age limits with regard to the right to pension, survivor’s
or invalidity benefits in individual contracts or collective agreements, or
4. differential treatment on grounds of age, if there is a legitimate purpose
and the means that are used are appropriate and necessary to achieve that
purpose.
Obligation to investigate and take measures against harassment
Section 3
If an employer becomes aware that an employee considers that he or she has
been subjected in connection with work to harassment or sexual harassment
by someone performing work or carrying out a traineeship at the employer’s
establishment, the employer is obliged to investigate the circumstances
surrounding the alleged harassment and where appropriate take the measures
that can reasonably be demanded to prevent harassment in the future.
This obligation also applies with respect to a person carrying out a
traineeship or performing work as temporary or borrowed labour.
Information about qualifications
Section 4
If a job applicant has not been employed or selected for an employment
interview, or if an employee has not been promoted or selected for education
or training for promotion, the applicant shall, upon request, receive written
information from the employer about the education, professional experience
and other qualifications that the person had who was selected for the
employment interview or who obtained the job or the place in education or
training.
Education
Prohibition of discrimination
Section 5/ Ceases to apply 1 July 2011/
A natural or legal person conducting activities referred to in the Education
Act (1985:1100) or other educational activities (an education provider) may
not discriminate against any child, pupil or student participating in or
applying for the activities. Employees and contractors engaged in the
activities shall be equated with the education provider when they are acting
within the context of their employment or contract.

82

The prohibition of discrimination also applies in cases where an education
provider, by taking reasonable measures regarding the accessibility and
usability of the premises, can see to it that a person with a disability who is
applying or has been accepted for education under the Higher Education Act
(1992:1434) or for education that can lead to a qualification under the Act
concerning authority to award certain qualifications (1993:792), is put in a
comparable situation to people without such a disability.
Section 5 /Enters into force: 1 July 2011/
A natural or legal person conducting activities referred to in the Education
Act (2010:800) or other educational activities (an education provider) may
not discriminate against any child, pupil or student participating in or
applying for the activities. Employees and contractors engaged in the
activities shall be equated with the education provider when they are acting
within the context of their employment or contract.
The prohibition of discrimination also applies in cases where an education
provider, by taking reasonable measures regarding the accessibility and
usability of the premises, can see to it that a person with a disability who is
applying or has been accepted for education under the Higher Education Act
(1992:1434) or for education that can lead to a qualification under the Act
concerning authority to award certain qualifications (1993:792), is put in a
comparable situation to people without such a disability. (Act 2010:861).
Section 6 / Ceases to apply: 1 July 2011/
The prohibition in Section 5 does not prevent
1. measures that contribute to efforts to promote equality between women
and men in admissions to education other than that referred to in the
Education Act (1985:1100),
2. the application of provisions that take account of age with regard to preschool activities, school-age childcare, education in a pre-school class, the
compulsory school system or an independent school equivalent to
compulsory school, special needs school for pupils with learning disabilities
or special school for children with disabilities, or
3. differential treatment on grounds of age, if there is a legitimate purpose
and the means that are used are appropriate and necessary to achieve that
purpose.
Nor does the prohibition prevent a folk high school or a study association
from taking measures that contribute to efforts to promote equal rights and
opportunities regardless of ethnicity, religion or other belief.
Section 6 /Enters into force: 1 July 2011/
The prohibition in Section 5 does not prevent:
1. measures that contribute to efforts to promote equality between women
and men in admissions to education other than that referred to in the
Education Act (2010:800),
83

2. the application of provisions that take account of age with regard to preschool activities, education in a pre-school class, nine-year compulsory
school, compulsory education for pupils with learning disabilities, Sami
schools, special schools primarily for pupils with impaired hearing or leisuretime centre (for school children), or such pedagogical operations which are
referred to in Chapter 25 of the Education Act or,
3. differential treatment on grounds of age, if there is a legitimate purpose
and the means that are used are appropriate and necessary to achieve that
purpose.
Nor does the prohibition prevent a folk high school or a study association
from taking measures that contribute to efforts to promote equal rights and
opportunities regardless of ethnicity, religion or other belief. (Act
2010:861).
Obligation to investigate and take measures against harassment
Section 7
If an education provider becomes aware that a child, pupil or student
participating in or applying for the provider’s activities considers that he or
she has been subjected in connection with these activities to harassment or
sexual harassment, the education provider is obliged to investigate the
circumstances surrounding the alleged harassment and where appropriate
take the measures that can reasonably be demanded to prevent harassment in
the future.
Information about qualifications
Section 8
If an applicant has been refused admission to an educational programme, or
has not been selected for a test or interview if such a procedure is used in the
admissions process, the applicant shall, upon request, receive written
information from the education provider about the education or other
qualifications that the person had who was admitted to the educational
programme or who was selected for the test or interview.
Labour market policy activities and employment services not under
public contract
Section 9
Discrimination against applicants or employees is prohibited with regard to
labour market policy activities and employment services not under public
contract.
However, this prohibition does not prevent
1. measures that contribute to efforts to promote equality between women
and men or equal rights and opportunities regardless of ethnicity, or
84

2. differential treatment on grounds of age, if there is a legitimate purpose
and the means that are used are appropriate and necessary to achieve that
purpose.
Starting or running a business and professional recognition
Section 10
Discrimination is prohibited with regard to
1. financial support, permits, registration or similar arrangements that are
needed or can be important for someone to be able to start or run a business,
and
2. recognition, certification, authorisation, registration, approval or similar
arrangements that are needed or can be important for someone to be able to
exercise a certain profession.
These prohibitions do not prevent differential treatment on grounds of age,
if there is a legitimate purpose and the means that are used are appropriate
and necessary to achieve that purpose.
Nor does the prohibition in the first paragraph, point 1 prevent measures
concerning support that contributes to efforts to promote equality between
women and men or equal rights and opportunities regardless of ethnicity.
Membership of certain organisations
Section 11
Discrimination is prohibited with regard to
1. membership of or participation in an employees’ organisation, employers’
organisation or professional organisation, and
2. benefits that any such organisation provides to its members.
This prohibition does not prevent an organisation from providing benefits to
members of one sex so as to contribute to efforts to promote equality
between women and men.
Goods, services and housing etc.
Section 12
Discrimination is prohibited on the part of a natural or legal person who
1. supplies goods, services or housing to the general public, outside the
private and family sphere, or
2. organises a meeting or event that is open to the public.
A person who represents a person referred to in the first paragraph in
relation to the public, shall be equated with that person.

85

However, this prohibition does not apply to discrimination associated with
age. The prohibition of discrimination associated with sex does not apply to
the supplying of insurance services, nor does it prevent women and men
being treated differently with regard to other services or housing if there is a
legitimate purpose and the means that are used are appropriate and necessary
to achieve that purpose.
Health and medical care and social services etc.
Section 13
Discrimination is prohibited with regard to
1. health and medical care and other medical services, and
2. social services activities and support in the form of special transport
services and national special transport services and housing adaptation
allowances.
However, these prohibitions do not apply to discrimination associated with
age.
The prohibitions applying to health and medical care and other medical
services or social services activities do not prevent women and men being
treated differently if there is a legitimate purpose and the means that are
used are appropriate and necessary to achieve that purpose.
Social insurance system, unemployment insurance and financial aid for
studies
Section 14
Discrimination is prohibited with regard to
1. social insurance and related benefit systems,
2. unemployment insurance, and
3. state financial aid for studies.
However, these prohibitions do not apply to discrimination associated with
age.
With regard to social insurance and related benefit systems, the prohibition
of discrimination associated with sex does not prevent the application of
provisions concerning widow’s pension, wife’s supplement or payment of
child allowance.
National military service and civilian service /The heading ceases to apply:
1 July 2010/
National military service and civilian service and other equivalent military
training within the Swedish Armed Forces /The heading enters into force: 1
July 2010/

86

Prohibition of discrimination
Section 15 /Ceases to apply: 1 July 2011/
Discrimination is prohibited in connection with enrolment inspection,
admission tests or other examination of personal circumstances under the
National Total Defence Service Act (1994:1809) and in connection with
enlistment for and during the performance of national military service or
civilian service.
However, this prohibition does not apply to discrimination associated with
age.
Nor does the prohibition prevent the application of provisions concerning
1. the obligation for men only to report for enrolment inspection and
service, or that a person liable for national total defence service shall not be
called for enrolment inspection or called up for national military service or
civilian service if he or she refers to her or his membership of a certain
religious association, or
2. the opportunity for women to perform national military service or civilian
service provided in the Act concerning Opportunities for Women to
perform National Military Service or Civilian Service involving extended
Basic Training (1994:1810).
Section 15 /Enters into force: 1 July 2010/
Discrimination is prohibited
1. in connection with enrolment inspection or other examination of personal
circumstances under the National Total Defence Service Act (1994:1809)
and in connection with enlistment for and during the performance of
national military service or civilian service, and
2. in connection with admission test for and during the performance of other
equivalent military training within the Swedish Armed Forces.
However, this prohibition does not apply to discrimination associated with
age.
Nor does the prohibition prevent the application of provisions concerning
the obligation that a person liable for national total defence service shall not
be called for enrolment inspection or called up for national military service
or civilian service if he or she refers to his or her membership of a certain
religious association (Act 2010:464).
Obligation to investigate and take measures against harassment
Section 16/ Ceases to applu: 1 July 2011/

87

If a government agency or an organisation covered by the prohibition in
Section 15 becomes aware that a person liable for national total defence
service considers herself or himself to have been subjected in connection
with activities described in that Section to harassment or sexual harassment,
the government agency or organisation is obliged to investigate the
circumstances surrounding the alleged harassment and where appropriate
take the measures that can reasonably be demanded to prevent harassment in
the future.
However, the first paragraph does not apply to harassment associated with
age.
Obligation to investigate and take measures against harassment
Section 16 /Enters into force: 1 July 2010/
If a government agency or an organisation covered by the prohibition in
Section 15 becomes aware that a person applying for or participating in
training or other activities which are stated in the provision considers herself
or himself to have been subjected to harassment or sexual harassment, the
government agency or organisation is obliged to investigate the
circumstances surrounding the alleged harassment and where appropriate
take the measures that can reasonably be demanded to prevent harassment in
the future.
However, the first paragraph does not apply to harassment associated with
age. Act (2010:464).
Public employment
Section 17
Discrimination is also prohibited in cases other than those referred to in
Section 5 or Sections 9–15 when a person who is wholly or partly subject to
the Public Employment Act (1994:260)
1. assists the public by providing information, guidance, advice or other such
help, or
2. has other types of contacts with the public in the course of her or his
employment.
However, this prohibition does not apply to discrimination associated with
age.
Prohibition of reprisals
Section 18
An employer may not subject an employee to reprisals because the employee
has

88

1. reported or called attention to the fact that the employer has acted
contrary to this Act,
2. participated in an investigation under this Act, or
3. rejected or given in to harassment or sexual harassment on the part of the
employer.
The prohibition also applies in relation to a person who, with respect to the
employer,
1. is enquiring about or applying for work,
2. is applying for or carrying out a traineeship, or
3. is available to perform work or is performing work as temporary or
borrowed labour.
A person who has the right to make decisions on the employer’s behalf in
matters concerning someone referred to in the first or second paragraph
shall be equated with the employer.
Section 19
A person who is alleged to have acted contrary to the provisions of Chapter
2, Section 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 or 17 or Chapter 3, Section 15 or
16 may not subject an individual to reprisals because that individual has
1. reported or called attention to such actions,
2. participated in an investigation under this Act, or
3. rejected or given in to harassment or sexual harassment on the part of the
person who is alleged to have engaged in discrimination.
Chapter 3. Active measures
Working life
Cooperation between employers and employees
Section 1
Employers and employees are to cooperate on active measures to bring
about equal rights and opportunities in working life regardless of sex,
ethnicity, religion or other belief, and in particular to combat discrimination
in working life on such grounds.
Section 2
Employers and employees are in particular to endeavour to equalise and
prevent differences in pay and other terms of employment between women
and men who perform work which is to be regarded as equal or of equal
value. They are also to promote equal pay growth opportunities for women
and men.
Work is to be regarded as of equal value to other work if, on an overall
assessment of the requirements and nature of the work, it can be deemed to
89

be equal in value to the other work. The assessment of the requirements of
the work is to take into account criteria such as knowledge and skills,
responsibility and effort. In assessing the nature of the work, particular
account is to be taken of working conditions.
Goal-oriented work
Section 3
Within the framework of their activities, employers are to conduct goaloriented work to actively promote equal rights and opportunities in working
life regardless of sex, ethnicity, religion or other belief.
More detailed regulations on the obligations of employers are provided in
Sections 4–13.
Working conditions
Section 4
Employers are to implement such measures as can be required in view of
their resources and other circumstances to ensure that the working
conditions are suitable for all employees regardless of sex, ethnicity, religion
or other belief.
Section 5
Employers are to help enable both female and male employees to combine
employment and parenthood.
Section 6
Employers are to take measures to prevent and hinder any employee being
subjected to harassment or reprisals associated with sex, ethnicity, religion
or other belief, or to sexual harassment.
Recruitment
Section 7
Employers are to work to ensure that people have the opportunity to apply
for vacant positions regardless of sex, ethnicity, religion or other belief.
Section 8
Employers are to promote an equal distribution of women and men in
different types of work and in different employee categories, by means of
education and training, skills development and other appropriate measures.
Section 9
When the distribution of women and men is not more or less equal in a
certain type of work or in a certain employee category at a place of work, the
employer is to make a special effort when recruiting new employees to
90

attract applicants of the under-represented sex. The employer is to attempt
to see to it that the proportion of employees from the under-represented sex
gradually increases.
However, the first paragraph shall not be applicable if there are special
grounds not to take such measures or if the measures cannot reasonably be
required in view of the employer’s resources and other circumstances.
Matters of pay
Section 10
In order to discover, remedy and prevent unfair gender differences in pay
and other terms of employment, every three years the employer is to survey
and analyse
– provisions and practices regarding pay and other terms of employment that
are used at the employer’s establishment, and
– pay differences between women and men performing work that is to be
regarded as equal or of equal value.
The employer is to assess whether existing pay differences are directly or
indirectly associated with sex. The assessment is to refer in particular to
differences between
– women and men performing work that is to be regarded as equal, and
– groups of employees performing work that is or is generally considered to
be dominated by women and groups of employees performing work that is
to be regarded as of equal value to such work but is not or is not generally
considered to be dominated by women.
Section 11
Every three years employers are to draw up an action plan for equal pay in
which they report the results of the survey and analysis described in Section
10. The plan is to indicate the pay adjustments and other measures that need
to be taken to bring about equal pay for work that is to be regarded as equal
or of equal value. The plan is to contain a cost estimate and a time plan based
on the goal of implementing the necessary pay adjustments as soon as
possible and within three years at the latest.
A report on and evaluation of how the planned measures were implemented
is to be included in the next action plan.
The obligation to draw up an action plan for equal pay does not apply to
employers who employed fewer than 25 employees at the start of the latest
calendar year.
Section 12
Employers are to provide employees’ organisations with respect to which
they are bound by a collective agreement with the information needed for
91

the organisations to be able to cooperate in the survey, analysis and drawing
up of an action plan for equal pay.
If the information concerns data on pay or other circumstances that relate to
an individual employee, the rules on confidentiality and damages contained
in Sections 21, 22 and 56 of the Employment (Co-determination in the
Workplace) Act (1976:580) apply. In public sector activities, Chapter 14,
Sections 7, 9 and 10 of the Secrecy Act (1980:100) apply instead.
Gender equality plan
Section 13
Every three years employers are to draw up a plan for their gender equality
work. The plan is to contain an overview of the measures under Sections 4–9
that are needed at the place of work and an account of which of these
measures the employer intends to begin or implement during the coming
years.
The plan is also to contain a summary account of the action plan for equal
pay that the employer is required to draw up under Section 11.
An account of how the planned measures under the first paragraph have
been implemented is to be included in the next plan.
The obligation to draw up a gender equality plan does not apply to
employers who employed fewer than 25 employees at the start of the latest
calendar year.
Education
Goal-oriented work
Section 14 /Ceases to apply 1 July 2010/
An education provider conducting education or other activities under the
Education Act (1985:1100), education under the Higher Education Act
(1992:1434) or education that can lead to a qualification under the Act
concerning authority to award certain qualifications (1993:792) is to conduct
goal-oriented work within the framework of these activities to actively
promote equal rights and opportunities for the children, pupils or students
participating in or applying for the activities, regardless of sex, ethnicity,
religion or other belief, disability or sexual orientation.
More detailed regulations on the obligations of education providers are
provided in Sections 15 and 16.
Section 14 /Enters into force: 1 July2011/

92

An education provider conducting education or other activities under the
Education Act (2010:800), education under the Higher Education Act
(1992:1434) or education that can lead to a qualification under the Act
concerning authority to award certain qualifications (1993:792) is to conduct
goal-oriented work within the framework of these activities to actively
promote equal rights and opportunities for the children, pupils or students
participating in or applying for the activities, regardless of sex, ethnicity,
religion or other belief, disability or sexual orientation.
More detailed regulations on the obligations of education providers are
provided in Sections 15 and 16. (Act 2010:861)
Preventing and hindering harassment
Section 15
An education provider referred to in Section 14 is to take measures to
prevent and hinder any child, pupil or student who is participating in or
applying for their activities from being subjected to harassment associated
with sex, ethnicity, religion or other belief, disability or sexual orientation,
or to sexual harassment.
Equal treatment plan
Section 16
An education provider referred to in Section 14 is to draw up a plan each
year containing an overview of the measures needed to (1) promote equal
rights and opportunities for the children, pupils or students participating in
or applying for the activities, regardless of sex, ethnicity, religion or other
belief, disability or sexual orientation, and (2) prevent and hinder harassment
referred to in Section 15. The plan is to contain an account of which of these
measures the education provider intends to begin or implement during the
coming year.
An account of how the measures planned under the first paragraph have
been implemented is to be included in the next year’s plan.
Chapter 4. Supervision
The Equality Ombudsman
Duties of the Equality Ombudsman
Section 1
The Equality Ombudsman is to supervise compliance with this Act. The
Ombudsman is to try in the first instance to induce those to whom the Act
applies to comply with it voluntarily.

93

Provisions on the duties of the Ombudsman are also contained in the Act
concerning the Equality Ombudsman (2008:568).
Section 2
Chapter 6, Section 2 states that the Equality Ombudsman may bring a court
action on behalf of an individual who consents to this.
Obligation to provide information
Section 3
A natural or legal person who is subject to the prohibitions of discrimination
and reprisals, the obligation to investigate and take measures against
harassment or the provisions on active measures in this Act is obliged, at the
request of the Equality Ombudsman,
1. to provide information about circumstances in their activities that are of
importance for the supervision exercised by the Ombudsman,
2. to provide information about qualifications when the Ombudsman is
assisting in a request from an individual under Chapter 2, Section 4 or 8,
3. to give the Ombudsman access to workplaces and other premises where
the activities are conducted for the purpose of investigations that may be of
importance to the supervision exercised by the Ombudsman, and
4. to attend discussions with the Ombudsman.
The obligations specified in points 1–3 do not apply if there are special
grounds against their doing so in an individual case.
Financial penalty
Section 4
A natural or legal person who does not comply with a request under Section
3 may be ordered by the Equality Ombudsman to fulfil his or her obligation
subject to a financial penalty. A decision to order a financial penalty may be
appealed to the Board against Discrimination.
Section 5
A natural or legal person who does not fulfil his or her obligations
concerning active measures under Chapter 3, Section 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 15 or 16 may be ordered to fulfil them subject to a financial penalty.
Such orders are issued by the Board against Discrimination on application
from the Equality Ombudsman. They can also be directed towards the State
as an employer or as the entity responsible for educational activities.
If the Ombudsman has declared that he or she does not want to apply to the
Board for a financial penalty to be ordered, a central employees’ organisation
with respect to which the employer is bound by a collective agreement may
make an application concerning active measures in working life under
Chapter 3, Sections 4–13.
94

The application is to state the measures that should be required of the party
that the application concerns, the grounds referred to in support of the
application and what investigation has been made of the matter.
Prohibition against appeals
Section 6
No appeal may be made against decisions of the Equality Ombudsman under
this Act other than decisions under Section 4 concerning the ordering of
financial penalties.
Board against Discrimination
Duties of the Board
Section 7
The Board against Discrimination examines applications for financial
penalties under Section 5 and appeals against decisions concerning orders for
financial penalties under Section 4. In processing these cases, Sections 8–15
are to be applied.
Processing of an application for a financial penalty
Section 8
A natural or legal person who is the subject of an application for a financial
penalty shall be ordered to comment within a certain time on the application
and to supply the information concerning circumstances in their activities
that the Board against Discrimination needs for its examination.
When an employees’ organisation has made the application, the Equality
Ombudsman shall be given an opportunity to comment.
Section 9
The Board against Discrimination shall ensure that cases are adequately
investigated. When necessary, the Board shall arrange for additional
investigation. Superfluous investigation may be refused.
Section 10
Cases before the Board against Discrimination are decided after an oral
hearing, unless the Board considers such a hearing unnecessary.
Section 11
The Board against Discrimination shall call the party that has made the
application to the Board and the party that is the subject of the application
to a hearing. If necessary for the investigation, the Board may also call others
to the hearing.
95

The Board may order the party that the application concerns or that party’s
representative to attend in person, subject to a financial penalty.
Section 12
A case concerning the ordering of a financial penalty may be decided even if
the party that the application concerns does not comment on the case, does
not cooperate in the investigation or fails to attend an oral hearing.
If the Equality Ombudsman or the employees’ organisation that has made
the application for a financial penalty fails to attend a hearing, the application
for a financial penalty becomes void.
Section 13
In deciding a case concerning the ordering of a financial penalty, the Board
against Discrimination may instruct the party that the application concerns
to take measures other than those sought in the application, if these other
measures are not obviously more burdensome for the party.
In its decision the Board shall state how and by when the measures are to be
started or implemented.
The Board’s decision shall be in writing and shall be delivered to the party
that the application concerns.
Processing of an appeal against a decision to order a financial penalty
Section 14
In processing an appeal against a decision to order a financial penalty,
Sections 9 and 10 shall be applied.
Section 15
The Board against Discrimination shall call the party that has appealed
against the decision to order a financial penalty and the Equality
Ombudsman to a hearing. If necessary for the investigation, the Board may
also call others to the hearing.
The Board may order the party that has appealed against the decision or that
party’s representative to attend in person, subject to a financial penalty.
Prohibition against appeals
Section 16
No appeal may be made against a decision of the Board against
Discrimination under this Act.
Imposition of a financial penalty
96

Section 17
Proceedings for the imposition of a financial penalty that has been ordered
under this Act are brought before a district court by the Equality
Ombudsman.
In cases concerning the imposition of a financial penalty, the district court
may also assess the appropriateness of the penalty.
Board of Appeals for Higher Education
Section 18
A decision of a university or other higher education institution for which the
State, a municipality or a county council is the responsible entity may, if it
concerns education under the Higher Education Act (1992:1434), be
appealed to the Board of Appeals for Higher Education on the grounds that
the decision is contrary to
1. the prohibition of discrimination in Chapter 2, Section 5, first paragraph,
if the decision concerns
a) admission to education,
b) credit for education,
c) deferment of studies or resumption of studies after time off from studies,
d) a change of supervisor,
e) withdrawal of a supervisor and other resources in postgraduate education,
f) grants for research students, or
g) a disciplinary measure against a student,
2. the prohibition of discrimination in Chapter 2, Section 5, second
paragraph, or
3. the prohibition of reprisals in Chapter 2, Section 19.
If the Board of Appeals finds that the appealed decision is contrary to one of
the prohibitions and that this can be assumed to have influenced the
outcome, the decision shall be set aside and the case, if necessary, referred
back to the university or other higher education institution for reexamination.
If a decision can be appealed under another statute, the appeal shall be made
as prescribed there instead of as directed in the first paragraph.
Section 19
No appeal may be made against a decision of the Board of Appeals for
Higher Education under this Act.
Chapter 5. Compensation and invalidity
Compensation

97

Section 1
A natural or legal person who violates the prohibitions of discrimination or
reprisals or who fails to fulfil their obligations to investigate and take
measures against harassment or sexual harassment under this Act shall pay
compensation for discrimination for the offence resulting from the
infringement. When compensation is decided, particular attention shall be
given to the purpose of discouraging such infringements of the Act. The
compensation shall be paid to the person who has been offended by the
infringement.
An employer who violates Chapter 2, Section 1, first paragraph or Section 18
shall also pay compensation for the loss that arises. However, this does not
apply to a loss that arises in connection with a decision concerning
employment or promotion.
If there are special grounds, the compensation can be reduced or set at zero.
Section 2
If an employer in activities referred to in Chapter 2, Section 9, 10, 11, 13, 14,
15 or 17 discriminates against someone or subjects someone to reprisals, the
compensation for discrimination shall be paid by the employer. A person
performing work on behalf of another person in circumstances resembling
those in an employment relationship shall be equated with an employee.
If an education provider violates Chapter 2, Section 5, 7 or 19 the
compensation shall be paid by the entity responsible for the activities.
Invalidity
Section 3
If someone is discriminated against by a provision in an individual contract
or in a collective agreement in a manner that is prohibited under this Act, the
provision shall be modified or declared invalid if the person discriminated
against requests this. If the provision is of such significance for the contract
or agreement that it cannot reasonably be demanded that the contract or
agreement shall apply in other respects without material changes, the
contract may also be modified in other respects or be declared invalid in its
entirety.
If someone is discriminated against by termination of a contract or
agreement or by some other such legal act, the legal act shall be declared
invalid if the person discriminated against requests this.
If someone is discriminated against by a rule or similar internal provision at
the place of work, the provision shall be modified or declared without effect
if the person discriminated against requests this.

98

Chapter 6. Legal proceedings
Applicable rules
Section 1
Cases concerning the application of Chapter 2, Section 1, 2, 3 or 18 shall be
dealt with under the Labour Disputes (Judicial Procedure) Act (1974:371).
In such cases a person enquiring about or applying for work, a person
applying for or carrying out a traineeship or a person who is available to
perform work or who is performing work as temporary or borrowed labour
shall be regarded as an employee. The person at whose establishment the
traineeship or work is being or would have been carried out shall be regarded
as employer. This also applies when the regulations on negotiations
concerning disputes in the Employment (Co-determination in the
Workplace) Act (1976:580) are applied.
Cases concerning the application of Chapter 2, Section 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12,
13, 14, 15, 16, 17 or 19 shall be examined by a general court and dealt with in
accordance with the provisions of the Swedish Code of Judicial Procedure
concerning procedures in civil cases in which out-of-court settlement of the
matter is permitted.
Right to bring an action
Section 2
The Equality Ombudsman, or a non-profit organisation whose statutes state
that it is to look after the interests of its members and that is not an
employees’ organisation referred to in the third paragraph, may bring an
action, as a party, on behalf of an individual who consents to this. When the
Ombudsman or the association brings such an action, the Ombudsman or
association may also bring another action on behalf of the individual as part
of the same proceedings, if he or she consents to this. In cases under Section
1, first paragraph the Ombudsman’s action is brought before the Labour
Court. For unmarried children under 18 years of age the consent of the
custodian or custodians is required.
To be allowed to bring an action, the association must be suited to represent
the individual in the case, taking account of its activities and its interest in
the matter, its financial ability to bring an action and other circumstances.
When an employees’ organisation has the right to bring an action on behalf
of the individual under Chapter 4, Section 5 of the Labour Disputes (Judicial
Procedure) Act (1974:371), the Ombudsman or association may only bring
an action if the employees’ organisation does not do so.
Burden of proof

99

Section 3
If a person who considers that he or she has been discriminated against or
subjected to reprisals demonstrates circumstances that give reason to
presume that he or she has been discriminated against or subjected to
reprisals, the defendant is required to show that discrimination or reprisals
have not occurred.
Statute of limitations
Working life
Section 4
If someone brings an action on the basis of notice of termination or
summary dismissal, the following provisions of the Employment Protection
Act (1982:80) shall be applied:
– Section 40 concerning the time limit for actions for a declaration of
invalidity,
– Section 41 concerning the time limit for damages or other claims, and
– Section 42 concerning the expiry of the right to bring an action on the
grounds that it is time-barred.
If someone brings an action against an employer other than an action
referred to in the first paragraph, the following provisions of the
Employment (Co-determination in the Workplace) Act (1976:580) shall be
applied:
– Section 64 on the time limit for calling for negotiations,
– Section 65 on the time limit for bringing an action,
– Section 66 on the extended time limit for a person who is not represented
by an employees’ organisation, with the difference that the time limit
referred to in Section 66, first paragraph, first sentence shall be two months,
and
– Section 68 concerning the expiry of the right to bring an action on the
grounds that it is time-barred.
If the action concerns compensation on grounds of an employment decision
announced by an employer in the public sector, the time limits specified in
the second paragraph are calculated from the day on which the employment
decision gained legal force.
Section 5
In cases under Section 1, first paragraph the Equality Ombudsman can toll
the statute of limitations, except in cases concerning a declaration that a
notice of termination or summary dismissal is invalid, by informing the
employer in writing that the Ombudsman is making use of her or his right to
toll the statute of limitations. If the running of the statute of limitations has
been tolled by such a communication, a new statute of limitations under
Section 4 runs from the day of tolling.
100

A statute of limitations cannot be tolled more than once.
Other areas of society
Section 6
A legal action other than actions referred to in Section 4 must be brought
within two years from the date on which the act to which attention is called
was performed or from the last date on which an obligation should have
been fulfilled. Otherwise the right to bring legal action expires.
If the action concerns a person who was under 18 years of age when the act
was performed or the obligation should have been fulfilled at the latest, the
time limit specified in the first paragraph is calculated from the day on which
the person reached the age of 18.
Litigation costs
Section 7
In cases under Section 1, second paragraph, each party may be ordered to
bear its litigation costs, if the party that has lost the case had reasonable
grounds for bringing the dispute to court. However, this does not apply
when the Equality Ombudsman brings an action on behalf of an individual
under Section 2.
In cases under Section 1, first paragraph, Chapter 5, Section 2 of the Labour
Disputes (Judicial Procedure) Act (1974:371) applies instead.
Other provisions
Section 8
If someone brings an action on the basis of notice of termination or
summary dismissal, the following provisions of the Employment Protection
Act (1982:80) are to be applied:
– Section 34 concerning the validity of a notice of termination etc.,
– Section 35 concerning the validity of a notice of summary dismissal etc.,
– Section 37 concerning suspension from work when a notice of termination
or summary dismissal has been declared invalid,
– Section 39, first paragraph, first sentence concerning the dissolution of an
employment relationship, and
– Section 43, first paragraph, second sentence and second paragraph
concerning expeditious conduct of proceedings etc.
Section 9
An action for compensation based on a decision on employment that has
been announced by an employer in the public sector may not be examined
before the employment decision has gained legal force.
101

Section 10
The provisions of the Swedish Code of Judicial Procedure concerning parties
shall also apply to a person on whose behalf the Equality Ombudsman or an
association brings an action under this Act in so far as they regard
disqualifying circumstances, ongoing legal proceedings and personal
attendance, as well as hearing of witnesses on oath and other issues
concerning evidence.
When an individual brings an action under this Act, the Equality
Ombudsman or an association may not bring an action on the individual’s
behalf in the same matter.
Section 11
The decision of the court in a case where the Equality Ombudsman or an
association brings an action on behalf of an individual may be appealed by
the individual, if it may be appealed by the Ombudsman or the association.
When the decision of the court in a case referred to in the first paragraph has
become final and non-appealable, the matter may not be reviewed on the
action either of the individual or of the Equality Ombudsman or the
association.
____________________
1. This Act enters into force on 1 January 2009.
2. This Act supersedes
– the Equal Opportunities Act (1991:433),
– the Act on Measures against Discrimination in Working Life on Grounds
of Ethnic Origin, Religion or other Belief (1999:130),
– the Prohibition of Discrimination in Working Life on Grounds of
Disability Act (1999:132),
– the Prohibition of Discrimination in Working Life because of Sexual
Orientation Act (1999:133),
– the Equal Treatment of Students at Universities Act (2001:1286),
– the Prohibition of Discrimination Act (2003:307), and
– the Act Prohibiting Discriminatory and Other Degrading Treatment of
Children and Pupils (2006:67).
3. The superseded acts continue to apply with regard to discrimination and
reprisals that have taken place before this Act entered into force. After this
Act enters into force, the duties incumbent on an ombudsman under the
superseded acts shall be fulfilled by the Equality Ombudsman. After this Act
has entered into force, the duties incumbent under the superseded acts on
the Equal Opportunities Commission or the Board against Discrimination
shall be fulfilled by the Board against Discrimination.

102

4. The obligation of the employer under Chapter 3, Section 10 shall be
performed for the first time in 2009 or the year in which the provision first
becomes applicable.
5. The obligations of the employer under Chapter 3, Sections 11 and 13 shall
be performed for the first time in the year immediately following the start of
the calendar year when the employer employed at least 25 employees or the
year after that, if the obligation under Chapter 3, Section 10 is to be
performed that year.
2010:861
1. This Act enters into force on 1 July 2011.
2. Older provisions still apply to adult secondary education, adult education
for the learning disabled and Swedish for Immigrants until the end of June
2012.

Social Services Act (2001:453)
Chapter 5 Special provisions for certain groups
Older persons
Section 4 /Enters into force: 1 Jan 2011/
The care provided by the social services should be tailored towards providing
older persons the opportunity of leading a dignified life and experiencing
well-being (fundamental value).
The social welfare committee shall endeavour to ensure that older persons
are enabled to live independently and securely and to lead active, meaningful
lives in the company of others. Act (2010:427).
Section 6
The social welfare committee shall make itself closely acquainted with the
living conditions of older persons within its boundaries and, in its activation
measures, shall disseminate information concerning social services activities
in this field.
The municipality shall plan its measures for older persons. In this planning
the municipality shall cooperate with the county council and with other
public bodies and organisations.
Municipalities shall strive towards ensuring that personnel with knowledge
of Finnish, Meänkieli or Sami are available for the care of older persons when
this is deemed to be necessary. Act (2009:726).

103

Law on System of Choice in the Public Sector (2008:962)
Chapter 1 Area of application of the Act
Scope of the Act
Section 1
This Act applies when a contracting authority decides to apply
a system of choice regarding services within health and social services,
which are included as B Services in Category 25 of Appendix 3 of the
Public Procurement Act (2007:1091). However, the Act does not apply to
services covered by CPV code 85311300-5 (welfare services for children
and young people) according to Regulation (EC) No 2195/2002 of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 5 November 2002 on the
Common Procurement Vocabulary (CPV).
‘System of choice’ according to this Act means a procedure where the
individual is entitled to choose the supplier to perform the service and with
which a contracting authority has approved and concluded a contract. The
contracting authority does not need to apply the same system of choice
within all areas affected.
Principles for system of choice
Section 2
The contracting authority shall treat suppliers in an equal and
non-discriminatory manner. The contracting authority must observe the
principles of transparency, mutual recognition and proportionality when
applying a system of choice.
Application of the Administrative Procedure Act
Section 3
The Administrative Procedure Act (1986:223) shall not be applied
to the processing of matters under this Act.
Chapter 2 Definitions
Section 1
‘Contract documents/specification’ means such documentation
for the application to participate in a system of choice that a contracting
authority provides.
Section 2
‘Contract’ means a written agreement with financial conditions
that

104

1. has been concluded between one or more contracting authorities and
one or more suppliers,
2. relates to the provision of services, and
3. has been signed by the parties or signed by them with an electronic
signature.
The contract may also contain conditions other than financial conditions.
Section 3
‘Supplier’ means a person who provides service in the market as
referred to in Chapter 1, Section 1, first paragraph. ‘Supplier’ also means a
group of suppliers.
Section 4
‘Continuous publication’ means a notice that applies indefinitely
and where no final date has been stipulated to submit an application.
Section 5
‘Body governed by public law’ means such companies and foundations
that fulfil needs in the public interest, provided the need is not of a
commercial nature, and:
1. which is for the greatest part funded by a municipality, a county council
or a contracting authority,
2. whose operations are subject to the control of a municipality, a county
council or a contracting authority, or
3. on whose board or corresponding management body more than half of
the number of members are appointed by a municipality, a county council
or a contracting authority.
Section 6
‘Service’ means such service as referred to in Chapter 1, Section
1, first paragraph.
Section 7
‘Contracting authority’ means a local government authority.
When applying this Act, the contracting authority shall be equated with
1. the decision-making assemblies of municipalities and county councils,
2. a body governed by public law as referred to in Section 5,
3. associations formed by one or more authorities according to the first
paragraph or assemblies according to 1, and
4. associations of one or more bodies according to 2.
Chapter 3 Publication
Obligation to publish on a national website
Section 1
105

A contracting authority that has decided to establish or change
a system of choice shall publish this on the national website set up for
the purpose. Contract documents shall, together with the notice, be held
available on the website.
Continuous publication
Section 2
The contracting authority shall continuously request applications
by notices on the national website.
Chapter 4 Content of the contract documents
Financial remuneration
Section 1
The principles for the financial remuneration for a supplier shall
be stated in the contract documents.
Special conditions of contract
Section 2
The contracting authority may lay down special social, environmental
and other conditions relating to the performance of a contract. All
conditions shall be stated in the notice about the system of choice or in the
contract documents.
Submission and processing period of an application
Section 3
The manner in which the application is to be submitted shall be
stated in the notice or the contract documents.
Section 4
The time within which the contracting authority will make a
decision on approval shall be stated in the contract documents.
Section 5
The provisions of Section 10 of the Administrative Procedure Act
(1986:223) shall apply when assessing whether a document is deemed to
have been received by the contracting authority.
Chapter 5 Application for participation in a
system of choice
The right to participate in a system of choice

106

Section 1
Natural or legal persons can individually or together with other
suppliers submit an application. The contracting authority may not impose
conditions requiring that a group shall assume a specific legal form
in order to be allowed to submit an application. However, the contracting
authority may request that a group shall assume a specific legal form
when it has been awarded the contract, to the extent that this is necessary
for the acceptable performance of the contract.
Access to the capacity of other undertakings
Section 2
An applicant may, where appropriate, rely on the economic,
technical and professional ability of other undertakings in its application.
The applicant shall, by producing a commitment by the undertakings in
question or in another way prove that he or she will have at their disposal
the resources necessary for the execution of the contract.
Chapter 6 Communication
Communication by electronic means
Section 1
When communicating by electronic means, the means must be
non-discriminatory, generally available and possible to use together with
such equipment and software as is generally used.
Correction of errors, clarification and supplementation
Section 2
The contracting authority may allow an applicant to correct a
written error or some other manifest error in the application. The
contracting
authority may request that an application is clarified or supplemented.
Chapter 7 Exclusion of applicants
Circumstances that may result in exclusion of an applicant
Section 1
The contracting authority may exclude an applicant that
1. is bankrupt or is being wound up, is under compulsory administration
or is the subject of a composition or has indefinitely stopped their payments
or is subject to a prohibition on conducting business,
2. is the subject of proceedings for a declaration of bankruptcy, for an order
for compulsory winding up or administration by the court or composition
or any other similar proceedings,
107

3. has been convicted by a judgment which has the force of res judicata for
an offence relating to professional practice,
4. has been guilty of grave professional misconduct and the contracting
authority can prove this,
5. has not fulfilled their obligations relating to social insurance charges or
tax in their country of origin or other State within the EEA area, or
6. in some essential respect has failed to provide information requested or
provided incorrect information required pursuant to this provision.
If the applicant is a legal person, the applicant may be excluded if a
representative
for the legal person has been sentenced for an offence referred
to in the first paragraph, Section 3 or committed such an error as referred
to in the first paragraph, Section 4.
The contracting authority may request that an applicant proves that
there are no grounds for excluding them pursuant to the first paragraph,
Section 1, 2, 3 or 5.
Certificates and evidence regarding applicants
Section 2
The contracting authority shall, as evidence for there not being
grounds for excluding an applicant, accept an extract from an official
register of other equivalent document as regards a circumstance as referred
to in Section 1, first paragraph, item 1, 2 or 3 and a certificate from a
competent authority as regards a circumstance as referred to in Section 1,
first paragraph, item 5.
If such documents or certificates as referred to in the first paragraph are
not issued in the applicant’s country of origin or the country whence they
come or do not cover all of the cases as referred to in Section 1, first
paragraph, items 1 to 3, they may be replaced by a statement provided under
honour and faith of by a similar assurance.
If an applicant is registered in an official list of approved suppliers in a
country within the EEA, the contracting authority shall assume that the
applicant cannot be excluded as a supplier according to Section 1, first
paragraph, items 1 to 5.
Chapter 8 Approval and conclusion of contract
Decision on approval
Section 1
The contracting authority shall approve all applicants satisfying
the requirements referred to in the contract notice and contract documents
108

and which have not been excluded pursuant to Chapter 7, Section 1.
Notification of decision
Section 2
When a decision has been made concerning whether an applicant
may participate in the system of choice, the contracting authority
shall as soon as possible give notice to the applicant of the decision and
the reasons for it.
Such a notification shall be provided to the applicants even when the
contracting authority decides to discontinue the establishment of the
system of choice.
If the contracting authority decides not to approve the applicant as a
supplier in the system of choice, the contracting authority shall provide
information on how rectification can be sought.
Concluding the contract
Section 3
When the contracting authority has granted its approval, the
authority shall conclude a contract with the supplier without delay.
Chapter 9 Information and no-choice alternative
The contracting authority’s information responsibility
Section 1
The contracting authority shall provide to private parties
information about all suppliers with which the authority has concluded
contracts within the framework of the system of choice. This information
shall be objective, relevant, comparable, easy to understand and readily
available.
No-choice alternative
Section 2
For the private party who does not choose a supplier, the contracting
authority shall provide a no-choice alternative.
Chapter 10 Remedies, etc.
Rectification
Section 1
A supplier, who claims that a contracting authority has breached
109

a provision of this Act, may apply for rectification to a general
administrative
court.
Only the applicant that has not been approved can apply for rectification
of the contract authority’s decision according to Chapter 8, Section 1.
An application for rectification shall be submitted in writing.
Section 2
If the contracting authority has breached any provision of this
Act and this has meant that a supplier suffered or may suffer damage, the
court shall decide that the contracting authority shall implement
rectification.
Competent court
Section 3
An application for rectification according to Section 1 shall be
made to the general administrative court in whose judicial district the
contracting authority is based.
An application according to Section 1, second paragraph shall have been
received by the general administrative court within three weeks from
when the notification was provided according to Chapter 8, Section 2.
Leave to appeal is required to make an appeal to the Administrative Court
of Appeal. Act (2009:856).
Prohibition of appeal
Section 4
A decision to which this Act applies may not be appealed
against under Chapter 10 of the Local Government Act (1991:900).
Damages
Section 5
A contracting authority that has not complied with the provisions
of this Act must compensate the applicant for damage caused thereby.
An action for damages which is based on a decision under Chapter
8, Section 1 shall be instituted within one year from the date on which the
contracting authority decided not to approve the applicant.
Actions for damages shall be instituted at a general court.
If an action is not brought in time, the right to damages is lost.

110

Exemptions from rectification and damages
Section 6
The provisions of this Chapter concerning rectification or damages
do not apply to the decision of a contracting authority on information
and no-choice alternative.
Supervision
Section 7
The Government shall appoint an authority to exercise supervision
of the system of choice according to this Act.
Section 8
The supervisory authority may obtain such information from
the contracting authority as may be necessary for the supervision. This
information shall in the first instance be collected through written
procedure.
If it is more suitable, owing to the scope of the material, urgency or
some other circumstance, the information may be collected by visiting the
contracting authority or verbally.
Section 9
A contracting authority is liable to provide the information that
the supervisory authority requests for its supervision.
__________________
Enters into force 1 Jan 2009

Heritage Conservation Act (1988:950) etc.
Good place names practice
Section 4 In state and local government operations, good place names
practice shall be observed. This means that:
- place names established by long usage shall not be changed without good
cause,
- place names shall generally be spelled in accordance with generally accepted
rules for linguistic correctness, unless spelling forms established by long
usage otherwise require,
- the impact on names established by long usage shall be taken into account
when forming new place names, and
- Swedish, Sami and Finnish names shall, as far as possible, be used in parallel
on maps and also for signs and other markings in multilingual areas.

111

Names that have been approved for public map production shall also be used
in their approved form in other contexts. Act (2000:265).

Sami Parliament Act (1992:1433)
Chapter 2 The Sami Parliament
Assignments of the Sami Parliament
Section 1 /Ceases to apply: 1 Jan 2011/
The Sami Parliament shall work for a living Sami culture, taking initiatives
for activities and proposing measures for promoting this culture. The
assignments of the Sami Parliament include, in particular:
1. deciding on the allocation of state subsidies and funds from the Sami
Foundation to Sami culture and Sami organisations, as well as funds that are
intended for the common disposal of the Sami people,
2. appointing the Board of Directors for the Sami school indicated in
Chapter 8 Section 6 of the Education Act (1985:1100),
3. establishing objectives for and guiding the work on the Sami language,
4. participating in community development and ensuring that Sami needs are
considered, including the interests of reindeer breeding in the use of land
and water,
5. providing information on Sami conditions, and
6. performing the additional tasks that pertain to the Sami Parliament
pursuant to legislation or other statutes. Act (2009:725).
Section 1 /Enters into force: 1 Jan 2011/
The Sami Parliament shall work for a living Sami culture, taking initiatives
for activities and proposing measures for promoting this culture. The
assignments of the Sami Parliament include, in particular:
1. deciding on the allocation of state subsidies and funds from the Sami
Foundation to Sami culture and Sami organisations, as well as funds that are
intended for the common disposal of the Sami people,
2. appointing the Board of Directors for the Sami Education Board,
3. establishing objectives for and guiding the work on the Sami language, 4.
participating in community development and ensuring that Sami needs are
considered, including the interests of reindeer breeding in the use of land
and water,
5. providing information on Sami conditions, and
6. performing the additional tasks that pertain to the Sami Parliament
pursuant to legislation or other statutes. Act (2010:868).

Compulsory School Ordinance (1994:1194)

112

Bilingual tuition
Section 7
For pupils who have a language other than Swedish as the daily means of
interaction (dagligt umgängesspråk) with one or both custodians,
municipalities may provide parts of the tuition in grades 1-6 in the language
of the daily means of interaction (bilingual tuition). For pupils whose
language of the daily means of interaction is Finnish, such tuition may also
be organised in grades 7-9.
The total time during which the bilingual tuition is provided, at most 50%
may be provided in the language of the daily means of interaction. The
tuition shall be planned such that the tuition in Swedish gradually increases
over the course of the tuition period.
Chapter 8 of the Sami Education Ordinance (1995:205) contains provisions
on integrated Sami tuition in nine-year compulsory school. Ordinance
(1997:599).
Mother tongue tuition
Section 9 If one or both of the pupil’s custodians have a language other than
Swedish as their mother tongue and the language represents the pupil’s daily
means of interaction (dagligt umgängesspråk), the pupil shall receive tuition
in this language as a subject (mother tongue tuition), if
1. the pupil has basic knowledge of the language, and
2. the pupil wishes to receive such tuition.
Mother tongue tuition in Sami, Finnish, Meänkieli, Romani Chib or Yiddish
shall be offered even if the language does not represent the daily means of
interaction in the pupil’s home. The same applies to a pupil who is an
adoptee and has a mother tongue other than Swedish.
Chapter 5, Sections 2 and 3 contain provisions on the study guidance of the
pupil’s mother tongue. Ordinance (2008:97).
Section 10
Mother tongue tuition can be offered
1. as a language option
2. as the pupil’s option
3. within the framework of the school’s option, or
4. outside the hours of the timetable.
Mother tongue tuition may not consist of more than one language for a
pupil. However, a Romani pupil who is from abroad may receive mother
tongue tuition in two languages if there are specific reasons for this.

113

For mother tongue tuition in Sami the curricula which should be used shall
be the same as that which the Swedish National Agency for Education, based
on Chapter 3 Section 6 of the Sami Education Ordinance (1995:205) has
established. Ordinance (2002:1010).
Section 11
If mother tongue tuition for a pupil is provided outside the hours of the
timetable, the pupil is entitled to such tuition for a maximum of seven
academic years in total during his/her schooling within the state school
system. However, the pupil is only entitled to such tuition for a long period
of time if he/she has a specific need for such.
The restriction does not apply to mother tongue tuition in Sami, Finnish,
Meänkieli, Romani Chib, Yiddish or a Nordic language. Ordinance
(2008:97).
Section 12
If a ruling is issued establishing that mother tongue tuition for a pupil
should be provided within the framework of the school’s option or outside
the hours of the timetable, consultation shall take place with the pupil and
the pupil’s custodian prior to the ruling. Ordinance (1997:599).
Section 13
A municipality is only liable to provide mother tongue tuition in a language
if a suitable teacher is available.
A municipality is liable to provide such tuition if at least five pupils request
such tuition in the language. With regard to Sami, Finnish, Meänkieli,
Romani Chib or Yiddish the municipality is liable to provide mother tongue
tuition even if the number of pupils is below five. Ordinance (2008:97).

Education Act (2010:800)
Chapter 8 The pre-school
Mother tongue
Section 10
The pre-school should contribute towards ensuring that children who have a
mother tongue other than Swedish have the opportunity to develop both the
Swedish language and their mother tongue.
Chapter 9 The pre-school class
Mother tongue

114

Section 10
The pre-school class should contribute towards ensuring that pupils who
have a mother tongue other than Swedish have the opportunity to develop
both the Swedish language and their mother tongue.
Chapter 10 Nine-year compulsory school
Mother tongue tuition
Section 7
A pupil who has a custodian with a mother tongue other than Swedish
should be offered mother tongue tuition in this language if
1. the language is the pupil’s daily means of interaction (dagligt
umgängesspråk) in the home and
2. the pupil has basic knowledge of the language.
Mother tongue tuition in a national minority language should be offered
even if the language is not the pupil’s daily means of interaction in the home.
The government or an authority appointed by the government may issue
regulations with regard to the mother tongue tuition. Such regulations may
involve that mother tongue tuition in a certain language will only be offered
if a certain number of pupils wish to receive such tuition in the language.
_________________
Enters into force 1 July 2011

The Health and Medical Service Act (1982:763)
Section 2
Health and medical services are aimed at assuring the entire population of
good health and of care on equal terms.
Care shall be provided with respect for the equal dignity of all human beings
and for the dignity of the individual. Priority for health and medical care
shall be given to the person whose need of care is greatest. Act (1997:142).
Section 2 b /Ceases to apply: 1 Jan 2011
The patient should be given individualised information concerning
1. his/her state of health,
2. the methods for examination, care and treatment which are available,
3. his/her opportunities of choosing a care provider and executor within
publically financed health and medical care, and
4. the health care guarantee.
If this information cannot be supplied to the patient, it shall be supplied to a
close relative instead. Information may not be supplied to the patient or any
relative of the patient, however, insofar as this is contrary to Chapter 25,
115

Section 6 or 7 of the Secrecy Act (2009:400) or Chapter 2, Section 8 second
paragraph or Section 9 first paragraph of the Health and Medical Services
(Professional Activity) Act (1998:531). Act (2010:243).
Section 2 b /Enters into force: 1 Jan 2011/
The patient should be given individualised information concerning
1. his/her state of health,
2. the methods for examination, care and treatment which are available,
3. his/her opportunities of choosing a care provider and executor within
publically financed health and medical care, and
4. the health care guarantee.
If this information cannot be supplied to the patient, it shall be supplied to a
close relative instead. Information may not be supplied to that patient or any
relative of the patient, however, insofar as this is contrary to Chapter 25,
Section 6 or 7 of the Secrecy Act (2009:400) or Chapter 6, Section 12 second
paragraph or Section 13 first paragraph of patientsäkerhetslagen [the Act on
Patient Safety] (2010:659). Act (2010:662)
Section 2 e
Where health and medical services are conducted, there shall be present the
staff, facilities and equipment necessary in order for the provision of good
care to be possible. Act (1998:1660).
__________________________

116

