Strasbourg, 10 October 2013

MIN-LANG (2013) PR 05

EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES

Fifth periodical report
presented to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe
in accordance with Article 15 of the Charter

SWEDEN

1

Government Offices of Sweden

Sweden’s report to the Council of
Europe on the European Charter
for Regional or Minority
Languages
presented, in accordance with Article 15 of the
Charter, fifth Periodical Report

2

Foreword
Strengthening the protection of national minority languages and the
national minorities is a central element of Sweden’s systematic work for
human rights at national level. Since Sweden submitted its fourth report
in October 2010, work on minority policy has continued to be
strengthened. We are seeing an increase in knowledge about the national
minorities and their languages in society, at the same time as there is a
growing desire and interest on the part of the national minorities to
strengthen their languages and rights.
Work to promote human rights is, however, a continually ongoing
process. Despite the significantly higher ambitions that have been seen
in recent years, a good deal of work will still be required before minority
policy achieves its full impact at local, regional and national levels.
Situations and circumstances change and new shortfalls or needs may
arise, which may then require new measures and working methods.
The supervisory process of the Council of Europe is an important tool in
the work of following up, evaluating and developing the protection of the
national minority languages as part of Sweden’s minority policy.
Sweden hereby presents its fifth report on measures that have been
taken, up until 1 September 2013, in order to fulfil its commitments under
the Council of Europe’s European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages.

Stockholm, September 2013

Erik Ullenhag
Minister for Integration and responsible for minority policy

3

Content
Introductory comments ........................................................................................................... 5
Special initiatives ......................................................................................................................... 5
The Act on National Minorities and its follow-up ............................................................. 5
Amendments to the Constitution ........................................................................................ 6
A coordinated and long-term strategy for Roma inclusion, 2012–2032 ............................ 6
Measures taken as a result of the Committee of Ministers’ recommendations ............................ 7
Description of developments with regard to the general provisions, part I, as a result of the
Committee of Experts’ questions and recommendations ........................................................... 12
PART II. Description of developments under part II of the Convention ......................... 19
PART III. Description of developments under part III of the Convention ...................... 33
Article 8 – Education ...................................................................................................... 33
Article 9 – Judicial authorities ...................................................................................... 44
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services ...................................... 45
Article 11 –Media ........................................................................................................... 51
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities ................................................................ 55
Article 13 – Economic and social life ............................................................................ 59
Article 14 – Transfrontier exchange ............................................................................. 59
Appendices .............................................................................................................................. 60
Appendix 1 – Ratified Articles in the Charter ............................................................................ 60
Appendix 2 – National Legislation ............................................................................................ 61
The Instrument of Government .................................................................................... 61
Act (2009:724) on National Minorities and National Minority Languages .............. 61
Language Act (2009:600) ............................................................................................... 66
Discrimination Act (2008:567) ...................................................................................... 68
Social Services Act (2001:453) ....................................................................................... 90
Law on System of Choice in the Public Sector (2008:962) ......................................... 90
Heritage Conservation Act (1988:950) etc. .................................................................. 99
Sami Parliament Act (1992:1433) ................................................................................. 99
The Education Ordinance (2011:185) ........................................................................ 100
Education Act (2010:800) ............................................................................................ 103
The Health and Medical Service Act (1982:763) ....................................................... 104
Appendix 3 – Map of the administrative areas for Finnish (blue), Sami (red) and Meänkieli
(yellow) .................................................................................................................................... 104

4

Introductory comments

Sweden’s fifth report to the Council of Europe on the European Charter
for Regional or Minority Languages, submitted in accordance with
Article 15 of the Charter, adheres to the revised outline for periodical
reports that was adopted by the Committee of Ministers during the
Committee’s 1056th meeting on 6 May 2009. Special attention has been
given to the issues highlighted by the Committee of Experts in its fourth
evaluation report ECRML (2011) 4. The Government has chosen
presentation option B for presenting part III.
In order to avoid repeating information given in previous reports with
regard to commitments where no relevant changes have occurred since
the Government’s fourth report, the Government has chosen to refer to
these reports instead. The same applies to the commitments for which,
in its report, the Committee of Experts did not consider to require a
revised assessment or another account of the implementation.
The Government wishes to begin its fifth report by drawing the attention
of the Council of Europe to some special initiatives that have been
significant for developments in the area since the fourth report. After
this, an account is given of the measures taken in order to comply with
the Committee of Ministers’ and Committee of Experts’
recommendations. This is followed by a report of developments under
each Article.
Special initiatives

The Act on National Minorities and its follow-up
The Act (2009:724) on National Minorities and Minority Languages
ensures fundamental protection of the five national minorities in
Sweden. This fundamental protection represents a minimum standard
for minority efforts in Sweden.
Over and above this fundamental protection, there is strengthened
protection for three of the national minority languages, Finnish, Sami
and Meänkieli. This enhanced minority protection within the
administrative area for the Finnish, Meänkieli and Sami languages aims
at raising the status of the minority languages, making these languages
visible and increasing public services in the minority languages.
Since 2010, municipalities and county councils have been able, after
applying to the Government, to join the administrative area for
Meänkieli, Sami or Finnish. These municipalities and county councils
receive central government grants for the higher costs ensuing from their
greater obligations under the Act. Sweden’s decision on continued
extension of the administrative areas means that enhanced minority
protection for the minority languages has increased from seven
5

municipalities and one county council to 64 municipalities and twelve
county councils in 2013. For more information, see under Article 7.1.b.
The County Administrative Board in Stockholm County and the Sami
Parliament are responsible for following up application of the Act on
National Minorities and Minority Languages and they submit annual
reports to the Government. Like the Council of Europe’s supervisory
process, these annual follow-up reports are an important tool for
following up, evaluating and developing protection of the national
minority languages.
The budget allocation for minority policy was SEK 10 million a year in
2009 and was raised to SEK 80 million a year as of 2010. In 2011–2012, the
allocation was over SEK 85 million per year, and as of 2013, it amounts to
more than SEK 108 million per year, over SEK 11 million of which will be
used for special initiatives for the Roma minority.
Amendments to the Constitution
The Sami people have already been recognised as an indigenous people
and a national minority in Sweden. Since 1 January 2011 (Swedish Code of
Statutes 2010:1408), the Sami people are also specifically mentioned in
the Instrument of Government (see Chapter 1, Section 2, paragraph 6 of
the Instrument of Government). That the Sami people occupy an
exceptional position among the national minorities in Sweden has thus
been clarified. A previous statute containing aims has simultaneously
been replaced by an obligation on the part of public institutions to
promote opportunities for the Sami people and other ethnic, language
and religious minorities to preserve and develop a cultural and social life
of their own.
A coordinated and long-term strategy for Roma inclusion, 2012–2032
On 16 February 2012, the Government decided on a coordinated and
long-term strategy for the inclusion of the Roma over the period 20122032. This twenty-year strategy is to be seen as a strengthening of
minority policy. The overall objective of the twenty-year strategy is that a
Roma individual who turns 20 in 2032 is to have the same opportunities
in life as people who are not Roma.
Apart from the ordinary funds that are available for the national
minorities, the Government has allocated SEK 46 million for 2012–2015
for measures within the framework of the strategy for Roma inclusion.
Culture and language are one of the strategy’s six priority areas. The
strategy emphasises, among other things, the importance of ensuring
that the culture and language of the Roma are made visible, preserved
and developed in accordance with the established objective of the
national minority policy.

6

Measures taken as a result of the Committee of Ministers’
recommendations

1.

Strengthen education for all regional or minority languages,
by adopting a comprehensive and structured approach, based on
the needs of the speakers and according to the situation of the
languages.

Since the last report, the Government has undertaken initiatives to
strengthen the educational situation of the minority languages.
After the most recent round of reporting, education at pre-school and
compulsory school levels has undergone a number of reforms. A new
Education Act (2010:800), a new Education Ordinance (2011:185) and a
new curriculum (Lgr11) now regulate the school sector. These reforms
have required great efforts on the part of the Government and the
authorities involved.
The Government has tasked a number of higher education institutions
with responsibility for education in minority languages. In the Swedish
system, such assignments are only given in special cases, so as to ensure
that courses are put into place.
See also the answer under recommendation no. 4 and under Article 8.1.h.
2.

Ensure that “mother-tongue” education meets the
requirements of the Charter and offers real and adequate language
tuition, enabling pupils to achieve mature literacy in the languages
concerned.

The right to mother tongue tuition in the national minority languages is
subject to less strict requirements than those for other mother tongue
tuition. For these languages, it is not necessary for the language to be the
daily means of interaction in the home or for a specific number of pupils
to request mother tongue tuition. However, the requirement for a pupil
to have fundamental knowledge in the language in order to be offered
mother tongue tuition also applies to pupils requesting mother tongue
tuition in a national minority language.
It is up to each education provider to decide whether, and in what way,
pupils are to be offered mother tongue tuition in the national minority
language. The teaching offered must comply with the same quality
norms and requirements as other teaching in the school. The education
provider is responsible for ensuring that local conditions comply with
national regulations.
The National Agency for Education provides information via various
initiatives to pupils, custodians, education providers and school staff
7

about the rights and obligations existing in the area, using, for example,
information material, both printed and on the Agency’s website, and on
the information site www.modersmal.net.
The provisions of the Education Act that stipulate that pupils must have
fundamental knowledge to be entitled to teaching in their national
minority language are subject to review at the Government Offices. This
review is expected to be completed in the autumn of 2013. The result of
the review will later form the basis for an assessment of how best to deal
with the issue and any changes that may be necessary. See also the
answer under recommendation 1.
3.

Increase the amount of bilingual education available in
Finnish and Sami, and establish bilingual education in Meänkieli.

It is possible to organise bilingual teaching in years 1–6. The Ordinance
(2003:306) on pilot projects with bilingual teaching in compulsory school
also enables education providers to offer bilingual teaching in years 7–9
in languages other than Finnish. It is the municipalities and the
individual education providers that are responsible for how they organise
their activities and the teaching they offer under the national
regulations. In a quality control report that included bilingual teaching
(Report 2012:2), the Swedish Schools Inspectorate noted that education
providers (and in this case, often municipalities) need to acquire better
knowledge of pupil’s linguistic backgrounds and how bilingual teaching
could be organised to enable an expansion in this type of teaching.
The number of pupils in the Sami school, particularly in the school
division of Kiruna, is expected to increase in the next few years. In order
to ensure that parents are able to choose Sami schools or pre-schools for
their children, the Government announced in the 2013 Budget Bill that
the Sami Education Board will be allocated funds to enable an expansion
of the Sami school in Kiruna and allow it to continue to run existing
activities with the increased costs that ensue from larger numbers of
pupils.
A further measure to strengthen teaching in Sami is the integrated
teaching that municipalities are able to organise in years 7–9, after an
agreement with the Sami Education Board. Since 2010, the Sami
Education Board has received greater funding of SEK 1 million per year
from the Government, to expand the scope of this teaching. For more
information on integrated Sami teaching, see under items 161 and 175.
4.

Establish a dedicated and properly resourced system of
teacher training for all regional or minority languages.

8

In 2010, the Government assigned the former National Agency for Higher
Education (HSV) with the task of proposing measures for enabling
Sweden to comply better with the commitments of the Council of
Europeʼs minority conventions with regard to access to teachers who can
give tuition in and on the national minority languages. This task
included undertaking a review of higher education courses in the
national minority languages. In May 2011, HSV presented its findings in
the report, entitled ‘Lärarförsörjningen för de nationella minoriteterna –
hur kan den tryggas?’ (Teacher supply for the national minorities – how
can it be secured?) (Report 2011:14). The report was circulated for formal
consultation to 72 consultation bodies.
In its Budget Bill for 2013, the Government announced its intention to
task some higher education institutions with responsibility for education
in the minority languages. In the 2013 appropriation directions, the
selected higher education institutions were assigned special
undertakings and were allocated national responsibility and funds for
building up and developing subject teacher training in each language as
soon as possible.
In their efforts to build up and develop subject teacher training, these
higher education institutions are required to take into account the
special needs and conditions of each language and to conduct a dialogue
with the national minority concerned. The higher education institution
is required to cooperate with the actors involved in Sweden, and where
relevant, also with actors in other countries that have experience of work
with the language concerned.
The aim is for the education to be run in such an environment and
maintain such a quality to enable compliance with the examination
requirements of the Higher Education Ordinance (1993:100) appendix 2
(Examination procedures), and for the higher education institution to be
thereby authorised to issue subject teacher qualifications in one or more
of the Finnish, Sami, Meänkieli and Romani Chib languages. For people
with sufficient knowledge of one language, a supplementary teacher
training (KPU) consisting of 90 higher education credits may lead to a
subject teacher qualification and thus a teacher certificate and
entitlement to teach in the subject.
The annual report must state how the higher education institution is
working on building up and developing subject teacher training in the
above-mentioned minority languages. The Government will evaluate
these special undertakings and intends to monitor how many subject
teacher qualifications are issued where the minority language is included
as a teaching subject.

9

National responsibility and funds allocated for the development of
subject teacher training in minority languages:
Institution
Stockholm University
Umeå University
Södertörn University

Language and SEK allocated per year
Finnish and Meänkieli
SEK 2 500 000
Sami
SEK 2 000 000
Romani Chib
SEK 2 000 000

On 30 April 2013, Stockholm University was given authorisation to issue
a subject teacher qualification, directed at work in years 7–9 in
compulsory school in the teaching subject of Finnish as a mother tongue
language.
Since 2007, Lund University has a special undertaking for Yiddish, which
will remain unchanged. This undertaking means that every year, Lund
University is required to offer education in Yiddish. The annual report is
required to state the number of places offered, the number of applicants,
the number of full-time students and full-time equivalent studies. Higher
education institutions other than those receiving special funds for the
development of subject teacher training in minority languages may also,
in their appropriation directions, be tasked with offering education in a
specific language each academic year. This is the case, for example, with
Uppsala University, which has been tasked with providing education in
Finnish every academic year.
Apart from this long-term effort to build up subject teacher training in
the minority languages, the Government has assigned, in August 2013,
the National Agency for Education with the task of implementing a
special initiative for strengthening access to teachers, primarily in Sami,
Finnish and Meänkieli. This task includes ensuring that a suitable
programme is organised and implemented in order to put in place at
least twelve people working as mother tongue teachers in the national
minority languages. In its efforts for this task, the National Agency for
Education is to build up cooperation to enable municipalities,
independent schools and others, on their own initiative, to increase the
availability of mother tongue teachers in the minority languages, by
using the same educational model. The teacher training that is organised
must primarily correspond to the ordinary teacher training programmes
that are directed at compulsory or upper secondary schools, but it must
be adapted to each person’s previous knowledge, needs and conditions.
A first report on implementation of this assignment is to be submitted to
the Government in November 2014.
People belonging to the national minorities are also included in the
efforts of the Government via Lärarlyftet (Boost for Teachers) and
Vidareutbildning av lärare utan lärarexamen (VAL) (Further education of
unqualified teachers). The aim of the Boost for Teachers initiative is to
10

provide qualified teachers with the opportunity to supplement their
qualifications to authorise them for all the teaching they undertake. VAL
means that teachers who are working in schools without a teaching
qualification can supplement their previous education at seven higher
education institutions to achieve a qualification. The point of departure
is the requirement for higher education institutions to take into account
the student’s previous experience as a teacher and to offer individualised
programmes to make it easier, and shorten the period of study for
individual students.
5.

Create teaching and learning materials, for all regional or
minority languages.

The decentralised structure of the school system has led to individual
education providers being responsible for the material used in teaching.
This also applies to the national minority languages. Thus in Sweden,
central government has no general responsibility for teaching materials.
However, since the number of pupils who participate in mother tongue
tuition in the national minority languages is lower than what, in many
respects, is commercially viable, the Government has seen the need for
central government initiatives to ensure the diversity of teaching and
learning material. This has been done via continuing Government remit
to the Sami Education Board and the National Agency for Education to
produce material.
Within the framework of the Government’s strategy for Roma inclusion
over the period 2012–2032, the National Agency for Education has been
tasked with promoting the development and production of books and
other teaching tools for children, young people and adults in all the
varieties of Romani Chib. This work has been implemented after
consultation with teachers of Romani Chib and Roma representatives,
and will result in nine different types of school material, which in
principle are to be ready for the autumn term of 2013. In 2012, the Sami
Education Board has translated and printed a number of work books in
North and Lule Sami and a South Sami version is in the process of being
produced. A Lule Sami reading book is being produced and a school
dictionary in North Sami is in the process of being completed.
In addition, central government may inform the publishing sector,
Svenska Läromedel (Swedish Teaching Material) and the Swedish
Association of Educational Writers of the views received to draw the
attention of the publishing sector to the problem. To some extent, this is
already taking place through a dialogue between authorities at the local
and national levels on the one hand and the publishing industry on the
other.

11

On the Tema Modersmål website, the National Agency for Education has
also collected children’s books, music and other resources for
multilingual children at pre-school. Mother tongue teachers have
translated and dictated books that children can listen to directly on the
web. Information is also available on how pre-schools work with
multilingual material, on reading tips for teachers, links to Swedish and
international websites and advice on how this material can be
loaned/purchased. Several of the books are available in Finnish,
Meänkieli and the different varieties of Sami.
Utbildningsradio (UR), the Swedish Educational Broadcasting Company,
is one of the programme companies within the Swedish public service
sector. Among its services, UR offers UR Play TV programmes in the
national minority languages. The UR broadcasting licence states that the
company has special responsibility for producing material for the
national minorities and much of this is available via this open portal.
Schools have access to more material at UR than do the general public.
As part of its work of making available previously broadcast material, the
UR Open Archive was launched on 16 April 2013. The Open Archive
contains entire programmes and series of programmes in the national
minority languages and others. Since the Archive is free and open to all,
the material can be used by teachers as a supplement to their teaching in
the national minority languages.
For one of the varieties of Sami that is most under threat, South Sami, a
new teaching aid was launched in 2011. OAHPA Åarjel! is a teaching aid
that provides opportunities for choice that can be adapted to the user’s
linguistic level. The programme is suitable both for young people and
adults and is available on the Internet. This teaching aid has been written
in cooperation between the Aajege - Samisk språk och kompetens senter
i Röros (the Aajege–Sami Language and Skills Centre in Röros), the
Centre for Language Technology at Tromsö University and the Sami
Language Centre at the Sami Parliament.
In order to also promote Sami at pre-school, the knowledge box Jågloe
has been produced and distributed to 425 pre-schools in the Sami
administrative area. As well as containing inspiration material such as
memory cards, pictures, songs and rhymes to strengthen the Sami
language, the idea of the box is to promote knowledge about the Sami
people and Sami culture among pre-school children
More information on teaching and audiovisual materials is given under
Article 8.
Description of developments with regard to the general provisions, part
I, as a result of the Committee of Experts’ questions and
recommendations

12

15. (box) The Committee of Experts strongly urges the Swedish authorities
to take pragmatic steps to collect, in agreement and co-operation with the
speakers, reliable data on the number and geographic distribution of the
speakers of regional or minority languages.
As mentioned in previous reports, Sweden does not compile official
statistics regarding the ethnic origins of individuals, only information
with regard to citizenship and country of birth. This is because no
methods are available for assessing ethnic origin that are both ethically
acceptable and scientifically reliable. There are thus no official statistics
with regard to ethnic, linguistic or cultural affiliation. For an estimate of
the number of speakers of minority languages and their geographical
distribution, previous reports are referred to.
On the other hand, collected data and knowledge about national
minorities are available, based on different types of qualitative and
quantitative studies, where participants have contributed voluntarily. For
example, the National Institute of Public Health was tasked with a study
of the health situation of the national minorities and with presenting
proposals for how health-promotion and preventive public health efforts
could be run among these groups. The findings were reported in April
2010. Based on these findings and the views expressed by minority
organisations, the National Institute of Public Health was given a new
assignment at the end of 2012. The aim is for a consultative forum
consisting of representatives of the national minorities to study the need
and conditions for collecting data on the health situation of the national
minorities and possible methods that could be suitable for each group.
The Institute is to report its findings in November 2013.
Apart from this, on 4 December 2011, the Government tasked the
Equality Ombudsman (DO) with undertaking a pilot study on methods
for investigating the composition and conditions of life of the
population. One of the aims of this task was to study the possibilities of
collecting information on the conditions of life among the population.
This would be done based on the number of people who identify
themselves as belonging to Sweden’s national minorities. The aim was
also to enable separate reporting of the grounds for discrimination in the
Discrimination Act (2008:567), which are not currently reported in
official statistics.
The findings of the pilot study were reported by the DO in November
2012. It is clear from the study that there is currently no general method
that is suitable for collecting information on the national minorities. To
enable investigations over a longer period, special solutions are required
for each group instead. However, these special solutions mean that the
investigations would make comparisons between different groups
difficult, which could also be a problem from a minority policy
13

perspective. Another factor pointed out by the Equality Ombudsman is
that, before investigations are undertaken systematically, there must be
an acceptance in each group, which does not exist in all minority groups
at present.
Thus a number of challenges remain before Sweden can take a position
on whether it is suitable to compile statistics on minority languagespeakers and their geographical distribution and the methods that would
be suitable, were this to be the case, both in legal terms and from the
perspectives of the minority groups themselves.
41. The Committee of Experts asks for information concerning the state
monitoring of the implementation of the law and would like to receive
information about more examples of policy initiatives undertaken by
public bodies.
The aim of the follow-up system that was introduced in 2010 is to
improve the Government’s ability to monitor further developments in
the area. As mentioned in the former report, the follow-up system
consists of different parts.






The minority policy objective has been made tangible and
broken down into a number of sub-sections, so that the effects of
minority policy can be followed up within each sub-section.
Responsibility for follow-up has been introduced, in which
the County Administrative Board in Stockholm County and the
Sami Parliament have been assigned responsibility for following
up the implementation of minority policy. These authorities also
provide assistance to other administrative authorities through
advice, information and similar activities related to the
application of the Act (2009:724) on National Minorities and
Minority Languages. The aim is to facilitate work at the municipal
level. An annual follow-up report is submitted to the Government.
Measures to increase knowledge on the Act (2009:724) on
National Minorities and Minority Languages and the rights that
are held by the national minorities.
Better communication between public authorities.

The County Administrative Board in Stockholm County and the Sami
Parliament have been assigned responsible for following up application
of the Act on National Minorities and Minority Languages and they
submit annual reports to the Government. Follow-up is based on the Act
on National Minorities, the minority policy objective and its subsections. The annual follow-up report from the Sami Parliament and the
County Administrative Board in Stockholm County is based on
information collected annually from all administrative municipalities,
other municipalities, county councils and central government
14

authorities. The County Administrative Board in Stockholm County and
the Sami Parliament have developed a web-based formula that makes it
possible to compare developments in the area from year to year. Based
on the latest follow-up report, it can be seen that work in the field of
minority policy gives results since most of the municipalities included in
the administrative areas currently comply with their commitments under
the Act on National Minorities and Minority Languages. The need for
different types of initiatives at local, regional and national levels
continues, however, to be large, particularly outside the administrative
areas. Outside the administrative areas, where only the statutory basic
protection for national minorities applies, knowledge about minority
rights and central government’s responsibility for them, continues to be
minimal.
Since 2010, the County Administrative Board and the Sami Parliament
have undertaken a number of, often annual, initiatives to support
municipalities and county councils. Some examples are:
 implementation of different information meetings,
conferences and educational seminars for municipalities,
county councils and authorities,
 visits to all the municipalities in the administrative areas,
 annual dialogue meetings with representatives of the
national minorities,
 the production and distribution of information material to
municipalities, county councils and minority
representatives,
 meetings with specifically designated government
authorities,
 The development of an intranet within the website
www.minoritet.se, in order to facilitate the work of the
authorities concerned,
 distribution of the Sami Parliament’s language manual to
Sami administrative municipalities, and
 the production and distribution of a manual for minority
efforts, directed at municipalities and county councils.
As part of the work of coordinating authorities, eleven authorities were
tasked in 2010–2012 with following up, analysing and reporting their
internal efforts, based on the three sub-sections of minority policy:
discrimination and vulnerability; influence and participation, and
language and cultural identity. These authorities are the National Police
Board, the National Board of Health and Welfare, the National Institute
of Public Health, the National Agency for Education, the Swedish
Schools Inspectorate, the former National Agency for Higher Education,
Lantmäteriet (the Swedish mapping, cadastral and land registration
authority), the Equality Ombudsman, the National Board for Youth
Affairs, the Election Authority and the Swedish Arts Council.
15

The Committee of Experts would like to see examples of initiatives taken
by these authorities. In its work on combating discrimination and
vulnerability, the National Board for Youth Affairs has provided support
to a number of activities working against discrimination, racism and
intolerance and thereby combating exposure of national minorities and
others to such phenomena. In addition, funds have been granted to
activities being run by the groups themselves. Both the Jewish Central
Council and the National Roma Youth Association have been granted
project funds for initiatives to combat racism and intolerance. Several
authorities have also taken initiatives designed to raise levels of
knowledge aimed at combating the vulnerability of minority groups, and
in the National Agency for Education’s courses for further training for
teachers, special attention has been given to issues related to national
minorities in pre-schools and schools. At the National Police Board, a
review is underway of the three-year national policy and plan for
diversity and equal treatment that expired in 2012, aimed at including
efforts for the national minorities.
Within the sub-section of influence and participation, it can be
mentioned that several of the authorities have held consultative
meetings and that some of them have been coordinating these meetings
since 2010. This coordination has been appreciated by representatives of
minorities. Over the period 2010–2012, there has been a positive
development in the way in which authorities are providing minority
groups with opportunities for influence in planning, implementation and
follow-up of initiatives that particularly involve the national minorities.
The National Board for Youth Affairs has granted funds to organisations
for young people who belong to the national minorities, among other
things, for the formation of a common platform for Sweden’s national
minority youth associations. Grants have also been allocated for the
organisation of women and for gender equality projects.
Within the third sub-section, language and cultural identity, the Swedish
Arts Council, for example, has monitored the regions' efforts to promote
minority languages and culture via the new cultural cooperation model.
This is a new model for distributing certain central government funds to
regional cultural activities. The model was introduced in 2011 and the aim
is to bring culture closer to the citizens and to provide the conditions for
greater regional influence and responsibility.
The National Board of Health and Welfare has begun a project aimed at
identifying the elderly care for Sami people offered by the administrative
municipalities and the views of Sami people on how elderly care could,
and should be run. The National Board of Health and Welfare has also
held consultations or dialogue meetings with representatives of the
Roma, the Sami, the Tornedalers and the Swedish Finns. In addition to
16

this, a dialogue meeting with Roma representatives has been held,
focusing on children and young people, and a consultation meeting was
held with representatives of the Jewish community in Stockholm in
March 2013.
In 2011, the National Police Board published information on its external
website (www.polisen.se), in the national minority languages, on how to
report crime, contact the police, apply for a passport, the rules that apply
to traffic and possible support for the victims of crime. In addition, over
the period 2010–2012, the National Police Board has written to the 21
police authorities, requesting their submission of reports regarding their
efforts within minority policy. The police authorities state that, when
requested, they use interpreters in contacts with people belonging to one
of the national minorities. Some of the police authorities also state that
they have produced information specific to their own authority, in
addition to information that has been made available on the Swedish
Police’s external website. One police authority also reports that it is
participating in a cooperation project with a municipality, aimed at
revitalising and developing the Sami language.
Beginning in 2013 and in order to actively continue to promote and speed
up implementation of reforms at the national level, the Government has
assigned several of the eleven authorities that were tasked in general
with following up and analysing their initiatives on the basis of the
minority policy objectives over a three-year period, with a renewed and
more targeted task within the framework of their own areas of
responsibility. The authorities that were given a renewed and more
precise task in 2013 are the National Board for Youth Affairs, the Swedish
Arts Council, the Swedish Schools Inspectorate, the National Agency for
Education and the National Institute of Public Health.
With regard to Lantmäteriet’s (the Swedish mapping, cadastral and land
registration authority) work on place names, see the answer under
Article 10.2.g. With regard to the National Board of Health and Welfare
and the National Institute of Public Health, see also the answer under
Article 7.1.d.
46. The Committee of Experts encourages the Swedish authorities to
clarify the status of Elfdalian as a language or dialect through, for
example, commissioning an independent scientific study, in cooperation with the speakers.
The Ministry of Employment held a meeting with representatives of
Elfdalian on 14 March 2013, to discuss the situation of Elfdalian . Ahead
of the meeting, a thorough survey was made of written material in the
form of reports and other available written information on Elfdalian
and its status. The meeting was also attended by representatives of the
17

Swedish Institute for Language and Folklore (ISOF). Notes from the
meeting have been sent to the meeting participants.
Representatives of Elfdalian at the meeting expressed concern for the
future of Elfdalian and pointed especially to the fact that many children
lose their Elfdalian in connection with going to school.
In view of this meeting on 14 March and the written material available
regarding Elfdalian , the Ministry states the following:







There is no absolute consensus among linguists on whether
Elfdalian is a language or a dialect. The general view in Sweden,
however, is that Elfdalian is a dialect.
Doreta Melerska’s thesis ‘Älvdalska– mellan språkdöd och
revitalisering’ (Elfdalian –Between death and revitalisation of the
language) from 2011, shows that there are few domains of use for
Elfdalian and that few parents speak Elfdalian with their
children. According to her study, only 5 per cent (45 individuals)
of children under 15 years of age can speak Elfdalian .
According to people from Älvdalen, there are 12 different
varieties of Elfdalian spoken today. There are fears among
linguists that standardisation of Elfdalian would destroy the
dialectal diversity currently existing in Älvdalen. Attempts at
codifying Elfdalian in writing have met with opposition from
people speaking Elfdalian .
A recognition of Elfdalian as a minority language would probably
mean that demands would emerge from groups speaking other
dialects for these to be designated minority languages as well. In
all probability, this could lead to the purpose of the European
Charter on Regional or Minority Languages being undermined.

All in all, the Government finds no reason to review its previous
position with regard to Elfdalian. As mentioned in previous reports,
however, the Government considers that there is great value in
preserving Elfdalian as part of the Swedish cultural heritage and that it
is desirable for Elfdalian to be passed on to new generations.
52. The Committee of Experts welcomes the support of the Sami Language
Centre and of the authorities towards the revitalisation of Ume Sami and
encourages the Swedish authorities to continue its efforts, most notably in
relation to language acquisition and research. It also asks the authorities
to
clarify to what extent Ume Sami is specifically promoted by the Sami
Language Centres.
Various initiatives are being taken to revitalise Ume Sami at national and
municipal levels. In 2010–2012, Ume Sami was included in 18 per cent of
the applications received by ISOF for grants to revitalisation projects.
18

Projects that have been granted funds include a number of language
immersion projects in Ume Sami in Ammarnäs and Lycksele. In several
cases, these immersion projects have also received funding from the
administrative municipalities concerned.
At Umeå University, university courses have been held in practical Ume
Sami. The number of participants in these course, according to the Sami
Parliament, was considered to be high in comparison with the number of
speakers; in 2010–2011, 24 students took part and during academic year
2011–2012, eleven people.
The Sami language centre’s work includes methods development
initiatives to strengthen conditions for individuals to use and reclaim the
Sami language and is intended to meet the needs of the Sami in
reclaiming their language, regardless of its variety, through its activities
in Östersund and Tärnaby. The aim is for the methods being developed
to be used for all Sami varieties, and thus also Ume Sami. The Sami
information centre has also contributed to the translation into Swedish,
of a Master thesis in sociolinguistics on the use of Ume Sami and North
Sami within reindeer husbandry in bilingual Sami villages, so that
publication of the thesis could be assured in Sweden.
At the municipal level, primarily in the administrative municipalities in
the area in which Ume Sami is spoken, a number of different activities
are underway, in order to support and promote Ume Sami in various
ways. Since January 2013, one municipality within the Ume Sami area is
running a language revitalisation project to strengthen the national
minority languages, where Ume Sami is included as a natural
component. The project aims at finding other ways of strengthening
languages, apart from mother tongue tuition. There are some
municipalities within the Ume Sami area that are running outreach
activities to inform Sami families of their rights and to encourage them
to apply for mother tongue tuition for their children. Another
municipality has offered its employees further training in Ume Sami at
Umeå University, based on a survey of its personnel’s language
knowledge in 2012. This course has been funded by the municipality and
held in working hours. Otherwise, the municipalities note an increased
demand for pre-school and mother tongue tuition in Ume Sami. The lack
of teachers, however, is a matter of concern and the solution for several
of the municipalities has been to purchase teaching from other
municipalities. Within elderly care, the demand is small, but several
municipalities organise activities with a Sami theme for older people.
PART II. Description of developments under part II of the
Convention

Article 7. Objectives and principles

19

Article 7.1.a – Recognition of regional or minority languages as an
expression of cultural wealth
For more information on this, the previous report is referred to.
Article 7.1.b – Respect for the geographical area of each regional or
minority language
This enhanced minority protection within the language administrative
areas for Finnish, Meänkieli and Sami aims at raising the status of these
minority languages, making the languages visible and increasing public
services in the minority languages. In recent years, these areas have been
extended to more municipalities. After an application to the
Government, five municipalities were approved for an administrative
area in 2011, nine in 2012, and eight in 2013. This means an extension from
seven municipalities and one county council in 2009 to 64 municipalities
and twelve county councils in 2013. In appendix 3, a map is given of the
administrative areas for Finnish, Sami and Meänkieli.
The Swedish Government considers that opportunities for municipalities
to apply for membership of an administrative area are a good way of
strengthening minority policy in accordance with the minority policy
strategy. Being part of an administrative area means taking on greater
municipal responsibility for following the legislation that is to protect
the national minorities.
It is particularly the need for elderly care and pre-school activities in
minority languages in these municipalities that has actively promoted
the increase in the interest of municipalities in wanting to join an
administrative area. In the opinion of the Government, the increase in
the number of municipalities that actively take a position on joining an
administrative area indicates that interest and understanding for the
Government’s minority policy and the needs of the national minorities
have been strengthened.
The substantial expansion of the administrative areas since 2010 means
that the need for support has increased among the municipalities, county
councils and central government authorities involved. The Government
has therefore allocated special resources for coordination, measures to
raise the level of knowledge and information and training initiatives,
primarily in administrative municipalities. The County Administrative
Board in Stockholm County and the Sami Parliament have thereby been
able to undertake a number of initiatives, including a large number of
information meetings, conferences and seminars.
Article 7.1.c – Resolute action to promote regional or minority
languages

20

84. (box) The Committee of Experts encourages the Swedish authorities to
ensure that Yiddish and Romani Kalé benefit from adequate practical and
financial support from the Language Council of the Institute for Language
and Folklore.
The Language Council, which is part of ISOF, has reference groups for
Romani Chib and Yiddish, as it has for the other national minority
languages, for which the agency has language conservation (corpus
planning) responsibility. ISOF has two full-time employed Roma
language consultants, one of whom has Romani Kale as their mother
tongue.
The initiatives implemented include a study of the need for language
conservation initiatives for Yiddish and language seminars on,
translations into, and the purchase of linguistics literature in, Romani
Chib.
On the Language Council’s website, news and information texts on
Yiddish are available. Translations to Yiddish have been made when
needed, and a transcription system for the spelling of Yiddish with Latin
letters is in the planning stage. In addition, the Language Council has
published material in different varieties of Romani Chib on its website.
The Language Council provides advice and recommendations on Romani
Chib via email and telephone.
ISOF grants funds for revitalisation projects, including those involving
Romani Chib and Yiddish. The distribution of grants has been as follows
in the three-year period during which revitalisation initiatives for
national minority languages have been underway:




In 2010, SEK 171 000 was granted for Yiddish and SEK
542 000 for Romani Chib.
In 2011, SEK 641 000 was granted for Yiddish and SEK
557 000 for Romani Chib.
In 2012, SEK 515 000 was granted for Yiddish and SEK
538 000 for Romani Chib.

For more information on the distribution of revitalisation grants, see
under item 85.
85. The Committee of Experts asks the Swedish authorities to provide more
detailed and language-specific information on the allocation of funds in
the next periodical report (ISOF).
During the period 2010–2013, ISOF has had some SEK 4 900 000 at its
disposal for language conservation and revitalisation initiatives for the
national minority languages, SEK 1 million of which were annually for
21

language conservation and SEK 3 900 000 annually for revitalisation
measures. In addition to this, further initiatives involving the national
minority languages are funded from the ISOF framework appropriation.
Initiatives for revitalising the national minority languages have primarily
been taken via the granting of funds to revitalisation projects in
accordance with the Ordinance (2010:21) on government subsidies to
initiatives supporting the national minority languages. All the national
minority languages are included in this support. When distributing
funds, language projects that focus on children and young people, and
reading-promotion projects have been given special priority. In addition,
projects focusing on language as the bearer of culture and the
transmission of language between generations have been promoted.
Most of the revitalisation projects have been implemented in the form of
language camps, language immersion or language clubs, where games
and play activities have been part of learning the language. On the
whole, the number of participants has varied between 12 and 60 people
and the participants have mainly been children or young people.
Revitalisation projects aim, however, at being intergenerational.
The main purpose of language revitalisation projects is to strengthen
knowledge of the national minority languages by teaching children,
young people and adults to speak, read and write and increasing their
vocabulary. Another purpose is to develop a temporary, single-language
environment in which children and young people are given the
opportunity, in active and natural forms, to continually speak minority
languages with the help of older people’s initiatives.
In the last three years, it has emerged that there is a lack of continuity in
language learning. For example, insufficient attention has been given in
these projects to the need for repetition, time and continuity in order to
learn a language. ISOF therefore intends to encourage and, in future,
prioritise more extensive and well-prepared projects that also stimulate
continued revitalisation after the conclusion of the project.
Project applications are dealt with in a reference group appointed by
ISOF. This group contains representatives of the five national minorities.
The reference group prepares applications and presents a joint proposal
for the distribution of grants. Decisions on grants are made by ISOF’s
Director-General. It is worth noting that the number of applications has
markedly declined during the years. The reason for this decline, however,
is unclear. The distribution of funds has been as follows during 2011 and
2012.
Government grants in 2012 for initiatives to support the national
minority languages

22

Finnish
Yiddish
Meänkieli
Romani
Chib
Sami
Several
languages
Total

Number of
eligible
applications
30
5
8
15

Number of
applications
approved
10
3
5
4

19
3
80

Sum of grants
(SEK 1000)

Share of total sum of
grants

627
515
799
538

18 %
15 %
23 %
15 %

10
1

971
50

28 %
1%

33

3 500

100 %

Government grants in 2011 for initiatives to support the national
minority languages
Number of
Number of
Sum of grants Share of
eligible
applications (SEK 1000)
total sum of
applications
approved
grants
Finnish
57
17
832
24 %
Yiddish
10
5
641
18 %
Meänkieli
9
4
504
14 %
Romani Chib 19
8
557
16 %
Sami
24
10
966
28 %
Several
3
0
0
0%
languages
Total
122
44
3 500
100 %

In 2012, the special funds at ISOF’s disposal for language conservation
initiatives for minority languages have mainly been used for initiatives
for Romani Chib and to a lesser extent, Meänkieli, Finnish and Yiddish. A
special initiative has been taken to spread knowledge about, and show
good examples of language conservation and revitalisation efforts for
Romani Chib among the Roma.
A small portion of the funds from the appropriation has been used for
translation into Sami and for a newly-established minority language
prize. This prize is awarded annually to a person or an organisation that
has made significant contributions towards minority languages in
Sweden. This may, for example, be a matter of language policy work,
interpretation and translation, or pedagogical work.
86. According to information at the disposal of the Committee of Experts,
the Swedish Government plans to change its funding system for cultural
activities, organisations and smaller 16 archives. In future, such bodies are
to be funded by a regional funding system only. It is not clear to the
Committee of Experts what effect this may have on the national or
umbrella organisations for
23

regional or minority languages that are currently being funded on a
national level. The Committee of Experts asks the Swedish authorities to
clarify this issue in the next periodical report.
See the answer under Article 12.1.a and 12.1.g. with regard to the cultural
cooperation model.
Article 7.1.d – Facilitating and/or encouraging use of regional or
minority languages in public and private life
93. The Committee of Experts welcomes these positive developments,
and looks forward to receiving information on the practical application
of these legal rights and obligations in the next periodical report.
(elderly care in minority languages)
Health and medical care
The Government considers it important that health and medical care
providers increase the pace of their work on translating information into
the minority languages. In June 2012, therefore, the Government decided
to allocate SEK 3 million for the development of information in the
national minority languages on the www.1177.se and
www.umo.se.websites. The website www.1177.se contains health and
medical care information and www.umo.se provides information,
support and advice on issues related to health, sex and relations, to
young people between the ages of 13-25.
Since the last report, the National Institute of Public Health and the
National Board of Health and Welfare have translated several documents
and texts directed at the general public into the national minority
languages. Information material that was distributed in connection with
the swine influenza epidemic and information on the vaccination of
children and translated into Finnish and Romani Chib can be mentioned
as examples here.
The National Board of Health and Welfare has also published an
information sheet ‘New Act on National Minorities and Minority
Languages’ (5/2010) and an accompanying pocket-sized folder to
disseminate knowledge on the new Act and to provide support for staff
in health and medical care and the social services. The accompanying
folder describes briefly and simply the most important aspects of the Act
(2009:724) on National Minorities and Minority Languages and gives
advice on where to find more information. The folder is free and began
to be disseminated in the autumn of 2011. The effect expected is that
individual people from the national minorities will feel that knowledge is
increasing within health and medical care and the social services.

24

In 2012, the National Board of Health and Welfare adopted translation
and interpretation guidelines that state that general information on the
activities of the agency and the rights of the national minorities is to be
available in all the minority languages on the external website. The same
year, the National Board of Health and Welfare produced a web-based
tool that offers each employee the opportunity to voluntarily state the
languages of which they have a command and which they could consider
using in their work, for example, by assisting colleagues and target
groups with minor translation and interpreting tasks.
Elderly care in minority languages
Since 1 January 2009, it has been possible for municipalities to use
freedom of choice systems under the Act (2008:962) on systems of choice
in the public sector (LOV). The aim of the reform is to create greater
freedom of choice for the individual user by increasing the diversity of
actors and the supply of services, within such sectors as elderly care. By
enabling users themselves to choose the provider of a service, conditions
are improved for being able to offer elderly care in the different minority
languages, since representatives of the ethnic minorities themselves are
able to offer certain community services in the municipalities that have
chosen to introduce a freedom of choice system. At present, 133
municipalities have already implemented LOV and a further 42
municipalities have decided to implement it. The profiling of operations
that has already taken place is often a matter of staff having special
language skills. According to reports from the National Board of Health
and Welfare, in 2012 there were around 900 care providers throughout
the country that are active within the freedom of choice system. In some
fifty municipalities, there are individual providers offering some type of
special focus and/or special skills in their operations. In some 40 of
these, this is a matter of special language skills, including staff who
speaks Finnish. In some municipalities, elderly care that offers language
skills in one or more of the minority languages is also offered by the
municipalities themselves. One example of such housing is the home for
the elderly in Kiruna, which was inaugurated in 2013 and offers elderly
care for people who speak Finnish, Meänkieli or Sami.
The National Board of Health and Welfare has initiated a project that is
to describe the elderly care offered by the 19 Sami administrative
municipalities and the views of the Sami themselves on how elderly care
in Sami could, and should be organised. The project has three objectives:
to generate knowledge, to drive developments forward towards elderly
care whose design is based on the needs of the national minorities and to
develop and test new forms of consultation. The National Board of
Health and Welfare’s interest in the issue has been a support for local
activities, aimed at developing elderly care in the minority languages. A
report will be published in the autumn of 2013.

25

On 24 March 2011, the Government decided to appoint an Inquiry Chair
tasked with presenting proposals for how the patient’s position within,
and influence over health and medical care could be strengthened (ToR
2011:25). The Inquiry presented its first interim report
ʻPatientlagʼ(Patient legislation) (Swedish Government Official Reports
2013:2) in January 2013. According to the Inquiry’s proposals, the
information that the patient is entitled to receive should be clarified and
adapted to the recipient’s age, maturity and language background.
Even according to today’s legislation the patient must be given
individually adapted information about his or her health status and on
the methods for examination, care and treatment that are available.
However, the Inquiry’s proposals also mean more specific directions and
clarification of the information obligation within health and medical
care, such as, for example, higher demands for information to be
individually adapted, in terms of language and so on. The Inquiry’s
proposals are currently being prepared at the Government Offices.
Making visible
See the answer under Article 10.2.g concerning place names in minority
languages and the answer under Article 11 regarding radio and TV
broadcasts.

Article 7.1.e – Cooperation between speakers of the same language
and other languages
108. The Committee of Experts asks the Swedish authorities to report
on measures taken to facilitate and support such co-operation between
different minority language groups in the next periodical report.
Since the last report, different measures have been taken, aimed at
promoting and facilitating contact and at supporting cooperation
between the national minority groups. One or two examples are given
below.
In the Government Bill ‘Från erkännande till egenmakt – regeringens
strategi för de nationella minoriteterna’ (From Recognition to
Empowerment – the Government’s Strategy for the National Minorities)
(Government Bill 2008/09:158), the Government made the assessment
that there was a need for gathering expertise, primarily among the
national minorities, with knowledge of the situation for each minority
language, experience from active revitalisation work and knowledge of
current efforts in the field. To collect this expertise, the Government
decided in 2010 to appoint a reference group for revitalisation of the
national minority languages. In 2010–2012, this group has constituted an
arena for dialogue and the exchange of experience between the national
minorities regarding revitalisation issues, aimed at gaining more in26

depth knowledge, disseminating experience and coordinating initiatives
in the area. The reference group’s final report describes, among other
things, the challenges involved in the work of revitalising the minority
languages and the needs existing for a similar arena for cooperation
between minority groups in the future.
In February 2012, representatives of young people who belong to the
national minorities gathered for the first time at a consultative meeting
with the Minister responsible for minority policy, Erik Ullenhag, at the
Ministry of Employment. The aim of the meeting was to provide an
opportunity for the exchange of experience and views on Sweden’s
minority policy. It was also an opportunity for the representatives to
discuss important issues with young people from other national
minorities. As a result of this discussion meeting with young people, a
platform has been created for the national minorities’ youth
organisations. The platform will enable the exchange of knowledge and
experience between these organisations and will be run in cooperation
with the Svenska Tornedalingars Riksförbund (STR-T) (the Swedish
association for Tornedalers), the Jewish Youth Association in Sweden,
the Finnish-Swedish Youth Association, the Sami Parliament Youth
Council and the magazine Sàminuorra. The National Board for Youth
Affairs has granted project funds for the platform.
Another area in which cooperation between the national minorities takes
place is work on the minoritet.se website. The Sami Parliament is
responsible for the website for the national minorities
(www.minoritet.se). In order to get the national minorities involved in
the development of the website, a council will be set up with
representatives of all the national minorities.
Article 7.1.f – Education in, and studies of regional or minority
languages at all appropriate levels
112. (box) The Committee of Experts urges the Swedish authorities to adopt
a comprehensive and structured approach to strengthening the teaching
and study of all regional or minority languages.
See the answer under the Committee of Ministers’ recommendations
nos. 1, 2 and 4, and under Article 8.
119. The fourth periodical report does not provide any information with
regard to the teaching of regional or minority languages at
förskoleklass level.
The curriculum for the pre-school (Lpfö 98, revised in 2010) states that
an awareness of one’s own cultural heritage and participation in other
peoples’ culture are to contribute to children developing their ability to
27

understand and appreciate the conditions and values of other people.
Children belonging to the national minorities can be given support in
developing a multicultural identity at pre-school. According to the
Education Act (2010:800), teaching at the pre-school and in the preschool class should also contribute towards ensuring that children who
have a mother tongue other than Swedish have the opportunity to
develop both the Swedish language and their mother tongue.
Some municipalities are to provide parents with the opportunity to place
their children in a pre-school or equivalent, where all, or parts of the
activities are conducted in Sami, Finnish or Meänkieli. This right applies
to the municipalities that are part of the administrative areas for Finnish
(48 municipalities), Sami (19 municipalities) or Meänkieli (6
municipalities). The supervisory agency, the Swedish Schools
Inspectorate, has undertaken targeted supervision (reg.no. 40-2011:3022)
in the area to ensure that the municipalities fulfil their obligations. This
supervision showed some shortfalls in part of the municipalities’
activities. The Swedish Schools Inspectorate continually follows up the
shortfalls that emerged in its review.
128. (box) The Committee of Experts again strongly urges the Swedish
authorities to devise innovative solutions to the lack of Romani-teachers in
co-operation with the speakers.
During its work on the report ‘Lärarförsörjningen för de nationella
minoriteterna – hur kan den tryggas?ʼ (Teacher supply for the national
minorities – how can it be secured?), the authority that was then
responsible, the National Agency for Higher Education, held consultative
meetings with representatives of the national organisations for the
national minorities on several occasions. The report’s proposals have
formed the basis of the deliberations and changes that the Government
has implemented in recent years.
As previously mentioned in the report, in its Budget Bill for 2013, the
Government tasked Södertörn University with national responsibility
and funds for building up and developing subject teacher training in
Romani Chib as soon as possible. The funds allocated for this purpose
amount to SEK 2 000 000 per year. In this work, the University is to take
account of a dialogue with the national minority concerned. The
University is also required to cooperate with the actors involved in
Sweden, and where relevant, also with actors in other countries that have
experience of work with this language. The University is required to
build up a programme in Romani Chib, based on the aim of offering
education in Romani Chib every academic year beginning in 2014. The
Government intends to return to the issue of evaluation of this special
undertaking.

28

In the autumn of 2008, an agreement was drawn up between the
Education Department in Stockholm City and Södertörn University
regarding a contract educational programme directed at three
unqualified Roma teachers. In principle, this teacher training programme
followed the ordinary teacher training programme, with the focus on
pre-schools, the pre-school class and the earlier years of compulsory
school. A few partial courses were merged and the programme included
a specialisation of its own on Roma history and the current situation of
the Roma. The Roma teachers received their qualifications at an
examination ceremony in October 2010.
130. (box) The Committee of Experts again urges the Swedish authorities to
increase the availability of teaching in or of Yiddish, in particular in
Gothenburg, Stockholm and Malmö.
The Vasa Real School in Stockholm has applied for, and been granted
permission by the National Agency for Education to organise a special
programme in Jewish studies. Pupils taking this special programme are
also to be offered the chance of selecting Hebrew and Yiddish, as their
language choice. Apart from this, Hillel School in Stockholm has offered
teaching in Yiddish outside the ordinary teaching.
Lund University has had national responsibility for Yiddish since 2007
and the University has received funds for building up the programme in
order to increase access to teaching in Yiddish. This has resulted in Lund
University being able to offer in 2012, for the first time, a course at BA
level in the subject of Yiddish. A total of 71 places were offered, 12 of
which at BA level and 12 in a web-based beginner course. These places
were applied for by 118 people, 69 of whom were first-choice applicants.
The number of full-time students was 12 and the number of full-time
equivalent studies was 6.
In the autumn term of 2012, Lund University provided courses on the
campus and distance courses in the language as well as in Jewish culture
and history. The courses are provided at beginner, basic and advanced
levels. Teaching takes place in Swedish or English. According to our
information, the University is one of the few higher education
institutions in the world offering distance courses in Yiddish both to
national and international students at different levels. This also enables
interested people from other parts of Sweden to take part in courses. It is
also possible for other universities and higher education institutions to
offer education in Yiddish.
Article 7.1.g – Provision of facilities enabling non-speakers of a
regional or minority language living in the area where it is used to
learn it if they so desire

29

See the answer under Article 7.1.h.
Article 7.1.h – The promotion of study and research on regional or
minority languages at universities or equivalent institutions
Teaching and research in Finnish is available at the universities of
Stockholm, Uppsala, Umeå and Mälardalen. Teaching and research in
Sami is provided, for example, at the universities of Uppsala and Umeå.
Teaching and research in Romani Chib are to be developed at Södertörn
University. Teaching and research in Yiddish are provided at Lund
University.
Teaching on national minorities and their linguistic conditions is
provided, for example, at Hugo Valentin-centrum at Uppsala University
and at Institutionen för moderna språk at Uppsala University and at
Centrum för tvåspråkighetsforskning at Stockholm University. At the
latter institutions, some research is also undertaken on Swedish language
policy.
Article 7.1.i – Promotion of transnational exchanges
On 10 January 2012, Fylkesmannen in Norway, i.e., the Norwegian
equivalent of county administrative boards, presented a report from the
working group for cooperation between Sweden and Norway on Sami
teaching. The report contained proposals for intiatives and greater
cooperation between Norway and Sweden. As a result of this,
possibilities for cooperation between Sweden and Norway are bing
discussed with regard to efforts to strengthen teaching in Sami. Examples
of measures being discussed are an improvement in access to teaching
materials and access to trained teachers.
Article 7.2 – Eliminate unjustified distinctions, exclusions,
restrictions or preferences applying to the use of regional or
minority languages
For more information on this, the previous report is referred to.
Article 7.3 – Promote mutual understanding between all linguistic
groups in the country
The Government provides funding to the website www.minoritet.se,
which aims at spreading knowledge and information on Sweden’s
national minorities, minority languages and minority rights. This is done
by increasing the knowledge of the majority population, decisionmakers, civil servants and the national minorities themselves about
Sweden’s international minority commitments and minority and

30

discrimination legislation. The Sami Parliament is responsible for the
website.
The revised curriculum for compulsory school entered into force on 1
July 2011. This focuses more clearly on the national minorities. One of the
overall knowledge goals is that schools are to be responsible for each
pupil acquiring knowledge of the cultures, languages, religions and
history of the national minorities after completing compulsory school.
The syllabi draw attention to the national minorities, particularly in the
subjects of Swedish, history and civics.
According to the syllabus in Swedish, one of the aims of the course is to
help enable pupils to meet and acquaint themselves with the national
minority languages in Sweden. For example, the status of minority
languages in society is part of the core contents of Swedish in years 7–9.
The aim of teaching in the subject of history, under the compulsory
school syllabus, is for pupils to acquire an understanding of different
cultural contexts and ways of life. Part of the core content of years 7–9 is
a historical perspective on the indigenous people, the Sami, and the
situation of the other national minorities in Sweden.
In the subject of civics under the syllabus, teaching in years 4–6 must
discuss the status of the Sami as an indigenous people and other national
minorities in Sweden and their rights. In the core content of years 7–9 in
the same subject, a further discussion is required of the significance of
the special situation and rights of the national minorities and the Sami
indigenous people.
See also the answers under Article 7.1.e and Article 8.1.g.
Article 7.4 – Participation and influence
The aim of Sweden’s strategy for national minorities includes
strengthening opportunities for the national minorities to influence
issues that involve them within important social sectors, and by doing so,
increase these groups’ empowerment.
Under Section 5 of the Act on National Minorities and Minority
Languages, the administrative authorities are to give the national
minorities the opportunity to exert influence on issues that involve them,
and as far as possible, consult with representatives of the national
minorities on such issues.
The annual follow-up reports of the Sami Parliament and the County
Administrative Board in Stockholm County show that opportunities for
the national minorities to exert an influence have increased, both at the
31

local and national levels. Within the administrative areas, all the
municipalities, apart from three, state that they have held consultations
during 2012, which is an improvement since the previous year. At the
same time, this improvement does not apply to all five national
minorities to the same extent, and it varies in different parts of the
country. Several of the authorities that have had special undertakings in
the period 2010–2012 have held consultative meetings with
representatives of the national minorities. In order to make minority
participation easier and to enable a more coherent picture of different
areas of activity, several authorities have been coordinating their
consultations since 2011. For example, the National Agency for
Education, the former National Agency for Higher Education and the
Swedish Schools Inspectorate have held joint consultations with each
minority group. The National Agency for Special Needs Education and
Schools and the National Agency for Higher Vocational Education have
also joined this consultative group.
The obligation for the administrative authorities to provide
opportunities for influence has led to a demand for minority
organisations’ participation in consultation. In order to support and
facilitate activities for the organisations representing national minorities,
government grants are allocated every year after an application, under
the Ordinance on Government Support for National Minorities
(2005:765). Fourteen organisations applied for grants in 2012, and twelve
organisations were considered to fulfil the requirements under the
Ordinance. This organisation grant amounts to a total of SEK 4 600 000
per year. In 2012, the Sami Parliament and the County Administrative
Board held a national conference, aimed at developing knowledge about
consultation and influence. The result of the conference will be
disseminated in various ways, including an inspiration manual in 2013. In
addition, the National Board for Youth Affairs has granted funds to
organisations for young people who belong to the national minorities,
among other things, for the formation of a common platform for
Sweden’s national minority youth associations.
During 2010–2012, annual consultative meetings have also been held with
the responsible Minister and representatives of the national minorities.
These consultative meetings are an important part of the Government’s
work on implementing the strategy for the national minorities.
The strategy for Roma inclusion should be characterised by Roma
participation and Roma influence. The strategy states that all initiatives
are to be implemented in consultation with Roma representatives or
experts. From the reports from the authorities that have been assigned
tasks in this field, it is clear that different forms of dialogue and
consultation are being held with Roma representatives. All the
municipalities participating in the strategy’s pilot project are working
32

actively with establishing a Roma council, or otherwise holding an ongoing dialogue with the Roma living in the municipality. The Swedish
Association of Local Authorities and Regions, which has been tasked
with providing support in work on consultation, has compiled good
examples of consultative meetings in a handbook which is to be
disseminated to the municipalities to support them in their work.
In June 2013, the Government Offices also decided to form a Roma
reference group for work on the strategy for Roma inclusion. The
reference group is to ensure Roma participation and influence in the
work on the strategy for Roma inclusion and to contribute information
and views on how the Government can develop management and
initiatives in the strategy. A first dialogue meeting was held with the
reference group in September 2013.
See also the answer under Article 7.1.e.
Article 7.5 –Non-territorial languages
See the answer under Article 7.4.
PART III. Description of developments under part III of
the Convention

Languages: Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli
Article 8 – Education
General Article 8
As has been previously mentioned in the report, education at pre- and
compulsory school levels has been subject to a number of reforms
through a new Education Act, Education Ordinance and curriculum.
The Swedish Schools Inspectorate is the supervisory authority for the
school system and is the central government tool for ensuring that local
education providers fulfil their obligations. As part of its supervisory
activities, the Swedish Schools Inspectorate presented, in 2012, the
results of a review of mother tongue tuition in the national minority
languages (Swedish Schools Inspectorate Report 2012:2). This points to
the challenges facing education providers. The education providers that
took part in this review have also received individual reports on their
results together with suggestions for development scope in their
activities. This review is part of central government supervision in the
area, to ensure that education providers fulfil the various obligations for
which they are responsible. The results of the review provide a valuable
basis for the work of the education providers that were monitored in
strengthening their efforts. The review also clarifies the responsibilities
33

of education providers under central government regulations and thus
provides valuable information, both to education providers, pupils and
their custodians.
According to the Education Act (2010:800), the pre-school should
contribute towards ensuring that children who have a mother tongue
other than Swedish have the opportunity to develop both the Swedish
language and their mother tongue. The curriculum for the pre-school
also stipulates that the pre-school should ‘contribute towards ensuring
that children who have a mother tongue other than Swedish have the
opportunity to develop both the Swedish language and their mother
tongue’. The municipalities that are part of the administrative areas for
Finnish, Sami or Meänkieli receive central government funds in order to
comply with this. Under the Education Act, mother tongue tuition in a
national minority language should be offered, even if the language is not
the pupil’s daily means of interaction in the home.
The National Agency for Education is responsible for information
initiatives on the rights of the national minorities to pre-school and
school. It disseminates information, such as the brochure ‘Förskolan är
till för ditt barn’ (The preschool is for your child). This primarily targets
parents and custodians and is about the pre-school curriculum. It has
been translated into several languages, including Meänkieli and North
Sami. By means of information campaigns, the National Agency for
Education disseminates awareness and knowledge of rights and
obligations to school actors with regard to, for example, teaching in
Sami. Further information is to be found on the Swedish National
Agency for Education’s website and on the Tema Modersmål website
(www.modersmal.net). Since responsibility for teaching lies with
education providers, such initiatives provide knowledge about how they
can best develop their activities and thereby fulfil the requirements
placed on their activities. Examples of this work are the information
service of the National Agency for Education, which answers questions
from individuals and education providers, and information material,
such as ‘Nationella minoriteter i förskola och skola’ (National minorities
in pre-school and school).
The Tema modersmål website for which the National Agency for
Education is responsible, offers support to teachers in their teaching in
the subject of mother tongue. The website contains teaching material,
news and teaching tools in a large number of languages, including all the
minority languages. Within the framework of work on the website, the
National Agency for Education has engaged editors from five different
Romani varieties (Arli, Kalé, Kelderash, Lovara and Romaniresande) and
editors for Sami, Yiddish, Finnish and Meänkieli. The result of this work
is better support in these languages for mother tongue activities within
pre-schools and schools, by considerably increasing access to teaching
34

tools and teaching resources. The material available on the website has
been developed, extended and supplemented in recent years so that it
now largely includes all varieties of the national minority languages.
367. The Committee of Experts has not received any information on
whether the reference group for Meänkieli has been established at the
Institute for Language and Folklore, and asks the Swedish authorities to
provide such information in the next periodical report, including
information on the work it
has carried out.
The Swedish Institute for Language and Folklore (ISOF) consults
regularly with representatives of the STR-T on the issue of how language
conservation for Meänkieli should be designed and the priorities that
should be made. Since 2010, the production of a two-way dictionary
(Meänkieli – Swedish, Swedish – Meänkieli) has been a high priority for
all the varieties of Meänkieli. This work is underway at Meän Akateemi,
supported financially by ISOF. In the long term, the aim is to appoint a
language consultant for Meänkieli, as well as to maintain the Tornedal
research archive that is currently located at ISOF. A linguistic reference
group will then also be appointed at the Institute.
161 The Committee of Experts asks the Swedish authorities to provide more
information in the next periodical report about the extent to which 1. Sami
language is taught within “integrated Sami education”; 2. such education is
bilingual; and 3. it concerns the different Sami varieties.
Since pupils are only able to receive teaching in the Sami school until the
end of year 6, integrated Sami teaching is organised for years 7–9.
Integrated Sami teaching is organised in municipal compulsory schools
and means that pupils can have lessons with Sami features and teaching
in Sami, apart from the usual mother tongue tuition in Sami. The Sami
Education Board (SaMs) contributes funds to the education providers
with which they sign agreements on integrated teaching. In these cases,
the SaMs is responsible for the costs of extending teaching time for Sami
as a mother tongue. Schools can also apply to SaMs for grants for
teaching in other subjects. Schools with integrated Sami teaching follow
the curriculum for the Sami school and then adapt the contents of
specific subjects so that they are given a Sami orientation. In 2012, a total
of 167 pupils participated in integrated Sami teaching at 16 compulsory
schools, which is an increase of 7 pupils, compared with 2011.
That the school organises mother tongue tuition in Sami is a basic
condition for receiving a grant from the SaMs for extending teaching in
Sami. The schools that have integrated Sami teaching have between two
and four hours of Sami per week. Teaching is given in three varieties,
35

North, Lule and South Sami. These varieties are those that have an
orthography of their own.
The language of teaching in integrated teaching varies from school to
school and mainly depends on the pupils’ level of skills. The aim is for
teaching to be conducted only in Sami, but today, pupils seldom have the
prior knowledge required to enable teaching in Sami alone. In subjects
other than Sami, pupils study within the ordinary teaching syllabus at
the school.
Article 8.1.a.iii – Pre-school education
167. (box) The Committee of Experts again strongly urges the
Swedish authorities to take action to promote Sami pre-school
education.
At the pre-schools run by the SaMs most of their activities take place in
Sami. Experience shows that since language teaching in the pre-school
does not have the same level of requirements as that in compulsory
school, it is easier to use Sami and Sami terminology between children
and staff within the pre-school than at compulsory school. Within preschools, it is also possible to employ staff who have a command of Sami
as child carers, instead of having to depend on being able to employ the
few Sami-speaking university educated pre-school teachers that are
available. To guarantee good quality in pre-schools, however, the SaMs
has also employed a number of qualified pre-school teachers who are
responsible for teaching at pre-school. The aim of the teaching in the
SaMs’ pre-schools is for children to have sufficient knowledge to be able
to manage lessons in different subjects that are taught entirely in Sami at
compulsory school level, after having undergone 3–4 years at a preschool.
See also the answer under recommendation 3 and item 371.
371. (box) The Committee of Experts strongly urges the Swedish authorities
to improve the offering of pre-school education in Meänkieli throughout
the area where the language is traditionally spoken.
Within the administrative area, children are entitled to pre-school
activities entirely or partially in Meänkieli. The municipalities that are
part of the administrative area for Meänkieli receive central government
funds in order to comply with this.
To ensure that the legislation is complied with, the Swedish Schools
Inspectorate has been tasked by the Government to monitor the school
system, pre-school activities and out of school centres. During the spring
of 2011, the Swedish Schools Inspectorate carried out a targeted
inspection (reg. no. 40–2011:3 022) to find out how the administrative
36

authorities are following the legislation with regard to offering preschool activities that are completely or partially conducted in Meänkieli,
Sami or Finnish. The Swedish Schools Inspectorate’s assessments are
reported in the form of individual decisions for the municipalities
monitored and as an overall report. This survey is part of the supervision
aimed at ensuring that each education provider fulfils the requirements
for which they are responsible under the legislation and thus represents
part of the work of ensuring that national minority children’s rights are
fulfilled in pre-schools. The results of this supervision show, among other
things, that half of the municipalities monitored have not formally
identified needs for pre-school activities in minority languages and that
reasonable consideration has not been taken to custodians’ wishes for
this type of activity. Where criticism was directed at a municipality, the
Swedish Schools Inspectorate has undertaken a follow-up after three
months, and if sufficient measures have not been taken, the Inspectorate
continues with its follow-up.
Article 8.1.b.iv – Primary education
175 (box) The Committee of Experts encourages the Swedish authorities to
take pro-active measures to strengthen Sami-medium primary education.
Since 2010, the SaMs receives an annual grant of SEK 1 000 000 from
appropriation area 72 Measures for national minorities. These additional
funds are used to strengthen teaching in Sami at compulsory schools by
increasing access to integrated Sami teaching. The pupils who are not
able to select Sami schools then receive teaching with Sami features, and
teaching in Sami apart from the ordinary mother tongue tuition.
The SaMs has an agreement with ten municipalities for integrated Sami
teaching; all of these are part of the administrative area for Sami and
three of them have belonged to the administrative area since 2000. One
of the municipalities has used distance teaching for integrated Sami
teaching, which means that teaching is conducted with digital aids at a
distance with teachers and pupils in different places. The SaMs has
decided to use the funds to pay for integrated Sami teaching in Sami and
Sami handicraft, as well as in social study- and natural science-oriented
subjects and home and consumer studies. The Government’s initiative
means an opportunity to increase the number of municipalities offering
integrated Sami teaching so that more children are thereby given the
opportunity to be taught in Sami at compulsory school.
See also the answer under recommendations 2 and 3 and item 161.
376. (box) The Committee of Experts again strongly urges the Swedish
authorities to take steps to provide the teaching of Meänkieli as an integral

37

part of the curriculum in all the municipalities concerned and to develop
bilingual education in Meänkieli as an alternative to mother-tongue
education.
It is possible to provide bilingual teaching in years 1–6 under the
provisions of the Education Ordinance (2011:185). The Ordinance on preschool activities in compulsory school (2011:421) also enables education
providers to offer bilingual teaching in years 7–9 in languages other than
Finnish.
Article 8.1.c. iv –Secondary education
179. (box) The Committee of Experts urges the Swedish authorities to
introduce Sami in secondary education in other municipalities where Sami
is used.
Bokenskolan Jokkmokk offers two Sami upper secondary school
programme alternatives for young people – Sami industries and the Sami
civics programme. The school recruits nationally which means that
pupils from throughout the country can apply and take the programmes
at the school. Within the new upper secondary school (GY11) the Sami
civics programme has been developed into a higher education
preparatory civics programme with a Sami orientation and as of the
autumn term of 2012, the school has also offered a Sami vocational
programme on Sami industries. In the autumn of 2013, the Sami civics
programme had a total of 15 pupils and the Sami vocational programme
had 8 registered pupils.
381. (box) The Committee of Experts strongly urges the Swedish authorities
to develop strategies, in cooperation with the Meänkieli-speakers, to
strengthen the offer of Meänkieli secondary education.
Under Chapter 15, Section 19 of the Education Act (2010:800), mother
tongue tuition in a national minority language should be offered, even if
the language is not the pupil’s daily means of interaction in the home. It
is the municipality that is obliged to offer the pupil this. A pupil at upper
secondary school is thus entitled to receive teaching in Meänkieli at
upper secondary school, if he or she so requests.
Article 8.1.d.iv – Technical and vocational education
183. The Committee of Experts urges the Swedish authorities to take a
more pro-active approach by extending and reinforcing the provision of
vocational education in Sami.
Higher vocational education courses are a post-upper secondary form
of education aimed at covering specific skills needs in the labour
market. The supply of courses is steered by the needs of the labour
38

market and therefore varies over time. In order to obtain a licence to
run a higher vocational education course, the course must meet a
need for qualified labour in the labour market that is not met via a
course under the Higher Education Act (1992:1434) or a course that
may lead to an examination under the Award of Certain Degrees
Licensing Act (1993:792). Alternatively, the course must contribute to
developing or preserving qualified professional skills within a narrow
vocational sector that is important for the individual and society.
There are no special links with minority languages in the regulatory
framework and the National Agency for Higher Vocational Education
is therefore unable to take special account of this in its assessment.
285. The Committee of Experts […] asks the Swedish authorities to
provide detailed information on whether there is teaching in or of
Finnish at any of the mentioned folk high schools or at other
institutions providing
vocational education.(Axevalla Folk High School)
Axevalla Folk High School has a branch that is located in the same
building as Alma Folk High School in Stockholm (Liljeholmen). At this
branch, Axevalla has been managing a 2-year treatment assistant
programme for bilingual participants (Finnish/Swedish). The group has
consisted of some dozen participants per programme. In May 2013, the
third and last group completed their course. The Board of the school
decided not to start a new course as of autumn 2011 because too many
resources are required. However, the Folk High School is considering
offering other, shorter courses in Finnish, provided that there is
sufficient interest.
Article 8.1.e.iii – University and other higher education
191. The Committee of Experts encourages the Swedish authorities to
take active measures so that higher education institutions are able to
offer Sami courses and do so, without imposing thresholds which may
threaten that provision.
Both at Umeå University and Uppsala University, it is possible to study
Sami for beginners, where the requirement for prior knowledge is basic
eligibility. In addition to this, as has been mentioned previously in the
report, as of 2013, the Government has assigned Umeå University with
national responsibility and funds for building up, and developing as soon
as possible, a subject teacher training in Sami. In this work, the
University is to take account of a dialogue with the national minority
involved. The Government intends to return to the issue of evaluation of
this special undertaking.
The supply of courses in Sami and Sami studies at Umeå University
consists of distance courses with web support, or purely web-based
39

courses. Examples of the courses offered are Sami language-revitalisation
studies, Sami cultural studies, Lule Sami and South Sami, at both basic
and advanced levels.
Article 8.1.g – Teaching of the history and culture
297. The Committee of Experts has not received any information on the
implementation of this undertaking for pupils in mainstream education
and asks the Swedish authorities to provide the relevant information in
the next periodical report. (Finnish)
394. The Committee of Experts has not received any information on the
implementation of this undertaking for pupils in mainstream education
and asks the Swedish authorities to provide the relevant information in the
next periodical report. (Meänkieli)
The school is responsible for each pupil, after completion of compulsory
school, compulsory school for pupils with learning disabilities, Sami
school or special school for children with disabilities, having acquired
knowledge of the national minorities’ cultures, languages, religions and
history. This task is stated in the overall goals and guidelines of the
curricula. The school principal has special responsibility for ensuring
that school staff are made aware of international agreements, including
the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, which Sweden
has pledged to take account of in its educational system. In subjects such
as Swedish, civics and history, all pupils are required to learn more about
the national minorities.
The national curriculum (Curriculum for the compulsory school,
preschool class and the recreation centre, 2011, Lgr 11) gives scope to the
national minorities’ culture and history and is a clear part of the focus of
the teaching. In the general section of the curriculum, this is, for
example, expressed in the text that ‘all pupils are to be aware of
themselves and their own cultural origins based on familiarity with the
Swedish, Nordic and Western cultural heritage and knowledge of the
national minorities’ cultures, languages, religions and history’. The
cultures and history of national minorities are also written about in the
subject-specific syllabi in the subjects in which it is natural for them to
be discussed. The syllabus for Swedish states that a core content of the
teaching is for ‘pupils to have knowledge of the use of language over the
ages and the national minority languages in Sweden and their status in
society’.
The framework of mother tongue tuition in the national minority
languages also contains elements of the history and cultures of the
national minorities. The syllabus for mother tongue tuition states that
through the mother tongue tuition, pupils should be given the
40

opportunity to reflect over traditions, cultural phenomena and social
questions based on their languages.
See also the answer under Article 7.3.
See the answer under item 297 and Article 7.3.
Article 8.1.h – Teacher training
196. (box) The Committee of Experts again strongly urges the Swedish
authorities to develop a teacher training programme for Sami
languages, including bilingual education, and to provide incentives to
students to become teachers of Sami.
Pupils in compulsory and upper secondary schools are offered study and
vocational guidance. This is one way of spreading information on
opportunities for becoming teachers in a national minority language, for
example. In addition, Sweden has a general study support system to
which all individuals are entitled for studies at universities and higher
education institutions. At several universities and higher education
institutions, courses and programmes are provided as distance teaching.
Universities and higher education institutions validate real qualifications
and previous practical experience.
As of 2013, the Government has assigned Umeå University with national
responsibility and special funds to build up and develop subject teacher
training in Sami as soon as possible. In this work, the University is to
take account of the special needs and conditions of the language and to
conduct a dialogue with the national minority concerned. The University
is also required to cooperate with the actors involved in Sweden, and
where relevant, in other countries that have experience of work with
Sami. The Government intends to return to the issue of evaluation of this
special undertaking.
In its appropriation directions, Umeå University is tasked with offering
education in Sami every academic year.
See also the answer under item 191 and recommendation 4.
400. (box) The Committee of Experts again strongly urges the Swedish
authorities to develop a teacher training programme for Meänkieli,
including bilingual education, and to provide incentives to students to
become teachers of Meänkieli.
As of 2013, the Government has assigned Stockholm University with
national responsibility and special funds to build up and develop subject
teacher training in Meänkieli as soon as possible. In this work, the
41

University is required to conduct a dialogue with the national minority
concerned. The University is also required to cooperate with the actors
involved in Sweden, and where relevant, in other countries that have
experience of work with Meänkieli. The Government intends to return to
the issue of evaluation of this special undertaking.
For more details, see the answer under items 191 and 196 and
recommendation 4.
Article 8.1.i – Supervisory body
The Swedish Schools Inspectorate is the supervisory agency for the
school system in Sweden. Its regular supervision includes ensuring that
each Swedish school fulfils the requirements for which the school is
responsible under the school statutes. This means ensuring that the
national minorities’ linguistic rights are safeguarded.
The Swedish Schools Inspectorate is tasked by the Government with
conducting quality controls of the school system, pre-school activities
and out of school centres. These quality controls entail detailed and
systematic examinations of the quality of an activity within a limited
area, where the point of departure is the equal right of all children and
pupils to a good education in a secure environment. The observations,
analyses and assessments that are undertaken within the framework of
this control are reported, partly in the form of an individual decision to
the education provider that has been monitored and partly in an overall,
summary report. By providing descriptions of important quality aspects
within the field being monitored, the overall, summary report is
intended to also provide development support to education providers
and schools that have not been monitored. In 2012, the Swedish Schools
Inspectorate presented a quality control survey of mother tongue tuition
and bilingual teaching in the national minority languages (Report
2012:2). During 2011, the Inspectorate also undertook targeted monitoring
within the field of special rights to a place in pre-school activities for
certain national minorities (reg. no.40:2011:3022).
The National Agency for Education and the Swedish Schools
Inspectorate hold joint responsibility. The National Agency for
Education is responsible for the management, development and support
of schools, while the Swedish Schools Inspectorate exercises supervision.
Together, these agencies ensure that schools both develop and comply
with their existing obligations. This also applies to aspects concerning
the national minorities and is manifested by the quality control survey
made by the Swedish Schools Inspectorate that was presented in 2012
and by the National Agency for Education’s continued work on offering
teaching support.

42

Article 8.2 – Education outside the administrative areas
210. The declaration in Section 14 of the Language Act that persons
belonging to a national minority are to be given “the opportunity to learn,
develop and use the minority language”, confirms the general right of
people belonging to the Sami national minority to learn Sami through the
public education system throughout Sweden. The Committee of Experts
has received no information as to how this provision is implemented in
practice outside the administrative area for Sami. The Committee of
Experts has nevertheless been made aware that distance learning courses
for all three Sami varieties are available for all levels of education, but
lacks detailed information as to how these are
actually delivered and what effect they have.
As described in previous reports, it is possible in Sweden to learn and
develop one’s minority language at different educational levels. The
following are examples of the opportunities to learn Sami provided at
compulsory school and university level. In addition, short courses are
offered at different study associations at local level in several
municipalities. In addition, language immersion camps, primarily for
children but also for older people, are regularly held in different parts of
the Sami area. Language immersion is a type of method that often entails
the language being used intensively by all the participants at a course
lasting several days.
The Government has decided for academic year 2011/2012 to grant a
subsidy of SEK 430 000 to the Sami Education Centre for development of
distance education, primarily in Lule Sami, and for teacher initiatives for
distance education groups. The Sami Education Centre is to report the
results of these development initiatives to the Government Offices (the
Ministry of Education and Research) in the form of a report by 31
October 2013 at the latest. This report should state how the funds have
been used.
At compulsory school level, teaching in Sami is conducted in two ways,
partly within the framework of the Sami school, where Sami is a subject
of its own that has a minimum guaranteed teaching time through the
fact that the subject is found in the timetable for the Sami school, and
partly within the context of mother tongue tuition in regular compulsory
schools. All pupils who fulfil the requirements of the Education Act
concerning basic knowledge must be given the opportunity to study
Sami. This applies regardless of where in the country they go to school.
Both at Umeå University and Uppsala University, it is possible to study
Sami for beginners, where the requirement for prior knowledge is basic
eligibility. All the courses are distance courses. Distance courses can be
studied by students regardless of where they live; this means that people
43

living outside the administrative area for Sami can also undertake the
course. Most courses also contain one or more meetings in person, that
are held in different places where the varieties of Sami are spoken, such
as Kiruna (North Sami), Jokkmokk (Lule Sami) and Östersund (South
Sami). For South Sami, a cooperation project has been initiated between
Umeå University and the Norwegian University of Science and
Technology (NTNU) in Trondheim. The University also provides webbased courses without physical meetings, in, for example, history,
culture, religion and social issues. Between 2007 and 2010, over 900
people applied for courses in Sami, and the number of people taking
courses was just under 200 full-time students.
In the former National Agency for Higher Education’s consultations with
representatives of the national minorities before writing the report
'Lärarförsörjningen för de nationella minoriteterna – hur kan den
tryggas?’ (Teacher supply for the national minorities – how can it be
secured?), (Report 2011:14 R), a certain amount of opposition to distance
courses other than those due to very special circumstances was put
forward. The basic view was that ordinary forms of teaching are
preferable. The report ’Utbildning för elever i samhällsvård och fjärr- och
distansundervisning’ (Education for pupils placed in society’s care and
remote and distance education) (Swedish Government Official Reports
2012:76) has been circulated for comment. The Ministry of Education and
Research intends to deal with this issue in a Government Bill during the
autumn of 2013. The Bill will be based on the former National Agency for
Higher Education’s report and the report mentioned above.
Article 9 – Judicial authorities
Article 9.1 – The right to use Sami in criminal proceedings, civil
proceeding and proceedings before courts concerning
administrative matters.
212. The Committee of Experts asks the Swedish authorities to assess the
situation and report in the next periodical report on the application of
Article 9 to Sami in the extended administrative area.
In the Government Bill ‘Tolkning och översättning i brottmål’
(Interpretation and Translation in Criminal Proceedings) (Government
Bill 2012/13:132), the Government proposed more stringent rules in the
Swedish Code of Judicial Proceedings for the provision of interpretation
at court meetings or police hearings when the person suspected or
accused of a criminal offence does not have a good command of Swedish.
This amendment means that courts and criminal investigation
authorities will also be obliged to translate certain documents in criminal
proceedings. The new rules will thus also include the minority languages
and will apply to all courts in the country.
44

The amendment aims at implementing the European Parliament and
Council Directive 2010/64/EU on the right to interpretation and
translation in criminal proceedings. The Directive is the first step in the
roadmap for work on strengthening procedural rights in criminal
proceedings that the EU agreed upon during the Swedish Presidency of
the EU in autumn 2009. The Riksdag (Parliament) granted its approval in
accordance with the Government's proposals in its Bill on 17 June 2013
and the legislative amendment will thereby enter into force on 1 October
2013.
The Act (2009:724) on National Minorities and Minority Languages has,
however, not been amended so that the right to use Sami in courts has
been extended to include the entire administrative area. The assessment
was that an extension would mean an increase in costs and practical
difficulties, at the same time as this option would only be used to a
limited extent. For these reasons, it was concluded that it was more
important to strengthen Sami within areas of society other than the
court system.
In other respects with regard to Article 9, the previous report is referred
to.
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
Article 10.1.a.iii – Use of spoken and written Sami
237. (box)The Committee of Experts strongly urges the Swedish authorities
to increase the proportion of Sami-speaking staff in the relevant State
administration offices, develop adequate training schemes and provide
incentives for staff members to improve their Sami-language skills,
increase the visibility of Sami on websites and at premises and inform
Sami-speakers of their rights to use Sami.
Sweden has previously reported that the administrative authorities,
under Section 11 of the Act (2009:724) on National Minority Languages
are to work actively to ensure that there is access to staff with knowledge
of Finnish and Meänkieli where necessary in individuals’ contacts with
the authority.
The County Administrative Board in Stockholm County and the Sami
Parliament have been tasked with responsibility for following up
compliance with the Minority Act since January 2010. These authorities
present an annual report to the Government on the application of the
Act by municipalities, county councils and central government
authorities.

45

With regard to access to Sami-speaking staff in the activities of
municipalities who are able to meet needs in accordance with
requirements stipulated in the Minority Language Act, the situation
varies among municipalities. The surveys of the municipalities
themselves show that there are shortfalls in their organisations. Many
municipalities solve this by purchasing services from outside or by
employing people who know the language.
The following are some examples of how individual municipalities deal
with the issue of increasing the proportion of Sami-speaking staff.
Strömsund municipality has produced a minority policy action plan to
increase language knowledge among municipal employees. Krokom
municipality has the ambition to be a good employer for Sami teachers.
For example, the municipality tries to be flexible as regards individual
wishes for further education in the language or with regard to wishes to
adapt their employment to reindeer husbandry activities. A meeting of
all the Sami teachers is convened once a month in Krokom for joint skills
development and planning. As of autumn 2013, a language barrier course
run by the teachers themselves will be started for Sami teachers, as
requested. The aim of the course is to remove language barriers, draw
attention to oral language and create new language arenas. Employees in
the Krokum administration are given the opportunity to study Sami and
go to the meetings during working time.
Eleven of the 14 municipalities have offered, or will offer, some kind of
further training in Sami, primarily within elderly care and the pre-school.
Further training includes everything, from a few hours a week during
working time, to enabling university education. Slightly more interest in
learning Sami has been reported. Despite the initiatives that have been
implemented, there continues to be a general need for municipalities to
improve skills development for their staff which leads to an increase in
the proportion of Sami-speaking staff.
337. Since the implementation of the Minority Act is still in its initial
phase, it has not been possible for the Committee of Experts to reach a
conclusion on the possibility to use Finnish with the state administration
authorities. It therefore requests the Swedish authorities to provide
information in this respect in the next periodical report.
Sweden considers that the issue of opportunities to speak Finnish, Sami
and Meänkieli in contact with the administrative authorities and the
right, when necessary, to receive interpretation and translation in one’s
minority language, are linked to each other and answers the question
under item 248.
Article 10.1.a.v –To ensure that documents in minority languages
are considered valid
46

For information on these commitments for Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli,
see previous reports.
Article 10.1.c – To allow the administrative authorities to draft
documents in a regional or minority language
See above under Article 10.1.a.iii.
Article 10.2.b/c/d – The possibility to submit applications and the
publication of official documents in regional or minority
languages.
See above under Article 10.1.a.iii.
Article 10.2.g – Place-names
General
Lantmäteriet (the Swedish mapping, cadastral and land registration
authority), in its role as the national place-names authority, is tasked
with coordinating central government place-name activities. The PlaceNames Advisory Board is a cooperation body for authorities and
organisations that monitor interests within place name management.
The Place-Names Advisory Board consists of representatives from
Lantmäteriet, ISOF, the Swedish National Heritage Board, the Sami
Parliament, the Swedish Association of Local Authorities and Regions,
the Swedish Transport Administration and a representative of the
universities in Sweden in Sweden.
Lantmäteriet has ongoing cooperation with the Swedish Institute for
Language and Folklore, the Sami Parliament and the Swedish association
of Tornedalers (STR-T) in the work of reporting place-names in northern
Sweden. Lantmäteriet undertakes continual monitoring of place-names
in the minority language areas and during the period in question, placenames in Lantmäteriet’s basic map data base (1:10 000) and place-names
in the overview map (1:250 000) have been monitored. Over 15 000 Sami
place-names have been included in this measure.
Language/var Number of placeiety
names in the place
name register
Swedish

936 803

Finnish

8 695

Meänkieli

5 795

North Sami

3 361
47

Lule Sami

5 926

South Sami

2 897

Ume Sami

3 244

The Swedish Transport Administrationʼs work on marking minority
languages on the spot has been undertaken in connection with this
monitoring. On 1 October 2011, 190 places were marked in Sami, 7 places
in Finnish and 7 places in Meänkieli. A large number of other places have
been identified and listed and are being processed. In this work,
Lantmäteriet is assisting the Swedish Transport Administration with
information on the correct orthography for all places.
At Lantmäteriet’s Internet service ’Kartsök och ortsnamnʼ(Mapsearch
and Place-names), the national place-name register can be accessed.
Place-names are searchable via different alternatives and are presented in
an interactive map function that makes it possible to look at the map of
Sweden, the overview map, the road map, the mountain map, the terrain
map and the topographical web map. All place-names are presented with
a language code, which identifies the minority language place-names. In
2012, 117 022 individual users visited this web service. Lantmäteriet’s
website (www.lantmateriet.se) has been revised and it is now possible to
read information in all the minority languages.
Lantmäteriet has an active network of authorities and organisations
within the minority language areas that contribute to the increased use
and exposure of minority language place-names, via consultative
procedures. Interest in the media is considerable for these issues and
reporting contributes to a greater understanding of the situation of
minority languages. Lantmäteriet has been able to note an increased
awareness of these issues, primarily through media contacts. During the
period, Lantmäteriet has actively worked with initiatives to achieve full
and correct place name reporting within the minority language areas and
in 2012, has devoted around 500 working hours to this task.
246. The Committee of Experts concludes that the undertaking is partly
fulfilled and asks the Swedish authorities to provide more detailed
information about the use of place names in Sami in the next periodical
report.
At the Place-names Advisory Board meeting on 11 May 2011, an account
was given of the Swedish Transport Administration’s plan for marking
place-names in minority languages along the public roads in
Västerbotten and Norrbotten counties. The issue of reporting postal
place-names in Sami was initiated.
48

On 17 May 2011 ISOF arranged a one-day course on place-names and
recording activities for the national minorities, the Sami, Swedish Finns
and Tornedalers. Lantmäteriet took part in this with place name
specialists. Representatives of the minority groups participated in this
course.
The seminar in 2011 was arranged as a course in place name
documentation and was particularly directed at private people who are
interested in recording place-names in Finnish, Meänkieli and Sami. The
aim of the course was to teach participants to be able to deliver, in a
simple manner, new recordings to the Institute's place name archive in
order to further raise the quality of place name collections. At the same
time, conditions are improved for recording minority language placenames on public maps and road signs.
347. The Committee of Experts concludes that the undertaking is partly
fulfilled and asks the Swedish authorities to provide more detailed
information about using place names in Finnish in the next periodical
report.
Finnish place-names are to be found in the following seven
municipalities: Gällivare, Haparanda, Kalix, Kiruna, Pajala, Överkalix and
Övertorneå.
See the answer under Article 10.2.g. and under item 246.
442. The Committee of Experts welcomes this development and looks
forward to receiving more information about the practical implementation
of this undertaking in the next periodical report. (place-names in
Meänkieli)
In 2011 ISOF was tasked by the Government to review Chapter 1, Section
4 of Heritage Conservation Act (1988:950), with regard to place-names in
minority languages. In consultation with representatives of, for example,
the Tornedaler minority, the Institute proposed in its report of 27 June
2011 that the section of the Act in question should be extended by
providing names in Meänkieli. This amendment to the Act will enter into
force on 1 January 2014.
In addition, the Institute has drawn up a manual for the scrutiny of
place- names in Meänkieli. A preliminary version was completed in
2012. It is clear from the manual that linguistic variation is
considerable within this language area. The manual is an attempt at a
cautious regulation of the variation that may be permitted for placenames.
See also the answer under item 246.
49

Article 10.4.a –Translation or interpretation as may be required
248. The information at the Committee of Experts disposal relates to
the regional and administrative area as it was before the Minority Act
came into force. The Committee of Experts considers that it requires
updated information about the situation throughout the extended
administrative area and in relation to all public bodies covered by the
Minority Act before it is in a position to conclude on this undertaking.
The Committee of Experts asks the Swedish authorities to provide the
relevant information in the next periodical report. (applies to Sami).
In Sweden, there is a compensation system in the form of state
subsidies which means that when a municipality or county council has
been given increased responsibilities for a commitment that is
basically a central government commitment, central government
funds are provided. This central government subsidy is paid to
municipalities that are part of the administrative areas for Finnish,
Sami or Meänkieli and is regulated in the Ordinance on National
Minorities and Minority Languages (2009:1299). These funds are
intended to be used for the additional costs arising in the municipality
or county council because of the rights of the individual under the Act
on National Minorities and Minority Languages (2009:724) and for
measures to support the use of the minority language.
The Government’s position is that the use of central government
funds should preferably take place in a dialogue between the
municipality or county council and representatives of the national
minority concerned. The intention is to be able to establish priorities
in local work by means of consultations and the mutual taking of
responsibility. In this way, transparency is created in the use of the
financial resources, which provides better consensus and a long-term
perspective in continued minority policy work. One result of these
consultations is that municipalities and county councils have not
given priority to employing an interpreter of their own. Instead,
interpreters and translators are employed when there is a demand or a
need. In most cases, other authorities have made a similar assessment
and engage interpreters and translators when they need to or when
this is requested.
The Sami Parliament and the County Administrative Board in Stockholm
County are required to present to the Government a comprehensive,
annual assessment of compliance with the Act on National Minorities
and Minority Languages (2009:724). In their follow-up for 2012, these
agencies show that most municipalities within the administrative areas
for Finnish, Sami and Meänkieli have undertaken surveys of needs and
resources within several different areas of activity. A compilation of these
surveys shows that the municipalities have reviewed such matters as the
50

municipalityʼs reception, switchboard and case processing, which should
ensure that there is a preparation for being able to meet people who wish
to speak their minority language. The surveys show a variation in the
administrative authorities’ ability and preparation to meet people in
Sami. These surveys are an important point of departure for the way in
which a municipality intends to work to meet the demand from
individual people to be able to use Sami in contact with an authority.
Such efforts could be made, inter alia, by working actively to ensure that
there is access to people with knowledge in Sami, which may mean, for
example, both actively taking account of the need to recruit and allowing
staff to undertake language courses.
Article 10.5 –Family names
For information on this commitment, see the previous report.
Article 11 –Media
Article 11.1.a.iii – Adequate provision so that broadcasters offer
programmes in the regional or minority languages
Public service companies have great responsibility for taking account of
the needs of national minorities and others. Sveriges Radio AB (SR),
Sveriges Television AB (SVT) and Sveriges Utbildningsradio AB (UR), the
Swedish Educational Broadcasting company, have broadcasing licences
that apply to the period 2010–2013. According to these broadcasting
licences, the public service companies are to take account of the interests
of linguistic and ethnic minorities. These activities are to be a priority
area and access is to be improved. The minority languages Sami, Finnish,
Meänkieli and Romani Chib must assume special status. In addition, the
public service companies are required to conduct a dialogue with the
groups involved. Within the framework for the generally phrased texts of
the broadcasting licences, the public service companies design their
supply of programmes independently
In 2012, SVT broadcast Sami programmes for a total of 83 hours,
including the news programme Ođđasat, which is jointly produced with
the Norwegian NRK and Finnish YLE Sámi Radio. Ođđasat also has a
website with the opportunity to watch streamed news broadcasts in
Sami. SR produced 9 677 hours of Sami programmes in 2012, which
resulted in a total broadcasting time of 20 142 hours. SR Sameradion
broadcasts programmes in several different dialects within all
programme areas and for all age groups, including children and young
people. UR has broadcast TV and radio programmes in Sami in 2012.
SVT broadcasts news, social programmes, childrens programmes,
documentaries, etc. in Finnish. In 2012, the total supply of Finnish51

speaking programmes in SVT was 281 hours. SR produced 8 131 hours in
Finnish in 2012, which resulted in a total broadcasting time of 30 466
hours. UR has broadcast programmes in Finnish both on TV and radio.
During 2012, SVT broadcast programmes in Meänkieli for a total of 12
hours. SR produced 637 hours in Meänkieli in 2012, which resulted in a
total broadcasting time of 2 316 hours. UR has broadcast programmes in
Meänkieli both on TV and radio.
On 16 June 2011, the Government decided to appoint a committee tasked
with analysing the conditions for public service radio and TV and with
submitting proposals for the changes needing to be made ahead of the
next licence period, which begins on 1 January 2014. On 11 September
2012, the Public Service Committee presented its report ‘Nya villkor för
public service’ (Swedish Government Official Reports 2012:59),(New
conditions for public service) which contains proposals for strengthening
services with regard to the public service companies’ supply of
programmes in the national minority languages.
On 19 June 2013, the Government took a decision on the Government Bill
‘Bildning och tillgänglighet – radio och tv i allmänhetens tjänst 2014–
2019’ (Education and acess –public service radio and TV, 2014–2019),
(Government Bill 2012/13:164). In the Government Bill, which contains
proposals for the conditions applying to SR, SVT and UR for the coming
licence period, more stringent requirements are given for public service
companies' supply of programmes in the minority languages. It is
proposed to specify conditions in broadcasting licences so that it is clear
that all the public service companies are to make an annual increase in
the supply of programmes in the national minority languages of Finnish,
Sami, Meänkieli and Romani Chib during the licence period, compared
with the level in 2013. All the public service companies are to offer a
supply of programmes in the national minority language of Yiddish.
Article 11.1.c.i – To encourage and/or facilitate the creation of at
least one television channel in the regional or minority languages
(applies only to Finnish)
Since the end of the 1980s, funds have been allocated from the central
government budget to enable broadcasting of a Finnish-speaking
channel in parts of Sweden’s terrestrial network. In connection with the
complete transfer of terrestrial network broadcasting to digital
technology alone at the beginning of 2007, the broadcasting area for the
Finnish channel could be extended. The National Association of Finns
allocates the central government funds and concludes agreements on the
distribution and copyright clearance of the channel. This means that TV
Finland is now broadcast in the entire Mälardalen region, including
Stockholm, Västerås and Uppsala, as a free channel in the terrestrial
52

network. An agreement between the largest cable operator in the area,
ComHem, and the National Association of Finns has ensured that the
channel can be accessed easily on the cable network in the same area. TV
Finland is also accessible in other parts of the country, as a pay channel
via cable TV and the web.

Article 11.1.d – Encouragement and/or facilitation of production
and
distribution
252. In the light of this new information, the Committee of Experts
concludes that the undertaking is fulfilled, and looks forward to receiving
further examples in the next periodical report. (production in Sami)
Filmpool Nord, a regional production centre for film and TV production,
has provided support to six projects in Sami, two in Meänkieli and one in
Romani over the period 2010–2012. Filmpool Nord comments that the
projects often include several different languages at the same time. Just
now, seven projects in Sami/Swedish are under development, and one in
Romani.
See also the answer under Article 11.1.a.iii.
Article 11.1.e.i – To encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or
maintenance of at least one newspaper in the regional or minority
languages
257. The Committee of Experts welcomes the initiatives taken by the
Swedish Government and looks forward to receiving information about the
outcome in the next periodical report (transnational newspaper).
457. The Committee of Experts welcomes the initiatives taken by the
Swedish Government and looks forward to receiving information about
the outcome in the next periodical report(transnational newspaper).
(Meänkieli)
Conditions for central government press subsidies are regulated in the
Press Subsidies Ordinance, which contains rules for financial support to
daily newspapers that are targeted at language minorities. There are
newspapers that are entirely or partly written in Finnish that receive press
subsidies. At present there is no daily newspaper in Sweden in Sami or
Meänkieli. However, there are journals that are written entirely or partly
in these languages.
On 22 December 2010, the Sami Parliament, in consultation with the
Swedish association of Tornedalers (STR-T), was tasked by the Swedish
53

Government to undertake a pilot study on the conditions for
transnational newspaper cooperation in Meänkieli and Sami. The Sami
Parliament received SEK 130 000 for implementation of the pilot study.
The findings were presented to the Government on 30 September 2011. In
its report, the Sami Parliament presented a number of proposals,
suggesting at the same time that the coming press subsidies inquiry
should look at these proposals.
In December 2011, the Press Subsidies Committee was appointed to make
a review of central government subsidies to the daily press. As its first
task, the Committee was to take a position, based on the Sami Parliament
report, on whether support to daily newspapers for national minorities
should be strengthened in the current Press Subsidies Ordinance. The
Committee was tasked with taking a position on, and analysing the
consequences of the Sami Parliament’s proposals for amendments to the
current Press Subsidies Ordinance. The Press Subsidies Committee
presented an interim report on 30 September 2012, ’Stöd till dagstidningar
på samiska och meänkieli’ (Support to daily newspapers in Sami and
Meänkieli), (Swedish Government Official Reports 2012:58).
In its interim report, the Press Subsidies Committee presents several
proposals to make it easier for newspapers that are entirely, or partly
written in Sami or Meänkieli to qualify for operational support. These
proposals mean that the circulation limit for general operational support
is reduced from 1 500 to 750 subscription numbers for newspapers that
are mainly written in Sami or Meänkieli. At the same time, it is proposed
that the requirement for 90 per cent of circulation to be spread
throughout Sweden should be removed for such newspapers, and that the
support should in future be calculated, as for other daily newspapers, on
the basis of the part of the circulation that is mainly distributed within
Sweden. The Committee also proposes that a provision on limited
operational support for a newspaper, 25 per cent of whose editorial
contents are written in Finnish, be extended to apply if at least 25 per
cent of the editorial contents are written in one or several of the
languages Finnish, Meänkieli or Sami. It is proposed to extend the
geographical limit for such a newspaper’s place of publication to include
municipalities that are situated in each administrative area for Sami or
Meänkieli.
The interim report with the Sami Parliament’s pilot study as an appendix
has been circulated for comment and the material is currently being
prepared within the Government Offices. The amendments to the Press
Subsidies Ordinance are intended to enter into force as of 2014.
The Press Subsidies Ordinance applies until 31 December 2016 in
accordance with the European Commission’s approval of central
government subsidies. The Press Subsidies Committee is therefore also
54

tasked with analysing the criteria that should form the basis for future
support to the daily press and with presenting proposals for the design of
such support. The Committee is also to take account of national
minorities in this work. The Press Subsidies Committee is to present its
final report on 31 August 2013.
Article 11.1.f.ii –Financial support to TV programmes in Sami
There is no special central government support for the production of TV
programmes, regardless of language.
Article 11.2 – Right to reception of radio and TV broadcasts from
neighbouring countries
As has been described in previous reports, there are no restrictions on
the freedom of direct reception of radio and television broadcasts from
neighbouring countries in languages that are used in an identical or
similar form to a regional or minority language, or on the rebroadcasting
of radio and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a
language.
Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities
Article 12.1.a – To encourage cultural activities (Sami, Finnish,
Meänkieli)
The Swedish Arts Council is tasked with working especially for artistic
and valuable developments in terms of cultural policy within activities
that involve the cultures of the Sami people and other national
minorities. At this agency, there is a special reference group that assesses
applications for support to projects, literature and other activities.
Support has been allocated, inter alia, to the Uusi Teatteri/Ny finska
teatern (the New Finnish Theatre), Tornedalsteatern (the Tornedal
Theatre), Sverige-finska biblioteket i Stockholm (the Swedish Finnish
Library in Stockholm), Judiska biblioteket i Stockholm (the Jewish
Library in Stockholm) and Sverigefinska riksförbundet (the National
Association of Finns), which was granted funds for Finnish amateur
theatre activities.
The Swedish Arts Council has otherwise continued to prioritise support
to the Roma cultural centre in Malmö and some thirty projects of a more
temporary nature. Apart from support to the promotion of national
minority cultural activities, funds were approved, as in previous years, for
support to the publication of literature and production support for
cultural journals. The Swedish Arts Council granted over SEK 9 million
in subsidies to the cultural activities of national minorities in 2012.
55

Apart from this, in 2012, the Swedish Arts Council has granted support to
a number of publicly funded cultural institutions, together with Roma
cultural workers, for initiatives that have made Roma culture accessible.
As of 2011, 20 counties have successively joined the cultural cooperation
model, which is a new model for distributing certain central government
funds to regional cultural activities. The model aims at a greater impact
for regional priorities and variations within cultural policy and at
bringing culture closer to the citizens. By granting central government
support to regional cultural activities, county councils are given greater
influence over, and responsibility for, distributing central government
cultural funds. Within the model, the Swedish Arts Council is active in
ensuring that the county councils draw attention to, and promote the
cultures of the national minorities and that this is done in cooperation
with representatives of the national minorities.
Apart from this, the Sami Parliament annually allocates funds to Sami
culture as part of the Government’s Sami policy.
Article 12.1.b – To foster access to works produced in regional or
minority languages (Sami, Finnish, Meänkieli)
464. The Committee of Experts therefore considers that the undertaking
remains partly fulfilled and asks the Swedish authorities to provide the
relevant information in the next periodical report.
As stated above, the public service companies have great responsibility
for taking account of the needs of the national minorities. In the section
on Article 11.1.a.iii, an account is given of the number of hours of
programmes that were broadcast in Sami, Finnish and Meänkieli in 2012.
However, these companies do not report in detail about whether the
programmes are broadcast in the original language or whether they are
dubbed into the languages in question.
The Swedish Film Institute allocates support to interpretation for the
visually impaired and blockwriting for Swedish-produced films in the
Swedish language for cinemas and dvds. Apart from the Swedish
language, Swedish also refers to the national minority languages Sami,
Finnish, Meänkieli, Romani Chib and Yiddish. During the period, no
support for blockwriting in minority languages has been allocated, but
support was given to training Swedish/Finnish interpreters for the
visually impaired in Norrbotten.
Article 12.1.c – Foster access in regional or minority languages to
works
produced in other languages (applies to Finnish and Sami)
56

For information on this, the previous report is referred to.
Article 12.1.d –Appropriate allowance for incorporating the
knowledge and use of regional or minority languages and cultures
in the undertakings (Sami, Finnish, Meänkieli)
For information on this, the previous report is referred to.
Article 12.1.e –Staff who have a full command of the regional or
minority language concerned (Sami)
For information on this, the previous report is referred to.
Article 12.1.f –Participation of regional or minority language
speakers (Sami, Finnish, Meänkieli)
For information on this, the previous report is referred to.
Article 12.1.g – Archives (Sami, Finnish, Meänkieli)
363. The Committee of Experts considers that the undertaking is partly
fulfilled at present and encourages the Swedish authorities to take
measures to ensure the future funding of the Sweden Finnish Archives at
an adequate level.
Until financial year 2013, the Swedish-Finns archive was granted
financial support by Swedish central government via the National
Archives’ Private Archives Committee. The grant to the SwedishFinns archive has grown from SEK 250 000 (2009) to SEK 270 000
(2013) in the past five years.
The National Archives’ Private Archives Committee ceased its
activities at the end of the year 2012/13. The duties of the
Committee with regard to awarding grants for archiving activities
have been taken over by the National Archives. In 2013, the
National Archives will decide on grants to these institutions for
financial year 2014 after consultation with the newly formed
Cooperation Committee for Private Archives at the National
Archives. The new model will not affect the allocation of grants for
institutions/organisations such as the Swedish-Finns archive. There
is nothing to indicate that the Swedish-Finns archive will not
receive a grant from central government for its activities in 2014.
The institution’s application to the National Archives will be
assessed on the same grounds as previously, i.e., the aim and
professional quality of its operations.

57

467. The Committee of Experts, however, has not received any
further information on the establishment of a Centre for Meänkieli,
and asks the Swedish authorities to provide such information in the
next periodical report.
ISOF has received information from the Swedish association of
Tornedalers (STR-T) that the organisation would like to have such
a centre.
See also the answer under item 367.
Article 12.1.h – Language conservation (Finnish, Sami)
The work of the Swedish Institute for Language and Folklore on
following up application of the Language Act has entailed the
development of language conservation for the national minority
languages. Work on advice for both researchers and the general
public is considerable and advice on language issues has increased,
as has the number of visitors to the Institute’s archives and their
collections.
With regard to Finnish, the Institute has compiled dictionaries,
documented Finnish in Sweden, monitored changes in the status of
Finnish in Sweden, published the language conservation journal
Kieliviesti with texts in Finnish and Meänkieli and published
information on its website. In addition, the Institute has organised
seminars, lectures and language conservation days and has
developed a language test in Finnish, primarily aimed at employers
and employees in the Finnish administrative area. With regard to
Sami, initiatives have been taken for transferring knowledge
between generations, the conservation of traditional knowledge
among Sami children and adults, the processing of Sami placenames and what is termed language immersion, which is a method
for language learning, where a second or foreign language is
deliberately used in the pupil's environment.
The Sami Parliament’s overall aim of language work is that the
Sami Parliament is to contribute to growth in the use and status of
the Sami language in society, primarily in the traditional Sami area.
Apart from this, the Sami Parliament has established goals of its
own for language work.
The Sami Parliament’s language efforts are organised in two
functions: a language department for advice and expert knowledge,
and the processing of grants for short-term studies in Sami. The
Sami language centre is responsible for outreach activities and for
revitalising Sami.

58

Article 12.2 – Cultural activities outside the administrative areas
(Sami, Finnish, Meänkieli)
For information on this, the previous report is referred to.
Article 13 – Economic and social life
For information on this, the previous report is referred to.
Article 14 – Transfrontier exchange
The Sami indigenous people live in Sweden, Norway, Finland and Russia.
Cooperation, mainly between Sweden, Norway and Finland, is welldeveloped and takes place in a range of different areas involving the
Sami.
Negotiations on a Nordic Sami Convention, aimed at strengthening Sami
rights and harmonising the legislation with relation to the Sami in the
three Nordic countries were initiated in 2011, and the ambition is to
complete negotiations within five years.
See also the answer under Article 7.1.i.

59

Appendices

Appendix 1 – Ratified Articles in the Charter
Sweden has ratified the following articles in part III of the Charter for Regional and
Minority Languages concerning the following languages

Sami

Finnish

Meänkieli

8.1.a.iii)

8.1.a.iii)

8.1.a.iii)

8.1.b.iv)

8.1.b.iv)

8.1.b.iv)

8.1.c.iv)

8.1.c.iv)

8.1.c.iv)

8.1.d.iv)

8.1.d.iv)

8.1.d.iv)

8.1.e.iii)

8.1.e.iii)

8.1.e.iii)

8.1.f.iii)

8.1.f.iii)

8.1.f.iii)

8.1.g

8.1.g

8.1.g

8.1.h

8.1.h

8.1.h

8.1.i

8.1.i

8.1.i

8.2

8.2

8.2

9.1.a.ii)

9.1.a.ii)

9.1.a.ii)

9.1a.iii)

9.1.a.iii)

9.1.a.iii)

9.1.a.iv)

9.1.a.iv)

9.1.a.iv)

9.1.b.ii)

9.1.b.ii)

9.1.b.ii)

9.1.b.iii)

9.1.b.iii)

9.1.b.iii)

9.1.c.ii)

9.1.c.ii)

9.1.c.ii)

9.1.c.iii)

9.1.c.iii)

9.1.c.iii)

9.1.d

9.1.d

9.1.d

9.2

9.2

9.2

9.3

9.3

9.3

10.1.a.iii)

10.1.a.iii)

10.1.a.iii)

10.1.a.v

10.1.a.v)

10.1.a.v)

10.1.c

10.1.c

10.1.c

10.2.b

10.2.b

10.2.b

10.2.c

10.2.c

10.2.c

10.2.d

10.2.d

10.2.d

10.2.g

10.2.g

10.2.g

10.4.a

10.4.a

10.4.a

10.5

10.5

10.5

11.1.a.iii)

11.1.a.iii)

1.1.a.iii)

education

judicial authorities

administrative authorities and
public service

media

11.1.c.i)
11.1.d

11.1.d

11.1.d

11.1.e.i)

11.1.e.i)

11.1.e.i)

11.1.f.ii)

11.1.f.ii)

11.1.f.ii)

11.2

11.2

11.2

12.1.a

12.1.a

12.1.a

12.1.b

12.1.b

12.1.b

12.1.c

12.1.c

12.1.d

12.1.d

12.1.d

60

cultural activities and
facilities

12.1.e
12.1.f

12.1.f

12.1.f

12.1.g

12.1.g

12.1.g

12.1.h

12.1.h

12.2

12.2

12.2

13.1.a

13.1.a

13.1.a

economic and social life

14.a

14.a

14.a

transfrontier exchange

14.b

14.b

14.b

Appendix 2 – National Legislation

The Instrument of Government
Chapter 1. Basic principles of the form of government
Art. 2 section 6
The opportunities of the Sami people and ethnic, linguistic and religious
minorities to preserve and develop a cultural and social life of their own
shall be promoted. Law (2010:1408).

Act (2009:724) on National Minorities and National Minority
Languages
General provisions
Section 1
This Act contains provisions on national minorities, national minority
languages, administrative areas and the right to use minority languages
in administrative authorities and courts, and provisions on certain
obligations within pre-schools such as the pedagogical operations
referred to in Chapter 25 of the Education Act (2010:800) which
supplement, or are offered instead of, pre-school or elderly care. The Act
also contains provisions regarding the following-up of the application of
the Act. Act (2010:865).
Section 2
National minorities, according to Sweden’s undertaking within the
Council of Europe’s Framework Convention for the Protection of
National Minorities (SÖ 2000:2) and the European Charter for Regional
or Minority Languages (SÖ 2000:3), are Jews, Roma, Sami, Sweden Finns
and Tornedalers.
In the Language Act (2009:600), it is stated that the national minority
languages are Finnish, Yiddish, Meänkieli, Romani Chib and Sami.
Section 3
61

When needed, administrative authorities shall, in a suitable manner,
inform the national minorities about their rights according to this Act.
Section 4
In the Language Act (2009:600), it is stated that public institutions has a
special responsibility for protecting and promoting the national minority
languages.
Public institutions shall also otherwise promote the national minorities’
possibilities of maintaining and developing their cultures in Sweden.
Particular attention shall be given to promoting opportunities for
children to develop their cultural identity and the use of their own
minority language.
Section 5
Administrative authorities shall give the national minorities the
opportunity to influence matters which concern them and shall, as far as
is possible, consult with representatives for the minorities in such
matters.
Administrative areas
Section 6
The administrative area for Finnish includes the municipalities of
Botkyrka, Eskilstuna, Gällivare, Hallstahammar, Haninge, Haparanda,
Huddinge, Håbo, Kiruna, Köping, Pajala, Sigtuna, Solna, Stockholm,
Södertälje, Tierp, Upplands Väsby, Upplands-Bro, Uppsala, Älvkarleby,
Österåker, Östhammar and Övertorneå.
The administrative area for Meänkeli includes the municipalities of
Gällivare, Haparanda, Kiruna, Pajala, and Övertorneå.
The administrative area for Sami includes the municipalities of Arjeplog,
Arvidsjaur, Berg, Gällivare, Härjedalen, Jokkmokk, Kiruna, Lycksele,
Malå, Sorsele, Storuman, Strömsund, Umeå, Vilhelmina, Åre, Älvdalen
and Östersund.
Section 7
Other municipalities than those indicated in section 6 can after
application be included in the administrative areas for Finnish, Meänkieli
or Sami. The decision that a municipality shall be included in an
administrative area is made by the government. The government may
issue regulations concerning such a voluntary inclusion in an
administrative area.
The right to use Finnish, Meänkieli and Sami in contacts with
authorities
62

Section 8
A person shall have the right to use Finnish, Meänkieli or the Sami
language in oral and written dealings with an administrative authority
the geographical sphere of activity of which coincides completely or
partly with the administrative area of the minority language. This applies
in matters in which the individual is a party or the representative of a
party, if the matter is related to the administrative area.
If a person uses Finnish, Meänkieli or the Sami language in such a
matter, the authority is obliged to give an oral answer in the same
language. In addition, a person who lacks legal assistance shall have the
right, on request, to receive a written translation into Finnish, Meänkieli
or the Sami language of the decision and rationale for the decision in the
matter.
The authority shall otherwise also strive to use in these languages when
dealing with such a person.
Section 9
Outside an administrative area, an individual person shall have the right
to use Finnish, Meänkieli or the Sami language in oral and written
contacts in the matters at the administrative authority of which the
individual is a party or the representative of a party, if the matter can be
handled by staff who are proficient in the minority language.
Section 10
An individual always has the right to use Finnish or Sami in written
dealings with a Parliamentary Ombudsman. The same applies to any
written contact which an individual may have with the Chancellor of
Justice, the Social Insurance Office, the Swedish National Tax Board or
the Discrimination Ombudsman in matters in which the individual is a
party or the representative of a party.
Section 11
The administrative authorities shall strive to ensure that there is access
to staff with a knowledge of Finnish, Meänkieli or Sami, where this is
necessary in contacts of individuals with the authority.
Section 12
The administrative authorities may establish special times and a special
place for receiving visits of individuals who speak Finnish, Meänkieli or
Sami, and may also have special telephone hours.

The right to use Finnish, Meänkieli or Sami in courts
63

Section 13
A person who is a party or the representative of a party in a case or
matter at an Administrative Court, District Court, Environmental and
Land Court or Maritime Court with a legal jurisdiction which completely
or partly coincides with the municipalities of Gällivare, Haparanda,
Kiruna, Pajala, and Övertorneå, has the right to use Finnish or Meänkieli
in the administration of the case or matter, if the case or matter has a
connection to any of these municipalities. The same applies with regard
to Sami at any such Court of Law with a jurisdiction which completely or
partly coincides with the municipalities of Arjeplog, Gällivare, Jokkmokk
or Kiruna, if the case or matter has a connection to any of these
municipalities.
The right to use Finnish, Meänkieli or Sami also includes the Court
which hears an appeal against a judgment or a decision in a case or
matter referred to in the first paragraph. Act (2010:943).
Section 14
The right to use Finnish, Meänkieli or Sami in cases or matters in the
Courts of Law indicated in section 13 also includes the right to submit
documents and written evidence in these languages, the right to have
documents which belong to the case or matter orally translated to this
language, and the right to speak this language in an oral hearing before
the court. The court shall translate documents and written
argumentation into Swedish, unless this is obviously unnecessary.
The Court shall also otherwise strive to use the minority language in its
contacts with the parties or their representatives.
In all cases and matters which are covered by the right to use Finnish,
Meänkieli or the Sami language in the Courts of Law indicated in section
13, the party or representative of a party who lacks legal assistance shall
have the right, on request, to have the judgment and court findings or
decision and decision motivation translated in writing to the appropriate
language.
Section 15
A person who wishes to use Finnish, Meänkieli or the Sami language in
the handling of a case or a matter at a Court of Law indicated in section
13 shall request this when the case or the matter is started or on the first
occasion when the party is to make a statement in the matter.
The request to receive a translation in accordance with section 14 third
paragraph shall be brought forward within one week from the day when
the judgment or decision was pronounced, if such a request has not been
made earlier in the handling of the case or matter.
64

If the request to use a minority language or to receive a translation is
brought forward later than is indicated in the first and second
paragraphs, it may be rejected. Such a request may also be rejected if it is
obvious that it has an improper purpose.
Section 16
If a party or the representative of a party has the right to use Finnish,
Meänkieli or Sami in a trial, an interpreter shall be appointed in
accordance with the provisions in Chapter 5 sections 6-8 and Chapter 33
section 9 of the Code of Judicial Procedure and sections 50-52 of the
Administrative Court Procedure Act (1971:291).
Finnish, Meänkieli and Sami in pre-schools, certain other
pedagogical activities and elderly care
Section 17
When a municipal authority in an administrative area offers a place in
the pre-school or such pedagogical operations which are referred to in
Chapter 25 of the Education Act (2010:800) which supplement or are
offered instead of pre-school, the municipal authority shall offer a child
whose parents or guardians so request a place in the pre-school activity
where the whole or a part of the activity is carried out in Finnish,
Meänkieli or Sami as appropriate. Act (2010:865).
Section 18
The municipal authority shall offer a person who so requests the
possibility of receiving the whole or a part of the service and care which
is offered within the framework of the care of the elderly by staff who
have a command of Finnish, Meänkieli or Sami. The same applies for
municipalities outside an administrative area if the municipal authority
have access to staff who are proficient in the language as appropriate.
Exceptions
Section 19
If there are special reasons, the government may issue provisions that an
authority under the jurisdiction of the government may be exempted
from the application of section 8. The same applies after the
government’s authorization for the County Council and Municipal
Authority with respect to the municipal authorities.
Follow-up etc
Section 20
The administrative authorities’ application of this act shall be followed
up. The government shall issue ordinances regarding the authority(ies)
65

responsible for the follow-up. This follow-up responsibility implies no
restriction in the supervisory responsibility which may rest with other
authorities.
Section 21
In addition, an authority with a follow-up responsibility shall, through an
advisory service, information and similar activities, assist other
administrative authorities in the application of the Act.

Language Act (2009:600)
Contents and purpose of the Act
Section 1
This Act contains provisions on the Swedish language, the national
minority languages and Swedish sign language. The Act also contains
provisions on the responsibility of the public sector to ensure that the
individual is given access to language and on the use of language in the
public sector and in international contexts.
Section 2
The purpose of the Act is to specify the position and usage of the
Swedish language and other languages in Swedish society. The Act is also
intended to protect the Swedish language and language diversity in
Sweden, and the individual’s access to language.
Section 3
If another act or ordinance contains a provision that diverges from this
Act, that provision applies.
The Swedish language
Section 4
Swedish is the principal language in Sweden.
Section 5
As principal language, Swedish is the common language in society that
everyone resident in Sweden is to have access to and that is to be usable
in all areas of society.
Section 6
The public sector has a particular responsibility for the use and
development of Swedish.

66

The national minority languages
Section 7
The national minority languages are Finnish, Yiddish, Meänkieli, Romani
Chib and Sami.
Section 8
The public sector has a particular responsibility to protect and promote
the national minority languages.
Swedish sign language
Section 9
The public sector has a particular responsibility to protect and promote
Swedish sign language.
The use of language in the public sector
Section 10
The language of the courts, administrative authorities and other bodies
that perform tasks in the public sector is Swedish.
Other legislation contains provisions on the right to use national
minority languages and other Nordic languages.
There are separate provisions concerning the obligation of courts and
administrative authorities to use interpreters and to translate
documents.
Section 11
The language of the public sector is to be cultivated, simple and
comprehensible.
Section 12
Government agencies have a special responsibility for ensuring that
Swedish terminology in their various areas of expertise is accessible, and
that it is used and developed.
Swedish in international contexts
Section 13
Swedish is the official language of Sweden in international contexts.
The status of Swedish as an official EU language is to be safeguarded.
Individuals’ access to language

67

Section 14
All residents of Sweden are to be given the opportunity to learn, develop
and use Swedish. In addition
1. persons belonging to a national minority are to be given the
opportunity to learn, develop and use the minority language, and
2. persons who are deaf or hard of hearing, and persons who, for other
reasons, require sign language, are to be given the opportunity to learn,
develop and use Swedish sign language.
Persons whose mother tongue is not one of the languages specified in the
first paragraph are to be given the opportunity to develop and use their
mother tongue.
Section 15
The public sector is responsible for ensuring that the individual is given
access to language in accordance with Section 14.

Discrimination Act (2008:567)
Chapter 1. Introductory provisions
The purpose of the Act
Section 1
The purpose of this Act is to combat discrimination and in other ways
promote equal rights and opportunities regardless of sex, transgender
identity or expression, ethnicity, religion or other belief, disability, sexual
orientation or age.
The contents of the Act
Section 2
The first chapter of the Act contains definitions and other introductory
provisions. The second chapter contains provisions on prohibitions
against discrimination and reprisals. The third chapter contains
provisions on active measures. The fourth chapter contains provisions on
supervision. The fifth chapter contains provisions on compensation and
invalidity. The sixth chapter contains provisions on legal proceedings.
The Act is binding
Section 3
A contract or agreement that restricts someone’s rights or obligations
under this Act is of no legal effect in that regard.

68

Discrimination
Section 4
In this Act discrimination has the meaning set out in this Section.
1. Direct discrimination: that someone is disadvantaged by being treated
less favourably than someone else is treated, has been treated or would
have been treated in a comparable situation, if this disadvantaging is
associated with sex, transgender identity or expression, ethnicity,
religion or other belief, disability, sexual orientation or age.
2. Indirect discrimination: that someone is disadvantaged by the
application of a provision, a criterion or a procedure that appears neutral
but that may put people of a certain sex, a certain transgender identity or
expression, a certain ethnicity, a certain religion or other belief, a certain
disability, a certain sexual orientation or a certain age at a particular
disadvantage, unless the provision, criterion or procedure has a
legitimate purpose and the means that are used are appropriate and
necessary to achieve that purpose.
3. Harassment: conduct that violates a person’s dignity and that is
associated with one of the grounds of discrimination sex, transgender
identity or expression, ethnicity, religion or other belief, disability, sexual
orientation or age.
4. Sexual harassment: conduct of a sexual nature that violates someone’s
dignity.
5. Instructions to discriminate: orders or instructions to discriminate
against someone in a manner referred to in points 1–4 that are given to
someone who is in a subordinate or dependent position relative to the
person who gives the orders or instructions or to someone who has
committed herself or himself to performing an assignment for that
person.
Sex, transgender identity or expression, ethnicity, disability, sexual
orientation and age
Section 5
In this Act the following terms have the meaning set out in this Section.
1. Sex: that someone is a woman or a man.
2. Transgender identity or expression: that someone does not identify
herself or himself as a woman or a man or expresses by their manner of
dressing or in some other way that they belong to another sex.
3. Ethnicity: national or ethnic origin, skin colour or other similar
circumstance.
4. Disability: permanent physical, mental or intellectual limitation of a
person’s functional capacity that as a consequence of injury or illness
existed at birth, has arisen since then or can be expected to arise.
5. Sexual orientation: homosexual, bisexual or heterosexual orientation.
6. Age: length of life to date.

69

A person who intends to change or has changed the sex they belong to is
also covered by sex as a grounds of discrimination.
Chapter 2. Prohibition of discrimination and reprisals
Working life
Prohibition of discrimination
Section 1
An employer may not discriminate against a person who, with respect to
the employer,
1. is an employee,
2. is enquiring about or applying for work,
3. is applying for or carrying out a traineeship, or
4. is available to perform work or is performing work as temporary or
borrowed labour.
The prohibition of discrimination also applies in cases where the
employer, by taking reasonable support and adaptation measures, can
see to it that an employee, a job applicant or a trainee with a disability is
put in a comparable situation to people without such a disability.
A person who has the right to make decisions on the employer’s behalf in
matters concerning someone referred to in the first paragraph shall be
equated with the employer.
Section 2
The prohibition in Section 1 does not prevent
1. differential treatment based on a characteristic associated with one of
the grounds of discrimination if, when a decision is made on
employment, promotion or education or training for promotion, by
reason of the nature of the work or the context in which the work is
carried out, the characteristic constitutes a genuine and determining
occupational requirement that has a legitimate purpose and the
requirement is appropriate and necessary to achieve that purpose,
2. measures that contribute to efforts to promote equality between
women and men and that concern matters other than pay or other terms
of employment,
3. the application of age limits with regard to the right to pension,
survivor’s or invalidity benefits in individual contracts or collective
agreements, or
4. differential treatment on grounds of age, if there is a legitimate
purpose and the means that are used are appropriate and necessary to
achieve that purpose.
Obligation to investigate and take measures against harassment
Section 3
If an employer becomes aware that an employee considers that he or she
has been subjected in connection with work to harassment or sexual
70

harassment by someone performing work or carrying out a traineeship at
the employer’s establishment, the employer is obliged to investigate the
circumstances surrounding the alleged harassment and where
appropriate take the measures that can reasonably be demanded to
prevent harassment in the future.
This obligation also applies with respect to a person carrying out a
traineeship or performing work as temporary or borrowed labour.
Information about qualifications
Section 4
If a job applicant has not been employed or selected for an employment
interview, or if an employee has not been promoted or selected for
education or training for promotion, the
applicant shall, upon request, receive written information from the
employer about the education, professional experience and other
qualifications that the person had who was selected for the employment
interview or who obtained the job or the place in education or training.
Education
Prohibition of discrimination
Section 5
A natural or legal person conducting activities referred to in the
Education Act (2010:800) or other educational activities (an education
provider) may not discriminate against any child, pupil or student
participating in or applying for the activities. Employees and contractors
engaged in the activities shall be equated with the education provider
when they are acting within the context of their employment or contract.
The prohibition of discrimination also applies in cases where an
education provider, by taking reasonable measures regarding the
accessibility and usability of the premises, can see to it that a person with
a disability who is applying or has been accepted for education under the
Higher Education Act (1992:1434) or for education that can lead to a
qualification under the Act concerning authority to award certain
qualifications (1993:792), is put in a comparable situation to people
without such a disability. [Act (2010:861)].
Section 6
The prohibition in Section 5 does not prevent
1. measures that contribute to efforts to promote equality between
women and men in admissions to education other than that referred to
in the Education Act (2010:800),
2. the application of provisions that take account of age with regard to
preschool education, preschool classes, compulsory schools, compulsory
schools for pupils with learning disabilities, Sami schools, special schools
71

or recreational school centres, or educational activities referred to in
Chapter 25 of the Education Act, or
3. differential treatment on grounds of age, if there is a legitimate
purpose and the means that are used are appropriate and necessary to
achieve that purpose.
Nor does the prohibition prevent a folk high school or a study
association from taking measures that contribute to efforts to promote
equal rights and opportunities regardless of ethnicity, religion or other
belief. [Act (2010:861)].
Obligation to investigate and take measures against harassment
Section 7
If an education provider becomes aware that a child, pupil or student
participating in or applying for the provider’s activities considers that he
or she has been subjected in connection with these activities to
harassment or sexual harassment, the education provider is obliged to
investigate the circumstances surrounding the alleged harassment and
where appropriate take the measures that can reasonably be demanded
to prevent harassment in the future.
Information about qualifications
Section 8
If an applicant has been refused admission to an educational programme,
or has not been selected for a test or interview if such a procedure is used
in the admissions process, the applicant shall, upon request, receive
written information from the education provider about the education or
other qualifications that the person had who was admitted to the
educational programme or who was selected for the test or interview.
Labour market policy activities and employment services not under
public contract
Section 9
Discrimination against applicants or employees is prohibited with regard
to labour market policy activities and employment services not under
public contract.
However, this prohibition does not prevent
1. measures that contribute to efforts to promote equality between
women and men or equal rights and opportunities regardless of
ethnicity, or
2. differential treatment on grounds of age, if there is a legitimate
purpose and the means that are used are appropriate and necessary to
achieve that purpose.
Starting or running a business and professional recognition
Section 10
72

Discrimination is prohibited with regard to
1. financial support, permits, registration or similar arrangements that
are needed or can be important for someone to be able to start or run a
business, and
2. recognition, certification, authorisation, registration, approval or
similar arrangements that are needed or can be important for someone
to be able to exercise a certain profession.
These prohibitions do not prevent differential treatment on grounds of
age, if there is a legitimate purpose and the means that are used are
appropriate and necessary to achieve that purpose.
Nor does the prohibition in the first paragraph, point 1 prevent measures
concerning support that contributes to efforts to promote equality
between women and men or equal rights and opportunities regardless of
ethnicity.
Membership of certain organisations
Section 11
Discrimination is prohibited with regard to
1. membership of or participation in an employees’ organisation,
employers’ organisation or professional organisation, and
2. benefits that any such organisation provides to its members.
This prohibition does not prevent an organisation from providing
benefits to members of one sex so as to contribute to efforts to promote
equality between women and men.
Goods, services and housing etc.
Section 12
Discrimination is prohibited on the part of a natural or legal person who
1. supplies goods, services or housing to the general public, outside the
private and family sphere, or
2. organises a meeting or event that is open to the public.
A person who represents a person referred to in the first paragraph in
relation to the public, shall be equated with that person. [Act (2012:483)].
Section 12 a
The prohibition of discrimination in Section 12 associated with sex does
not prevent women and men being treated differently with regard to
services or housing if there is a legitimate purpose and the means that
are used are appropriate and necessary to achieve that purpose.
With regard to insurance services, however, insurance premiums
charged or insurance benefits paid to individuals must not differ between
women and men on account of calculations based on sex. Nevertheless, if
the conditions in the first paragraph are met, a person’s sex may
influence the assessment of other factors on which calculations of
insurance premiums are based. [Act (2012:673)].
Section 12 b
73

The prohibition of discrimination in Section 12 associated with age
1. does not prevent the application of provisions of an act in which a
certain age is prescribed,
2. does not apply to the provision of insurance services,
3. does not prevent the application of lower age limits for admission to
establishments where spirit drinks, wine, strong beer and other
fermented alcoholic beverages which the business operator is licensed to
serve are served on a commercial basis, and
4. does not prevent other differential treatment on grounds of age either
if the differential treatment serves a legitimate purpose and the means
that are used are appropriate and necessary to achieve that purpose. Act
(2012:673).
Health and medical care and social services etc.
Section 13
Discriminations is prohibited with regard to
1. health and medical care and other medical services, and
2. social services activities, and3. assistance in the form of special
transport services and national special transport services and housing
adaptation allowances. [Act (2012:673)].
Section 13 a
The prohibition of discrimination in Section 13, points 1 and 2, associated
with sex does not prevent women and men being treated differently if
this has a legitimate purpose and he means that are used are appropriate
and necessary to achieve that purpose. [Act (2012:673)].
Section 13 b
The prohibition of discrimination in Section 13 associated with age does
not prevent
1. the application of provisions of an act in which a certain age is
prescribed, or
2. other differential treatment on grounds of age if the differential
treatment serves a legitimate purpose and the means that are used are
appropriate and necessary to achieve that purpose. [Act (2012:673)].
Social insurance system, unemployment insurance and financial
aid for studies
Section 14
Discrimination is prohibited with regard to
1. social insurance and related benefit systems,
2. unemployment insurance, and
3. state financial aid for studies. [Act (2012:673)].
Section 14a

74

The prohibition of discrimination in Section 14, point 1, associated with
sex does not prevent the application of provisions of an act concerning
widow’s pension, wife’s supplement or payment of child allowance. [Act
(2012:673)].
Section 14b
The prohibition of discrimination in Section 14 associated with age does
not prevent 1. the application of provisions of an act in which a certain
age is prescribed, or
2. other differential treatment on grounds of age if the differential
treatment serves a legitimate purpose and the means that are used are
appropriate and necessary to achieve that purpose. [Act (2012:673)].
National military service and civilian service
National military service and civilian service and other equivalent military
training in the Swedish Armed Forces
Section 15
Discrimination is prohibited 1. in connection with enrolment procedures
or other examination of personal circumstances under the National Total
Defence Service Act (1994:1809) and in connection with enlistment for
and during the performance of national military service or civilian
service, and
2. in connection with admission examinations for and during the
performance of other equivalent military training in the Swedish Armed
Forces.
However, this prohibition does not apply to discrimination associated
with age.
Further, the prohibition does not prevent the application of provisions
directing that a person liable for national total defence service shall not
be called for enrolment or called up for national military service or
civilian service if he or she refers to her or his membership of a certain
religious community. Act (2010:464).
Obligation to investigate and take measures against harassment
Section 16
If a government agency or an organisation covered by the prohibition in
Section 15 becomes aware that a person applying for or participating in
training or other activities indicated in that provision considers herself or
himself to have been subjected in this connection to harassment or
sexual harassment, the government agency or organisation is obliged to
investigate the circumstances surrounding the alleged harassment and
where appropriate take the measures that can reasonably be demanded
to prevent harassment in the future.

75

However, the first paragraph does not apply to harassment associated
with age. Act (2010:464).

Public employment
Section 17
Discrimination is also prohibited in cases other than those referred to in
Section 5 or Sections
9–15 when a person who is wholly or partly subject to the Public
Employment Act (1994:260)
1. assists the public by providing information, guidance, advice or other
such help, or
2. has other types of contacts with the public in the course of her or his
employment.
[Act (2012:673)].
Prohibition of reprisals
Section 18
An employer may not subject an employee to reprisals because the
employee has 1. reported or called attention to the fact that the employer
has acted contrary to this Act,
2. participated in an investigation under this Act, or
3. rejected or given in to harassment or sexual harassment on the part of
the employer.
The prohibition also applies in relation to a person who, with respect to
the employer,
1. is enquiring about or applying for work,
2. is applying for or carrying out a traineeship, or
3. is available to perform work or is performing work as temporary or
borrowed labour.
A person who has the right to make decisions on the employer’s behalf in
matters concerning someone referred to in the first or second paragraph
shall be equated with the employer.
Section 19
A person who is alleged to have acted contrary to the provisions of
Chapter 2, Section 5, 7, 9,
10, 11, 12, 12a, 13, 14, 15, 16 or 17 or Chapter 3, Section 15 or 16 may not
subject an individual to reprisals because that individual has
1. reported or called attention to such actions,
2. participated in an investigation under this Act, or
3. rejected or given in to harassment or sexual harassment on the part of
the person who is alleged to have engaged in discrimination. [Act
(2012:483)].

76

Chapter 3. Active measures
Working life
Cooperation between employers and employees
Section 1
Employers and employees are to cooperate on active measures to bring
about equal rights and opportunities in working life regardless of sex,
ethnicity, religion or other belief, and in particular to combat
discrimination in working life on such grounds.
Section 2
Employers and employees are in particular to endeavour to equalise and
prevent differences in pay and
other terms of employment between women and men who perform work
which is to be regarded as equal or of equal value. They are also to
promote equal pay growth opportunities for women and men.
Work is to be regarded as of equal value to other work if, on an overall
assessment of the requirements and nature of the work, it can be deemed
to be equal in value to the other work. The assessment of the
requirements of the work is to take into account criteria such as
knowledge and skills, responsibility and effort. In assessing the nature of
the work, particular account is to be taken of working conditions.
Goal-oriented work
Section 3
Within the framework of their activities, employers are to conduct goaloriented work to actively promote equal rights and opportunities in
working life regardless of sex, ethnicity, religion or other belief.
More detailed regulations on the obligations of employers are provided
in Sections 4–13.
Working conditions
Section 4
Employers are to implement such measures as can be required in view of
their resources and other circumstances to ensure that the working
conditions are suitable for all employees regardless of sex, ethnicity,
religion or other belief.
Section 5
Employers are to help enable both female and male employees to
combine employment and parenthood.
Section 6
77

Employers are to take measures to prevent and hinder any employee
being subjected to harassment or reprisals associated with sex, ethnicity,
religion or other belief, or to sexual harassment.
Recruitment
Section 7
Employers are to work to ensure that people have the opportunity to
apply for vacant positions regardless of sex, ethnicity, religion or other
belief.
Section 8
Employers are to promote an equal distribution of women and men in
different types of work and in different employee categories, by means of
education and training, skills development and other appropriate
measures.
Section 9
When the distribution of women and men is not more or less equal in a
certain type of work or in a certain employee category at a place of work,
the employer is to make a special effort when recruiting new employees
to attract applicants of the under-represented sex. The employer is to
attempt to see to it that the proportion of employees from the underrepresented sex gradually increases.
However, the first paragraph shall not be applicable if there are special
grounds not to take such measures or if the measures cannot reasonably
be required in view of the employer’s resources and other circumstances.
Matters of pay
Section 10
In order to discover, remedy and prevent unfair gender differences in pay
and other terms of employment, every three years the employer is to
survey and analyse
– provisions and practices regarding pay and other terms of employment
that are used at the employer’s establishment, and
– pay differences between women and men performing work that is to be
regarded as equal or of equal value.
The employer is to assess whether existing pay differences are directly or
indirectly associated with sex. The assessment is to refer in particular to
differences between
– women and men performing work that is to be regarded as equal, and
– groups of employees performing work that is or is generally considered
to be dominated by women and groups of employees performing work
that is to be regarded as of equal value to such work but is not or is not
generally considered to be dominated by women.
Section 11
78

Every three years employers are to draw up an action plan for equal pay
in which they report the results of the survey and analysis described in
Section 10. The plan is to indicate the pay adjustments and other
measures that need to be taken to bring about equal pay for work that is
to be regarded as equal or of equal value. The plan is to contain a cost
estimate and a time
plan based on the goal of implementing the necessary pay adjustments as
soon as possible and within three years at the latest.
A report on and evaluation of how the planned measures were
implemented is to be included in the next action plan.
The obligation to draw up an action plan for equal pay does not apply to
employers who employed fewer than 25 employees at the start of the
latest calendar year.
Section 12
Employers are to provide employees’ organisations with respect to which
they are bound by a collective agreement with the information needed
for the organisations to be able to cooperate in the survey, analysis and
drawing up of an action plan for equal pay.
If the information concerns data on pay or other circumstances that
relate to an individual employee, the rules on confidentiality and
damages contained in Sections 21, 22 and 56 of the Employment (Codetermination in the Workplace) Act (1976:580) apply. In public sector
activities, Chapter 10, Sections 11-14 and Chapter 12, Section 2 of the
Secrecy Act (2009:400) apply instead. [Act 2009:526)].
Gender equality plan
Section 13
Every three years employers are to draw up a plan for their gender
equality work. The plan is
to contain an overview of the measures under Sections 4–9 that are
needed at the place of work and an account of which of these measures
the employer intends to begin or implement during the coming years.
The plan is also to contain a summary account of the action plan for
equal pay that the employer is required to draw up under Section 11.
An account of how the planned measures under the first paragraph have
been implemented is to be included in the next plan.
The obligation to draw up a gender equality plan does not apply to
employers who employed fewer than 25 employees at the start of the
latest calendar year.
Education
Goal-oriented work
Section 14
79

An education provider conducting education or other activities under
the Education Act (2010:800), education under the Higher Education Act
(1992:1434) or education that can lead to a qualification under the Act
concerning authority to award certain qualifications (1993:792) is to
conduct goal-oriented work within the framework of these activities to
actively promote equal rights and opportunities for the children, pupils
or students participating in or applying for the activities, regardless of
sex, ethnicity, religion or other belief, disability or sexual orientation.
More detailed regulations on the obligations of education providers are
provided in Sections 15 and 16. [Act (2010:861)].
Preventing and hindering harassment
Section 15
An education provider referred to in Section 14 is to take measures to
prevent and hinder any child, pupil or student who is participating in or
applying for their activities from being subjected to harassment
associated with sex, ethnicity, religion or other belief, disability or sexual
orientation, or to sexual harassment.
Equal treatment plan
Section 16
An education provider referred to in Section 14 is to draw up a plan each
year containing an overview of the measures needed to (1) promote equal
rights and opportunities for the children, pupils or students participating
in or applying for the activities, regardless of sex, ethnicity, religion or
other belief, disability or sexual orientation, and (2) prevent and hinder
harassment referred to in Section 15. The plan is to contain an account of
which of these measures the education provider intends to begin or
implement during the coming year.
n account of how the measures planned under the first paragraph have
been implemented is to be included in the next year’s plan.
Chapter 4. Supervision
The Equality Ombudsman
Duties of the Equality Ombudsman
Section 1
The Equality Ombudsman is to supervise compliance with this Act. The
Ombudsman is to try in the first instance to induce those to whom the
Act applies to comply with it voluntarily.
Provisions on the duties of the Ombudsman are also contained in the Act
concerning the Equality Ombudsman (2008:568).

80

Section 2
Chapter 6, Section 2 states that the Equality Ombudsman may bring a
court action on behalf of an individual who consents to this.
Obligation to provide information
Section 3
A natural or legal person who is subject to the prohibitions of
discrimination and reprisals, the obligation to investigate and take
measures against harassment or the provisions on active measures in this
Act is obliged, at the request of the Equality Ombudsman,
1. to provide information about circumstances in their activities that are
of importance for the supervision exercised by the Ombudsman,
2. to provide information about qualifications when the Ombudsman is
assisting in a request from an individual under Chapter 2, Section 4 or 8,
3. to give the Ombudsman access to workplaces and other premises
where the activities are conducted for the purpose of investigations that
may be of importance to the supervision exercised by the Ombudsman,
and
4. to attend discussions with the Ombudsman.
The obligations specified in points 1–3 do not apply if there are special
grounds against their doing so in an individual case.
Financial penalty
Section 4
A natural or legal person who does not comply with a request under
Section 3 may be ordered by the Equality Ombudsman to fulfil his or her
obligation subject to a financial penalty. A decision to order a financial
penalty may be appealed to the Board against Discrimination.
A financial penalty order under the first paragraph shall be served. Act
(2010:1979).
Section 5
A natural or legal person who does not fulfil his or her obligations
concerning active measures under Chapter 3, Section 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 15 or 16 may be ordered to fulfil them subject to a financial penalty.
Such orders are issued by the Board against Discrimination on
application from the Equality Ombudsman. They can also be directed
towards the State as an employer or as the entity responsible for
educational activities.
If the Ombudsman has declared that he or she does not want to apply to
the Board for a financial penalty to be ordered, a central employees’
organisation with respect to which the employer is bound by a collective
agreement may make an application concerning active measures in
working life under Chapter 3, Sections 4–13.

81

The application is to state the measures that should be required of the
party that the application concerns, the grounds referred to in support of
the application and what investigation has been made of the matter.
Prohibition against appeals
Section 6
No appeal may be made against decisions of the Equality Ombudsman
under this Act other than decisions under Section 4 concerning the
ordering of financial penalties.
Board against Discrimination
Duties of the Board
Section 7
The Board against Discrimination examines applications for financial
penalties under Section
5 and appeals against decisions concerning orders for financial penalties
under Section 4. In processing these cases, Sections 8–15a are to be
applied. [Act (2010:1979)].
Processing of an application for a financial penalty
Section 8
A natural or legal person who is the subject of an application for a
financial penalty shall be ordered to comment within a certain time on
the application and to supply the information concerning circumstances
in their activities that the Board against Discrimination needs for its
examination.
When an employees’ organisation has made the application, the Equality
Ombudsman shall be given an opportunity to comment.
Section 9
The Board against Discrimination shall ensure that cases are adequately
investigated. When necessary, the Board shall arrange for additional
investigation. Superfluous investigation may be refused.
Section 10
Cases before the Board against Discrimination are decided after an oral
hearing, unless the Board considers such a hearing unnecessary.
Section 11
The Board against Discrimination shall call the party that has made the
application to the Board and the party that is the subject of the
application to a hearing. If necessary for the investigation, the Board may
also call others to the hearing.

82

The Board may order the party that the application concerns or that
party’s representative to attend in person, subject to a financial penalty.
Section 12
A case concerning the ordering of a financial penalty may be decided
even if the party that the application concerns does not comment on the
case, does not cooperate in the investigation or
fails to attend an oral hearing.
If the Equality Ombudsman or the employees’ organisation that has
made the application for a financial penalty fails to attend a hearing, the
application for a financial penalty becomes
void.
Section 13
In deciding a case concerning the ordering of a financial penalty, the
Board against Discrimination may instruct the party that the application
concerns to take measures other than those sought in the application, if
these other measures are not obviously more burdensome for the party.
In its decision the Board shall state how and by when the measures are to
be started or implemented.
The Board’s decision shall be in writing and shall be delivered to the
party that the application concerns.
Processing of an appeal against a decision to order a financial penalty
Section 14
In processing an appeal against a decision to order a financial penalty,
Sections 9 and 10 shall be applied.
Service of documents
Section 15
The Board against Discrimination shall call the party that has appealed
against the decision to order a financial penalty and the Equality
Ombudsman to a hearing. If necessary for the investigation, the Board
may also call others to the hearing.
The Board may order the party that has appealed against the decision or
that party’s representative to attend in person, subject to a financial
penalty.
Service of documents
Section 1 a
An application for a financial penalty under Section 8, a summons to
attend a hearing under Section 11 or Section 15, and other documents that
an employer or some other party is required to provide shall be served.
[Act (2010:1979)].
83

Prohibition against appeals
Section 16
No appeal may be made against a decision of the Board against
Discrimination under this Act.
Imposition of a financial penalty
Section 17
Proceedings for the imposition of a financial penalty that has been
ordered under this Act are brought before a district court by the Equality
Ombudsman.
In cases concerning the imposition of a financial penalty, the district
court may also assess the appropriateness of the penalty.
Board of Appeals for Higher Education
Section 18
A decision of a university or other higher education institution for which
the State is the responsible entity may, if it concerns education under the
Higher Education Act (1992:1434), be appealed to the Higher Education
Appeals Board on the grounds that the decision is contrary to
1. the prohibition of discrimination in Chapter 2, Section 5, first
paragraph, if the decision concerns
a) admission to education,
b) credit for education,
c) deferment of studies or resumption of studies after time off from
studies,
d) a change of supervisor,
e) withdrawal of a supervisor and other resources in third-cycle courses
and study programmes,
f) grants for research students, or
g) a disciplinary measure against a student,
2. the prohibition of discrimination in Chapter 2, Section 5, second
paragraph, or
3. the prohibition of reprisals in Chapter 2, Section 19.
If the Appeals Board finds that the appealed decision is contrary to one
of the prohibitions and that this can be assumed to have influenced the
outcome, the decision shall be set aside and the case, if necessary,
referred back to the university or other higher education institution for
re-examination.
If a decision can be appealed under another statute, the appeal is to be
made as prescribed there instead of as directed in the first paragraph.
[Act (2012:913)].
Section 19

84

No appeal may be made against a decision of the Board of Appeals for
Higher Education under this Act.
Chapter 5. Compensation and invalidity
Compensation
Section 1
A natural or legal person who violates the prohibitions of discrimination
or reprisals or who fails to fulfil their obligations to investigate and take
measures against harassment or sexual harassment under this Act shall
pay compensation for discrimination for the offence resulting from the
infringement. When compensation is decided, particular attention shall
be given to the purpose of discouraging such infringements of the Act.
The compensation shall be paid to the person who has been offended by
the infringement.
An employer who violates Chapter 2, Section 1, first paragraph or Section
18 shall also pay compensation for the loss that arises. However, this does
not apply to a loss that arises in connection with a decision concerning
employment or promotion.
If there are special grounds, the compensation can be reduced or set at
zero.
Section 2
If an employer in activities referred to in Chapter 2, Section 9, 10, 11, 13,
14, 15 or 17 discriminates against someone or subjects someone to
reprisals, the compensation for discrimination shall be paid by the
employer. A person performing work on behalf of another person in
circumstances resembling those in an employment relationship shall be
equated with an employee.
If an education provider violates Chapter 2, Section 5, 7 or 19 the
compensation shall be paid by the entity responsible for the activities.
Invalidity
Section 3
If someone is discriminated against by a provision in an individual
contract or in a collective agreement in a manner that is prohibited
under this Act, the provision shall be modified or declared invalid if the
person discriminated against requests this. If the provision is of such
significance for the contract or agreement that it cannot reasonably be
demanded that the contract or agreement shall apply in other respects
without material changes, the contract may also be modified in other
respects or be declared invalid in its entirety.
If someone is discriminated against by termination of a contract or
agreement or by some other such legal act, the legal act shall be declared
invalid if the person discriminated against requests this.
85

If someone is discriminated against by a rule or similar internal provision
at the place of work, the provision shall be modified or declared without
effect if the person discriminated against requests this.
Chapter 6. Legal proceedings
Applicable rules
Section 1
Cases concerning the application of Chapter 2, Section 1, 2, 3 or 18 shall
be dealt with under the Labour Disputes (Judicial Procedure) Act
(1974:371). In such cases a person enquiring about or applying for work, a
person applying for or carrying out a traineeship or a person
who is available to perform work or who is performing work as
temporary or borrowed labour shall be regarded as an employee.
The person at whose establishment the traineeship or work
is being or would have been carried out shall be regarded as employer.
This also applies when the regulations on negotiations concerning
disputes in the Employment (Co-determination in the Workplace) Act
(1976:580) are applied.
Cases concerning the application of Chapter 2, Section 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12,
12a, 12b, 13, 13a, 13b, 14, 14a, 14b, 15, 16, 17 or 19 shall be examined by a
general court and dealt with in accordance with the provisions of the
Swedish Code of Judicial Procedure concerning procedures in civil cases
in which out-of- court settlement of the matter is permitted. [Act
(2012:673)].
Right to bring an action
Section 2
The Equality Ombudsman, or a non-profit organisation whose statutes
state that it is to look after the interests of its members and that is not an
employees’ organisation referred to in the third paragraph, may bring an
action, as a party, on behalf of an individual who consents to this. When
the Ombudsman or the association brings such an action, the
Ombudsman or association may also bring another action on behalf of
the individual as part of the same proceedings, if he or she consents to
this. In cases under Section 1, first paragraph the Ombudsman’s action is
brought before the Labour Court. For unmarried children under 18 years
of age the consent of the custodian or custodians is required.
To be allowed to bring an action, the association must be suited to
represent the individual in the case, taking account of its activities and
its interest in the matter, its financial ability to bring an action and other
circumstances.
When an employees’ organisation has the right to bring an action on
behalf of the individual under Chapter 4, Section 5 of the Labour
Disputes (Judicial Procedure) Act (1974:371), the Ombudsman or
86

association may only bring an action if the employees’ organisation does
not do so.
Burden of proof
Section 3
If a person who considers that he or she has been discriminated against
or subjected to
reprisals demonstrates circumstances that give reason to presume that
he or she has been discriminated against or subjected to reprisals, the
defendant is required to show that discrimination or reprisals have not
occurred.
Statute of limitations
Working life
Section 4
If someone brings an action on the basis of notice of termination or
summary dismissal, the following provisions of the Employment
Protection Act (1982:80) shall be applied:
– Section 40 concerning the time limit for actions for a declaration of
invalidity,
– Section 41 concerning the time limit for damages or other claims, and
– Section 42 concerning the expiry of the right to bring an action on the
grounds that it is time-barred.
If someone brings an action against an employer other than an action
referred to in the first paragraph, the following provisions of the
Employment (Co-determination in the Workplace) Act (1976:580) shall
be applied:
– Section 64 on the time limit for calling for negotiations,
– Section 65 on the time limit for bringing an action,
– Section 66 on the extended time limit for a person who is not
represented by an employees’ organisation, with the difference that the
time limit referred to in Section 66, first paragraph, first sentence shall
be two months, and
– Section 68 concerning the expiry of the right to bring an action on the
grounds that it is time-barred.
If the action concerns compensation on grounds of an employment
decision announced by an employer in the public sector, the time limits
specified in the second paragraph are calculated from the day on which
the employment decision gained legal force.
Section 5
In cases under Section 1, first paragraph the Equality Ombudsman can
toll the statute of limitations, except in cases concerning a declaration
that a notice of termination or summary dismissal is invalid, by
87

informing the employer in writing that the Ombudsman is making use of
her or his right to toll the statute of limitations. If the running of the
statute of limitations has been tolled by such a communication, a new
statute of limitations under Section 4 runs from the day of tolling.
A statute of limitations cannot be tolled more than once.
Other areas of society
Section 6
A legal action other than actions referred to in Section 4 must be brought
within two years
from the date on which the act to which attention is called was
performed or from the last date on which an obligation should have been
fulfilled. Otherwise the right to bring legal action expires.
If the action concerns a person who was under 18 years of age when the
act was performed or the obligation should have been fulfilled at the
latest, the time limit specified in the first paragraph is calculated from
the day on which the person reached the age of 18.
Litigation costs
Section 7
In cases under Section 1, second paragraph, each party may be ordered to
bear its litigation costs, if the party that has lost the case had reasonable
grounds for bringing the dispute to court. However, this does not apply
when the Equality Ombudsman brings an action on behalf of an
individual under Section 2.
In cases under Section 1, first paragraph, Chapter 5, Section 2 of the
Labour Disputes
(Judicial Procedure) Act (1974:371) applies instead.
Other provisions
Section 8
If someone brings an action on the basis of notice of termination or
summary dismissal, the following provisions of the Employment
Protection Act (1982:80) are to be applied:
– Section 34 concerning the validity of a notice of termination etc.,
– Section 35 concerning the validity of a notice of summary dismissal
etc.,
– Section 37 concerning suspension from work when a notice of
termination or summary dismissal has been declared invalid,
– Section 43, first paragraph, second sentence and second paragraph
concerning expeditious conduct of proceedings etc. [Act (2011:742)].
Section 9

88

An action for compensation based on a decision on employment that has
been announced by an employer in the public sector may not be
examined before the employment decision has gained legal force.
Section 10
The provisions of the Swedish Code of Judicial Procedure concerning
parties shall also apply to a person on whose behalf the Equality
Ombudsman or an association brings an action under this Act in so far as
they regard disqualifying circumstances, ongoing legal proceedings and
personal attendance, as well as hearing of witnesses on oath and other
issues concerning evidence.
When an individual brings an action under this Act, the Equality
Ombudsman or an association may not bring an action on the
individual’s behalf in the same matter.
Section 11
The decision of the court in a case where the Equality Ombudsman or an
association brings an action on behalf of an individual may be appealed
by the individual, if it may be appealed by the Ombudsman or the
association.
When the decision of the court in a case referred to in the first paragraph
has become final and non-appealable, the matter may not be reviewed
on the action either of the individual or of the Equality Ombudsman or
the association.
1. This Act enters into force on 1 January 2009.
2. This Act supersedes
– the Equal Opportunities Act (1991:433),
– the Act on Measures against Discrimination in Working Life on
Grounds of Ethnic Origin, Religion or other Belief (1999:130),
– the Prohibition of Discrimination in Working Life on Grounds of
Disability Act (1999:132),
– the Prohibition of Discrimination in Working Life because of Sexual
Orientation Act
(1999:133),
– the Equal Treatment of Students at Universities Act (2001:1286),
– the Prohibition of Discrimination Act (2003:307), and
– the Act Prohibiting Discriminatory and Other Degrading Treatment of
Children and Pupils
(2006:67).
3. The superseded acts continue to apply with regard to discrimination
and reprisals that have taken place before this Act entered into force.
After this Act enters into force, the duties incumbent on an ombudsman
under the superseded acts shall be fulfilled by the Equality Ombudsman.
After this Act has entered into force, the duties incumbent under the
superseded acts on the Equal Opportunities Commission or the Board
89

against Discrimination shall be fulfilled by the Board against
Discrimination.
4. The obligation of the employer under Chapter 3, Section 10 shall be
performed for the first time in 2009 or the year in which the provision
first becomes applicable.
5. The obligations of the employer under Chapter 3, Sections 11 and 13
shall be performed for the first time in the year immediately following
the start of the calendar year when the employer employed at least 25
employees or the year after that, if the obligation under
Chapter 3, Section 10 is to be performed that year.

Social Services Act (2001:453)
Chapter 5 Special provisions for certain groups
Older persons
Section 4
The care provided by the social services should be tailored towards
providing older persons the opportunity of leading a dignified life and
experiencing well-being (fundamental value).
The social welfare committee shall endeavour to ensure that older
persons are enabled to live independently and securely and to lead
active, meaningful lives in the company of others. Act (2010:427).
Section 6
The social welfare committee shall make itself closely acquainted with
the living conditions of older persons within its boundaries and, in its
activation measures, shall disseminate information concerning social
services activities in this field.
The municipality shall plan its measures for older persons. In this
planning the municipality shall cooperate with the county council and
with other public bodies and organisations.
Municipalities shall strive towards ensuring that personnel with
knowledge of Finnish, Meänkieli or Sami are available for the care of
older persons when this is deemed to be necessary. Act (2009:726).

Law on System of Choice in the Public Sector (2008:962)
Chapter 1 Area of application of the Act
90

Scope of the Act
Section 1
This Act applies when a contracting authority decides to apply
a system of choice regarding services within health and social services,
which are included as B Services in Category 25 of Appendix 3 of the
Public Procurement Act (2007:1091). However, the Act does not apply to
services covered by CPV code 85311300-5 (welfare services for children
and young people) according to Regulation (EC) No 2195/2002 of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 5 November 2002 on the
Common Procurement Vocabulary (CPV).
‘System of choice’ according to this Act means a procedure where the
individual is entitled to choose the supplier to perform the service and
with
which a contracting authority has approved and concluded a contract.
The
contracting authority does not need to apply the same system of choice
within all areas affected.
Principles for system of choice
Section 2
The contracting authority shall treat suppliers in an equal and
non-discriminatory manner. The contracting authority must observe the
principles of transparency, mutual recognition and proportionality when
applying a system of choice.
Application of the Administrative Procedure Act
Section 3
The Administrative Procedure Act (1986:223) shall not be applied
to the processing of matters under this Act.
Chapter 2 Definitions
Section 1
‘Contract documents/specification’ means such documentation
for the application to participate in a system of choice that a contracting
authority provides.
Section 2
‘Contract’ means a written agreement with financial conditions
that
1. has been concluded between one or more contracting authorities and
one or more suppliers,
91

2. relates to the provision of services, and
3. has been signed by the parties or signed by them with an electronic
signature.
The contract may also contain conditions other than financial
conditions.
Section 3
‘Supplier’ means a person who provides service in the market as
referred to in Chapter 1, Section 1, first paragraph. ‘Supplier’ also means a
group of suppliers.
Section 4
‘Continuous publication’ means a notice that applies indefinitely
and where no final date has been stipulated to submit an application.
Section 5
‘Body governed by public law’ means such companies and foundations
that fulfil needs in the public interest, provided the need is not of a
commercial nature, and:
1. which is for the greatest part funded by a municipality, a county
council
or a contracting authority,
2. whose operations are subject to the control of a municipality, a county
council or a contracting authority, or
3. on whose board or corresponding management body more than half of
the number of members are appointed by a municipality, a county
council
or a contracting authority.
Section 6
‘Service’ means such service as referred to in Chapter 1, Section
1, first paragraph.
Section 7
‘Contracting authority’ means a local government authority.
When applying this Act, the contracting authority shall be equated with
1. the decision-making assemblies of municipalities and county councils,
2. a body governed by public law as referred to in Section 5,
3. associations formed by one or more authorities according to the first
paragraph or assemblies according to 1, and
4. associations of one or more bodies according to 2.
Chapter 3 Publication
Obligation to publish on a national website

92

Section 1
A contracting authority that has decided to establish or change
a system of choice shall publish this on the national website set up for
the purpose. Contract documents shall, together with the notice, be held
available on the website.
Continuous publication
Section 2
The contracting authority shall continuously request applications
by notices on the national website.
Chapter 4 Content of the contract documents
Financial remuneration
Section 1
The principles for the financial remuneration for a supplier shall
be stated in the contract documents.
Special conditions of contract
Section 2
The contracting authority may lay down special social, environmental
and other conditions relating to the performance of a contract. All
conditions shall be stated in the notice about the system of choice or in
the
contract documents.
Submission and processing period of an application
Section 3
The manner in which the application is to be submitted shall be
stated in the notice or the contract documents.
Section 4
The time within which the contracting authority will make a
decision on approval shall be stated in the contract documents.
Section 5
The provisions of Section 10 of the Administrative Procedure Act
(1986:223) shall apply when assessing whether a document is deemed to
have been received by the contracting authority.
Chapter 5 Application for participation in a
system of choice

93

The right to participate in a system of choice
Section 1
Natural or legal persons can individually or together with other
suppliers submit an application. The contracting authority may not
impose
conditions requiring that a group shall assume a specific legal form
in order to be allowed to submit an application. However, the
contracting
authority may request that a group shall assume a specific legal form
when it has been awarded the contract, to the extent that this is
necessary
for the acceptable performance of the contract.
Access to the capacity of other undertakings
Section 2
An applicant may, where appropriate, rely on the economic,
technical and professional ability of other undertakings in its application.
The applicant shall, by producing a commitment by the undertakings in
question or in another way prove that he or she will have at their
disposal
the resources necessary for the execution of the contract.
Chapter 6 Communication
Communication by electronic means
Section 1
When communicating by electronic means, the means must be
non-discriminatory, generally available and possible to use together with
such equipment and software as is generally used.
Correction of errors, clarification and supplementation
Section 2
The contracting authority may allow an applicant to correct a
written error or some other manifest error in the application. The
contracting
authority may request that an application is clarified or supplemented.
Chapter 7 Exclusion of applicants
Circumstances that may result in exclusion of an applicant
Section 1
The contracting authority may exclude an applicant that
94

1. is bankrupt or is being wound up, is under compulsory administration
or is the subject of a composition or has indefinitely stopped their
payments
or is subject to a prohibition on conducting business,
2. is the subject of proceedings for a declaration of bankruptcy, for an
order
for compulsory winding up or administration by the court or
composition
or any other similar proceedings,
3. has been convicted by a judgment which has the force of res judicata
for
an offence relating to professional practice,
4. has been guilty of grave professional misconduct and the contracting
authority can prove this,
5. has not fulfilled their obligations relating to social insurance charges
or
tax in their country of origin or other State within the EEA area, or
6. in some essential respect has failed to provide information requested
or
provided incorrect information required pursuant to this provision.
If the applicant is a legal person, the applicant may be excluded if a
representative
for the legal person has been sentenced for an offence referred
to in the first paragraph, Section 3 or committed such an error as referred
to in the first paragraph, Section 4.
The contracting authority may request that an applicant proves that
there are no grounds for excluding them pursuant to the first paragraph,
Section 1, 2, 3 or 5.
Certificates and evidence regarding applicants
Section 2
The contracting authority shall, as evidence for there not being
grounds for excluding an applicant, accept an extract from an official
register of other equivalent document as regards a circumstance as
referred
to in Section 1, first paragraph, item 1, 2 or 3 and a certificate from a
competent authority as regards a circumstance as referred to in Section 1,
first paragraph, item 5.
If such documents or certificates as referred to in the first paragraph are
not issued in the applicant’s country of origin or the country whence
they

95

come or do not cover all of the cases as referred to in Section 1, first
paragraph, items 1 to 3, they may be replaced by a statement provided
under
honour and faith of by a similar assurance.
If an applicant is registered in an official list of approved suppliers in a
country within the EEA, the contracting authority shall assume that the
applicant cannot be excluded as a supplier according to Section 1, first
paragraph, items 1 to 5.
Chapter 8 Approval and conclusion of contract
Decision on approval
Section 1
The contracting authority shall approve all applicants satisfying
the requirements referred to in the contract notice and contract
documents
and which have not been excluded pursuant to Chapter 7, Section 1.
Notification of decision
Section 2
When a decision has been made concerning whether an applicant
may participate in the system of choice, the contracting authority
shall as soon as possible give notice to the applicant of the decision and
the reasons for it.
Such a notification shall be provided to the applicants even when the
contracting authority decides to discontinue the establishment of the
system of choice.
If the contracting authority decides not to approve the applicant as a
supplier in the system of choice, the contracting authority shall provide
information on how rectification can be sought.
Concluding the contract
Section 3
When the contracting authority has granted its approval, the
authority shall conclude a contract with the supplier without delay.
Chapter 9 Information and no-choice alternative
The contracting authority’s information responsibility
Section 1
96

The contracting authority shall provide to private parties
information about all suppliers with which the authority has concluded
contracts within the framework of the system of choice. This information
shall be objective, relevant, comparable, easy to understand and readily
available.
No-choice alternative
Section 2
For the private party who does not choose a supplier, the contracting
authority shall provide a no-choice alternative.
Chapter 10 Remedies, etc.
Rectification
Section 1
A supplier, who claims that a contracting authority has breached
a provision of this Act, may apply for rectification to a general
administrative
court.
Only the applicant that has not been approved can apply for rectification
of the contract authority’s decision according to Chapter 8, Section 1.
An application for rectification shall be submitted in writing.
Section 2
If the contracting authority has breached any provision of this
Act and this has meant that a supplier suffered or may suffer damage, the
court shall decide that the contracting authority shall implement
rectification.
Competent court
Section 3
An application for rectification according to Section 1 shall be
made to the general administrative court in whose judicial district the
contracting authority is based.
An application according to Section 1, second paragraph shall have been
received by the general administrative court within three weeks from
when the notification was provided according to Chapter 8, Section 2.
Leave to appeal is required to make an appeal to the Administrative
Court
of Appeal. Act (2009:856).

97

Prohibition of appeal
Section 4
A decision to which this Act applies may not be appealed
against under Chapter 10 of the Local Government Act (1991:900).
Damages
Section 5
A contracting authority that has not complied with the provisions
of this Act must compensate the applicant for damage caused thereby.
An action for damages which is based on a decision under Chapter
8, Section 1 shall be instituted within one year from the date on which
the
contracting authority decided not to approve the applicant.
Actions for damages shall be instituted at a general court.
If an action is not brought in time, the right to damages is lost.
Exemptions from rectification and damages
Section 6
The provisions of this Chapter concerning rectification or damages
do not apply to the decision of a contracting authority on information
and no-choice alternative.
Supervision
Section 7
The Government shall appoint an authority to exercise supervision
of the system of choice according to this Act.
Section 8
The supervisory authority may obtain such information from
the contracting authority as may be necessary for the supervision. This
information shall in the first instance be collected through written
procedure.
If it is more suitable, owing to the scope of the material, urgency or
some other circumstance, the information may be collected by visiting
the
contracting authority or verbally.
Section 9
A contracting authority is liable to provide the information that
the supervisory authority requests for its supervision.
98

__________________
Enters into force 1 Jan 2009

Heritage Conservation Act (1988:950) etc.
Good place names practice
Section 4 In state and local government operations, good place names
practice shall be observed. This means that:
- place names established by long usage shall not be changed without
good cause,
- place names shall generally be spelled in accordance with generally
accepted rules for linguistic correctness, unless spelling forms
established by long usage otherwise require,
- the impact on names established by long usage shall be taken into
account when forming new place names, and
- Swedish, Sami and Finnish names shall, as far as possible, be used in
parallel on maps and also for signs and other markings in multilingual
areas.
Names that have been approved for public map production shall also be
used in their approved form in other contexts. Act (2000:265).

Sami Parliament Act (1992:1433)
Chapter 2 The Sami Parliament
Assignments of the Sami Parliament
Section 1
The Sami Parliament shall work for a living Sami culture, taking
initiatives for activities and proposing measures for promoting this
culture. The assignments of the Sami Parliament include, in particular:
1. deciding on the allocation of state subsidies and funds from the Sami
Foundation to Sami culture and Sami organisations, as well as funds that
are intended for the common disposal of the Sami people,
2. appointing the Board of Directors for the Sami Education Board,
3. establishing objectives for and guiding the work on the Sami language,
4. participating in community development and ensuring that Sami
needs are considered, including the interests of reindeer breeding in the
use of land and water,
5. providing information on Sami conditions, and
6. performing the additional tasks that pertain to the Sami Parliament
pursuant to legislation or other statutes. Act (2010:868).

99

The Education Ordinance (2011:185)
Chapter 5 Education
Mother tongue tuition
Section 7
Chapter 10, Section 7, Chapter 11, Section 10, Chapter 12, Section 7, and
Chapter 13, Section 7 of the Education Act (2010:800) contain basic
provisions on the obligation of education providers to offer mother
tongue tuition. The education provider is also obliged to offer mother
tongue tuition to pupils who are adopted children and who have a
mother tongue other than Swedish, even if the language is not the pupil’s
daily means of interaction in the home.
The school principal decides on a pupil’s mother tongue tuition.
Section 8
Mother tongue tuition may be organised
1. as a language choice in compulsory school and special school for
children with disabilities,
2. as the pupil’s choice,
3. within the framework of the school’s choice, or
4. outside the guaranteed teaching time.
Section 9
Mother tongue tuition may not comprise more than one language for
one pupil. However, a Roma pupil who comes from abroad may be given
mother tongue tuition in two languages, if there are special reasons for
doing so.
Section 10
An education provider is obliged to organise mother tongue tuition in a
language only if
1. at least five pupils who are to be offered mother tongue tuition in the
language request such teaching, and
2. a suitable teacher is available.
The first paragraph 1 does not apply to national minority languages.
Under Section 7 of the Language Act (2009:600), the national minority
languages are Finnish, Yiddish, Meänkieli, Romani Chib and Sami.
Section 11
If a pupil is given mother tongue tuition outside the guaranteed teaching
time, the education provider is obliged to offer the pupil such teaching
for a total of, at most, seven academic years during the pupil’s school
100

career. However, the pupil should be offered mother tongue tuition for a
longer period if the pupil is in special need of such tuition.
The restriction under the first paragraph does not apply to the national
minority languages or to a Nordic language.
Section 12
A pupil receiving mother tongue tuition may, with the restriction
stipulated in Section 11, continue to take part in the tuition, even if the
language should cease to be the pupil’s daily means of interaction in the
home.
Section 13
In mother tongue tuition in Sami, the syllabus applying to the subject of
Sami in the Sami school should be used.
Chapter 9 Compulsory school
Bilingual teaching

the

Teaching in the language that is the pupil’s daily means of interaction in
home
Section 12
For pupils who have a language other than Swedish as their daily means
of interaction with one or both custodians in the home, parts of the
teaching in years 1–6 may be organised in this language. For pupils with
Finnish as their daily means of interaction in the home, such teaching
may also be organised in years 7–9.
An education provider that organises teaching in accordance with the
first paragraph should report this to the Swedish Schools Inspectorate.
Section 13
During the entire period in which the pupil receives bilingual teaching
under Section 12, at most half of the teaching may be given in the
language that is the daily means of interaction in the home. Teaching
should be planned so that teaching in Swedish gradually increases.
Chapter 12 The Sami school
The contents and scope of the education
Curriculum
Section 1

101

A curriculum applies to the Sami school under Chapter 1, Section 11, first
paragraph of the Education Act (2010:800).
The curriculum is to be found in the Ordinance (SKOLFS 2010:251) on
the curriculum for the Sami school, pre-school class and the recreation
centre in certain cases. The same Ordinance contains provisions on the
syllabi and knowledge requirements for the Sami school.
Timetable
Section 2
Provisions on the distribution of guaranteed teaching time (time table)
are to be found in appendix 3.
Section 3
The education provider decides after proposals from the school principal
on the distribution of teaching time among the years.
Sami teaching
Section 4
Teaching is to be given in Swedish and Sami.
Section 5
The subject of Sami should be available in all years.
Section 6
For pupils who have been received in the Sami school because of special
reasons under Chapter 7, Section 7, paragraph 1, second sentence of the
Education Act (2010:80), teaching in Sami and teaching in the subject of
Sami may be exchanged with other teaching.
Integrated Sami teaching in the compulsory school
Section 13
An education provider for compulsory school may organise Sami
teaching for Sami pupils in their compulsory school if the education
provider and the Sami Education Board conclude an agreement on this.
Sami teaching refers to teaching containing Sami features and teaching
in Sami apart from the teaching that is organised as mother tongue
tuition in Sami.
Section 14
Education for Sami pupils is to be integrated with the equivalent
education for other pupils in the compulsory school.

102

Sami teaching may be placed at times outside the guaranteed teaching
time.

Education Act (2010:800)
Chapter 8 The pre-school
Mother tongue
Section 10
The pre-school should contribute towards ensuring that children who
have a mother tongue other than Swedish have the opportunity to
develop both the Swedish language and their mother tongue.
Chapter 9 The pre-school class
Mother tongue
Section 10
The pre-school class should contribute towards ensuring that pupils who
have a mother tongue other than Swedish have the opportunity to
develop both the Swedish language and their mother tongue.
Chapter 10 Nine-year compulsory school
Mother tongue tuition
Section 7
A pupil who has a custodian with a mother tongue other than Swedish
should be offered mother tongue tuition in this language if
1. the language is the pupil’s daily means of interaction (dagligt
umgängesspråk) in the home and
2. the pupil has basic knowledge of the language.
Mother tongue tuition in a national minority language should be offered
even if the language is not the pupil’s daily means of interaction in the
home. The government or an authority appointed by the government
may issue regulations with regard to the mother tongue tuition. Such
regulations may involve that mother tongue tuition in a certain language
will only be offered if a certain number of pupils wish to receive such
tuition in the language.
_________________
Enters into force 1 July 2011

103

The Health and Medical Service Act (1982:763)
Section 2
Health and medical services are aimed at assuring the entire population
of good health and of care on equal terms.
Care shall be provided with respect for the equal dignity of all human
beings and for the dignity of the individual. Priority for health and
medical care shall be given to the person whose need of care is greatest.
Act (1997:142).
Section 2 b
The patient should be given individualised information concerning
1. his/her state of health,
2. the methods for examination, care and treatment which are available,
3. his/her opportunities of choosing a care provider and executor within
publically financed health and medical care, and
4. the health care guarantee.
If this information cannot be supplied to the patient, it shall be supplied
to a close relative instead. Information may not be supplied to that
patient or any relative of the patient, however, insofar as this is contrary
to Chapter 25, Section 6 or 7 of the Secrecy Act (2009:400) or Chapter 6,
Section 12 second paragraph or Section 13 first paragraph of
patientsäkerhetslagen [the Act on Patient Safety] (2010:659). Act
(2010:662)
Section 2 e
Where health and medical services are conducted, there shall be present
the staff, facilities and equipment necessary in order for the provision of
good care to be possible. Act (1998:1660).

Appendix 3 – Map of the administrative areas for Finnish (blue), Sami
(red) and Meänkieli (yellow)

104

105

106

