Strasbourg, 11 March 2013

MIN-LANG (2013) PR 01

EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES

Fourth periodical report
presented to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe
in accordance with Article 15 of the Charter

UNITED KINGDOM

THE EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES
Forth periodical report from the United Kingdom
December 2012

Foreword:
Devolved powers were formally transferred from the UK government to the devolved
administrations in Scotland and Wales on 1 July 1999 and in Northern Ireland on 2 December
1999.
At the point of devolution, the Welsh Assembly Government took over responsibility for a number
of the UK government's functions, including the Welsh language, education and training, economic
development, and local government. The Scottish Parliament also took on responsibility for a
range of UK government functions, which cover broadly the same ground as was previously
covered by the Scottish Office. This included responsibility for Scottish Gaelic and Scots. Similarly,
the Northern Ireland Assembly and Executive took over a wide range of functions previously
exercised by the UK Government. This included most responsibility for language issues, including
policy relating to the Irish and Ulster Scots in Northern Ireland. Although devolution in Northern
Ireland was suspended in October 2002, it was restored again on 8 May 2007.
The UK Government retains responsibility for foreign affairs, defence, national security, most
taxation, national economic policy and broadcasting.
There are therefore three devolved administrations which, along with the UK Government, are
responsible for implementing the provisions of the European Charter for regional or minority
languages in the United Kingdom.
The Charter has been extended to the Isle of Man, a Dependency of the British Crown, which has
its own parliament and legislature and where Manx Gaelic is enjoying a resurgence.
As with the UK response to the Third Periodical Report, and despite repeated requests from the
UK Government, the devolved administration in Northern Ireland has been unable to agree a
contribution to this Report reflecting the views and actions of the Northern Ireland Executive
relating to those issues for which they have policy responsibility. The UK Government expresses
its concern at this outcome and sincerely hopes that this can be remedied in time for the next
periodical report. The Report reflect the UK Government’s responses in relation to those Articles
where it retains policy responsibility.

2
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

Part I
Please provide updated information, if any new data exists, about the number and
geographic distribution of speakers of regional or minority languages, and the general
demographic situation.
Please provide information about any changes in the general policies, legislation or
practice of your state in respect of regional or minority languages. Please also indicate any
developments which are expected to occur during the next monitoring cycle, such as
envisaged political or budgetary changes, policy plans or any other elements that may have
a direct or indirect effect on the situation of the regional or minority languages in your
State.
Please give a detailed account of the legal and/or practical measures that your State has taken
to implement each one of the recommendations of the Committee of Ministers.

Cornish
At the time of the last report, the Cornish Language Partnership (CLP) had commissioned a survey
of speakers which gave a figure of some 699 speakers at three levels of competency. The survey
did not claim to capture all speakers but provided a baseline.
The CLP survey is not due to be updated until 2013, but the Partnership continues to monitor
numbers in classes and the number taking and passing examinations in the language. These
statistics show a steady though modest increase. The spread of knowledge of the language at the
level of awareness and knowledge of a few phrases of Cornish has been much quicker and more
extensive. It is believed that the normalisation of the language at this level is important in setting
the context which will enable awareness to translate into active acquisition in the future.
Importantly, while the demographic profile of learners in evening classes remains for the most part
at over 40 years of age, much of the activity around normalisation has been focussed on young
people and families, so that the growth of awareness has a much younger demographic profile.
The piloting of Cornish in primary schools has also widened interest in and knowledge of Cornish
with young children and their parents. The Partnership has also worked hard to widen access and
ownership and has succeeded to a great extent in changing perceptions of the Cornish language.
This allows Cornish to take its place within the culture and communities of present-day Cornwall.
The majority of speakers reside in Cornwall, but there are learners and speakers in a number of
countries world-wide, notably those in which there is a sizeable Cornish diaspora.
In late 2009, Cornwall Council adopted a policy on Cornish which aims to ensure that the Cornish
language is incorporated into many of the Council’s functions, including the drawing up of policy
documents, the provision of bilingual street signage and initiatives at departmental level. However,
there is a need to encourage greater implementation of the policy, which varies between individual
departments.
A strategy for the Development of Cornish was adopted in 2005 by local authorities and other
organisations in Cornwall. In 2010, the strategy was revised to take account of the changing
circumstances and to acknowledge the progress made. However, the central visions and targets of
the strategy remain the same. The revised strategy is complemented by a three-year business plan
and annual operational plans.
In 2005 the Labour Government endorsed the Strategy as providing the framework for
implementing Part II of the Charter in respect of Cornish and provided funding towards the

3
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

implementation of the strategy of £80,000 a year, alongside £20,000 from Cornwall County Council
and £100,000 from the EU Objective One programme. Government funding was increased to
£150,000 a year in 2008 and Council funding continued, but the closure of the Objective One
programme meant the loss of EU funding. Government funding was renewed in 2011 by the
Coalition Government for a three year period through to 2014, but on a tapering basis, namely
annual payments of £140,000, £120,000 and £100,000. The Government also indicated that
beyond this time-frame Cornwall would need to sustain Cornish language provision from within its
own resources. The Cornish Language Partnership (CLP), which includes both public and
voluntary sector organisations, was established to undertake the work with Cornwall Council as
lead partner and accountable body. The CLP is making efforts to access external funding and will
continue to work with the Department for Communities and Local Government. The core funding
currently supports the employment of dedicated staff and a small development budget.

Manx Gaelic
The resident population at the last census in 2011 was 84,497, representing an increase of 5.5%
on the 2006 census figure. The resident population consisted of 41,971 males and 42,526 females.
The latest systematic data on knowledge of Manx Gaelic is based on information provided for the
2011 Census. A total of 1,823 people claimed to read, speak or write Manx Gaelic with 1,662
people being able to speak the language. This is an increase of 135 people since the 2001
Census. The key element in the Census question was fluency. Persons only knowing a few words
or phrases were asked to tick the box marked, “No, cannot speak, read or write Manx Gaelic”.
The Isle of Man Government continues to recognise the value of Manx Gaelic and the ongoing
work to develop the use of the language.

Scots
The Committee of Experts of the European Charter for Regional and Minority Languages
requested further information: (Chapter 1: 1.2: 9.):
Please provide detailed information about the 2011 census questions concerning Scots.
What steps have been taken to ensure that questions on the number of speakers of Scots
and their language knowledge was included in the census? Was a way found to avoid any
confusion with other languages? (Chapter 1, para 1.2, 9)
Detailed information on data gathered is not yet available.
In the 2011 Census respondents were asked:

4
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

In addition, a website was developed specifically to assist respondents to be clear on what was
meant by Scots. The website – ayecan.com – was developed by the Scots Language Centre and
funded by the Scottish Government. The website allowed respondents to listen to examples of
Scots being spoken from a number of different areas of Scotland. It also included a list of
frequently asked questions and other relevant information.

Moratorium on rural school closures: Scottish local authorities have been asked not to progress or
bring forward new proposals to close any rural school for one year from 1 June 2011. A
Commission on the Delivery of Rural Education will be established to consider the provision of
education in rural communities and to take a comprehensive look at the Schools (Consultation)
(Scotland) Act 2010, which includes a clear legislative presumption against the closure of such
schools and the need for educational benefits to be the driving force in any proposed closure.
Spending Review: The Scottish Government is in the process of finalising its funding allocations for
the next three years. It is likely that the final outcomes will indicate a strong support for the Gaelic
language.
SNP Manifesto Commitments
 We will develop the concept of “Scottish Studies” in our schools, creating a distinct strand
of learning focused on Scotland and incorporating Scottish History, Scottish Literature, the
Scots and Gaelic Languages, wider Scottish culture and Scottish current affairs. All pupils
will have access to this strand at Primary and Secondary levels.
 We support the introduction of a Scottish Studies element within the curriculum and see this
as an important vehicle for protecting and promoting Scotland’s languages and also their
literature.
 We will develop a national Scots language policy, with increased support for Scots in
education, encouragement of a greater profile for Scots in the media, and the establishment
of a network of Scots coordinators.
Introduction of Scottish Studies: During the next monitoring cycle the Scottish Government will
develop plans for the introduction of Scottish Studies as a particular strand in the curriculum of
Scottish schools.
Scottish Gaelic
Census 2011: Detailed information on data gathered is not yet available.
Schools Pupil Census 2011: Data gathered annually from schools with Gaelic medium provision
showing the number of children enrolled in Gaelic-medium education or studying Gaelic at high

5
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

school. Data collected from centres/school from age 3-18. Bòrd na Gàidhlig early years support
workers gathering information regularly regarding the number of children enrolled in 0-3 Gaelic
provision. Statistics are distributed to Local Authorities annually.
Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Act 2010: The Act’s principal purpose is to update and
strengthen the statutory consultation practices and procedures that local authorities apply to their
handling of all proposals for school closures and other major changes to schools. The Act also
specifies that Bòrd na Gàidhlig is to be consulted when a proposal affects the provision of Gaelic
medium education (GME) such as where a GME class is to be established or discontinued or a
GME school’s catchment is to be changed. Paragraph 12 makes clear that where a change is
being proposed which affects a denominational school, the relevant church or denominational body
must be consulted.
Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Education (HMIE) prepared a report entitled Gaelic Education,
Building on the Successes, Addressing the Barriers on the past successes of GME while looking to
the future. HMIE has focused on:





contributing to the continued success of Gaelic Education
identifying how this success can gather the momentum required to meet the targets of the
National Plan
working with Gaelic establishments, partners and agencies to set clear areas for
improvement.

The report was issued June 2011. Since then the HMIE functions have been included in a new
agency – Education Scotland.
SNP Manifesto Commitments
 We will develop the concept of “Scottish Studies” in our schools, creating a distinct strand
of learning focused on Scotland and incorporating Scottish History, Scottish Literature, the
Scots and Gaelic Languages, wider Scottish culture and Scottish current affairs. All pupils
will have access to this strand at Primary and Secondary levels.
 ‘We will also continue to support the expansion of Gaelic medium education’
 We will examine how we can introduce an entitlement to Gaelic medium education where
reasonable demand exists.
 We support the introduction of a Scottish Studies element within the curriculum and see this
as an important vehicle for protecting and promoting Scotland’s languages and also their
literature.
 We will promote the acquisition, use and status of Gaelic through the implementation of the
Gaelic Action Plan with the aim of ensuring that by 2021 the proportion of Gaelic speakers
is back up to 2001 levels.
 We will continue to raise the profile of the Gaelic language across Scotland.
 Crucially, we will ensure that in Scotland’s most strongly Gaelic-speaking communities,
Gaelic continues to be in use as a community language.
Bord na Gàidhlig launched a new National Plan for Gaelic in June 2012. The key aims of the
National Gaelic Language Plan 2012-17 are:




arresting the decline in the overall number of Gaelic speakers in Scotland by increasing the
number of speakers acquiring the language.
expanding the range of situations in which Gaelic is used, in line with the Gaelic Language
Act’s key principle of equal respect for Gaelic and English
helping Gaelic speakers, both learners and native speakers, to develop their competence in
the language and their confidence in using it, and ensuring that the language itself
continues to be healthy and vibrant.

6
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

During the next monitoring cycle Bord na Gàidhlig will prepare, for ministerial approval, a revised
version of the Guidance for public bodies on Gaelic Language Plans.
During the next monitoring cycle the Scottish Government will develop plans for the introduction of
Scottish Studies as a particular strand in the curriculum of Scottish schools.
During the next monitoring cycle the Scottish Government will prepare national Guidance on the
delivery of Gaelic education and Gaelic medium education in Scottish schools.

Welsh
The detailed results of the 2011 Census regarding Welsh are expected to be published in 2013.
In 2008 the Welsh Language Board published a report outlining the results of the Language Use
Surveys of 2004-06. The Surveys concluded that 317,000 people (58% of Welsh speakers)
considered themselves to be fluent speakers. The full report can be viewed here:
http://www.webarchive.org.uk/wayback/archive/20120330031325/http://www.byigwlb.org.uk/english/publications/Pages/PublicationItem.aspx?puburl=/English/publications/Publicati
ons/Welsh%20Language%20Use%20Surveys%202004-06.pdf
In February 2012, The Welsh Language Board published “A Statistical Overview of the Welsh
language”, which is a comprehensive summary of the Board’s statistical and data collection work
since 2003. The full report can be viewed here:
:http://www.webarchive.org.uk/wayback/archive/20120330020847/http://www.byigwlb.org.uk/English/publications/Pages/PublicationItem.aspx?puburl=/English%2fpublications%2fPu
blications%2fA+statistical+overview+of+the+Welsh+languagef2.pdf
As a result of the devolution of power within the United Kingdom, the Welsh Government is
responsible for promoting the Welsh language. Since the 2011 Assembly Election that
responsibility currently lies with the Welsh Government’s Minister for Education and Skills.
The Welsh Language (Wales) Measure received Royal Assent in February 2011. It confirmed the
official status of the Welsh language and led to the establishment of the post of Welsh Language
Commissioner, an Advisory Panel for the Commissioner and a Welsh Language Tribunal. The
Measure will also lead to the development of Welsh language standards that will replace Welsh
Language Schemes and establish rights for Welsh speakers in the provision of services. The
Measure also includes provisions with regard to the freedom of people wishing to speak Welsh
with one another. In addition, a statutory Welsh Language Partnership Council will be established
to advise the Welsh Ministers about their Welsh Language Strategy.
As a result of the Welsh Language Measure 2011, the Welsh Language Board was abolished on
31 March 2012.
The new Welsh Language Strategy 2012–17 A living language: a language for living was launched
on 1 March 2012. Adopting a Welsh language strategy is a requirement placed on Welsh Ministers
by section 78 of the Government of Wales Act 2006.
http://wales.gov.uk/docs/dcells/publications/122902wls201217en.pdf
Six strategic aims have been identified for the strategy.
The six aims are:

1. to encourage and support the use of the Welsh language within families.
7
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

2. to increase the provision of Welsh medium activities for children and young people and
to increase their awareness of the value of the language;

3. to strengthen the position of the Welsh language in the community;
4. to increase opportunities for people to use Welsh in the workplace;
5. to improve Welsh language services to citizens; and
6. to strengthen the infrastructure for the language, including digital technology.
In March 2012, the Welsh Government published an Action Plan for 2012-2013 setting out how it
will implement the proposals set out in the Welsh Language Strategy for that financial year:
http://wales.gov.uk/topics/welshlanguage/publications/actionplan1213/?lang=en
The Welsh Language (Wales) Measure will contribute towards implementing the Strategy’s aims.
The Welsh Language Measure established the office of the Welsh Language Commissioner with a
general power to promote and facilitate the use of Welsh and to work towards ensuring that Welsh
is treated no less favourably than English. The Commissioner will have a key role to play in
safeguarding the rights of Welsh speakers and contributing to the public debate surrounding the
future of the Welsh language. The range of services available to the public in Welsh will be
improved as a result of the Measure. This will be achieved by creating standards which will impose
duties on organisations which fall within the scope of the Measure to:
 provide services in Welsh;
 consider the effect of policy decisions on the Welsh language
 promote the use of Welsh in the workplace
 promote and facilitate the use of Welsh more widely
 keep records of compliance with standards, and of complaints.
Both the Commissioner and the Welsh Government will have important roles to play in the creation
of standards. The Commissioner will also have significant powers to enforce compliance with
standards and powers to undertake investigations into allegations of interference with individuals’
freedom to use Welsh with one another. The Commissioner will also have the power to advise and
make recommendations to the Welsh Government in relation to the Welsh language. The
Commissioner will also be duty-bound to formulate a report every five years on the position of the
Welsh language.
It is essential that the strategy is evaluated in order to help assess its effectiveness against its
strategic objectives and to ensure learning improvements are based on the available evidence. To
do this, the Government will develop an evaluation framework alongside the strategy, incorporating
a range of methods and sources of data including bespoke research and analysis.
Education
The Welsh Government’s Welsh-medium Education Strategy, published in April 2010, sets out the
national strategic direction for Welsh-medium, bilingual and Welsh-language education in Wales.
The Implementation Programme that accompanies the Strategy details the work expected of the
Welsh Government and its partners and stakeholders in all phases of education and training. In
order to monitor progress made with implementing the Strategy, fixed five-year and indicative tenyear targets based on outcomes have been set. Progress made against the targets is to be
published in an annual report. The Strategy, and the first annual report which was published in July
2011, can be downloaded from:
http://wales.gov.uk/topics/educationandskills/publications/guidance/welshmededstrat/?lang=en.

8
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

The second annual report will be available from late May 2012.
Preparations for the School Standards and Organisation (Wales) Bill are under way and include
the proposal to make Welsh in Education Strategic Plans (WESPs) statutory. The introduction of
WESPs is one of the key proposals of the Welsh-medium Education Strategy and the Welsh
Government expects local authorities to plan effectively for Welsh-medium provision, to report on
their Welsh-medium, bilingual and Welsh-language education strategy and planning to Welsh
Ministers and to achieve specific outcomes.
The White Paper for the Bill was published on 10 October 2011 for consultation and can be
downloaded from:
http://wales.gov.uk/consultations/education/schoolstandardsbill/?lang=en.
The Bill was laid before the National Assembly for Wales in May 2012, and following successful
completion of all stages of scrutiny, it is expected that the Bill will be passed and become Act in
January 2013 and receive Royal Assent in February 2013.
The Welsh Language (Wales) Measure 2011, the Welsh Language Strategy, and the Welshmedium Education Strategy serve as a clear demonstration of the Welsh Government’s
determination to see the Welsh language prosper. The commitment to this task is reflected by the
fact that the Welsh language thrives is one of the Government’s 19 key strategic objectives.

Part II
Please indicate what measures your State has taken to apply Article 7 of the Charter to the
regional or minority languages as defined in paragraph a of Article 1 of the Charter, focusing
in particular on the following aspects:
-

Please provide information, for each regional or minority language, on new
developments that have occurred since the last monitoring round concerning the
provisions of Article 7;

-

Please give a detailed account of the legal and/or practical measures that your State
has taken to implement the encouragements and box recommendations of the
Committee of Experts given in the previous evaluation report(s).

Para 1.a) The recognition of the regional or minority languages as an expression of cultural
wealth
Cornish
Cornwall Council has in place a policy which recognises the distinctiveness of Cornwall and the
place of the language in contemporary culture and heritage and undertakes to provide information
on the language and support development initiatives.
The Council has extended bilingual street signage to the whole of Cornwall which has helped the
understanding of linguistic heritage in the environment and has included Cornish in council
documents. The policy encourages further expansion in council use, including signage in buildings
which has yet to be addressed. As other bodies look to the council for a lead, it is important that
the full implementation of the policy be addressed.
Work undertaken by the CLP in schools aims to place the language in a cultural and historical
context, and resources produced draw on historic and contemporary culture for their frame of

9
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

reference. Collaborations with festivals, educational providers, and media and arts organisations
on projects aim to embed the language into cultural life and expression in Cornwall. In addition,
the CLP continues to offer a translation service which assists organisations and events throughout
Cornwall to engage with Cornish.

Manx Gaelic
In 2012 the Manx Heritage Foundation’s Manx Language Development Officer produced an
updated review for the language. It is hoped that key partners will meet on a regular basis to
implement a long-term strategy for Manx Gaelic.

Scots
The Tobar an Dualchais/Kist o Riches project was launched in 2006 and was set up to digitise and
catalogue recordings from all over Scotland. Some of the recordings go back to the 1930s, while
others were recorded as recently as 2000. 11,500 hours of recordings have been digitised. This
site contains a wealth of material including ballads, songs, poetry, fairy stories and tales of
supernatural creatures. Birth, life and death customs are also recorded. The recordings came
from three major collections: the School of Scottish Studies (University of Edinburgh); BBC
Scotland; and the National Trust for Scotland's Canna Collection, collected by John Lorne
Campbell.
The first Government-funded research into public attitudes to the Scots language showed a clear
recognition of the language's importance to contemporary Scotland. Just over two-thirds of the
sample (67 per cent) considered it important that Scots continues to be used in Scotland, with the
language regarded as integral to Scotland's culture, heritage and local identities.

Scottish Gaelic
The Tobar an Dualchais/Kist o Riches project was launched in 2006 and was set up to digitise and
catalogue recordings from all over Scotland. Some of the recordings go back to the 1930s while
others were recorded as recently as 2000. 11,500 hours of recordings have been digitised. This
site contains a wealth of material including ballads, songs, poetry, fairy stories and tales of
supernatural creatures. Birth, life and death customs are also recorded. The recordings came
from three major collections: the School of Scottish Studies (University of Edinburgh); BBC
Scotland; and the National Trust for Scotland's Canna Collection, collected by John Lorne
Campbell.
46 Public Bodies have now been given notification from Bòrd na Gàidhlig to prepare a Gaelic Plan.
The Bord’s Gaelic Usage Committee will take the lead in creating strong links between the National
Plan and each authorities Gaelic Plan. This will help deliver the aims that appear in the new
national plan.
The report, Public Attitudes Towards the Gaelic Language, covers a variety of questions related to
the language, including current usage, teaching and its heritage. Key findings include: 65 per cent
thought more should be done to promote Gaelic in Scotland, 81 per cent feel it is important that
Scotland does not lose its Gaelic language traditions, 70 per cent thought there should be more
opportunities to learn Gaelic, 90 per cent thought pupils should be taught Scottish studies and 53
per cent would like to see more Gaelic in Scottish life. This research demonstrates majority
support for the maintenance of the Gaelic language and recognises the need for greater access to
learning the language. The public has also been consistent in its desire that Scotland does not lose
its Gaelic identity.

10
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

Welsh
The National Library of Wales (www.llgc.org.uk) based in Aberystwyth continues to house and
gives access to a vast collection of works about Wales, many of which are written in Welsh.
The National Library of Wales received a total of £2 million from the Welsh Government’s Strategic
Capital Investment Fund in contribution towards its Welsh Newspapers and Magazines Online
project which will digitise and provide free, searchable, online access to 2 million pages (up to 300
titles) of newspapers and magazines / journals relating to Wales. This work was completed in early
2012. A beta version will be available later during 2012 with the aim of launching this in January
2013.
Amongst the material to be digitised are important Welsh language publications such as Baner ac
Amserau Cymru, Y Cymro, Seren Cymru and Tarian y Gweithiwr which represent a particularly
productive period in Welsh language publishing in the late 19th / early 20th centuries.
This project will improve the availability and accessibility of Welsh materials (and Welsh language
material) for research and learning, and has potential for use, re-use and commercial exploitation.
This project is part of the National Library of Wales' wider Theatr y Cof / Theatre of Memory
programme which aims to increase digitisation of Welsh printed material and ensure free access to
a wealth of Welsh language resources on the internet.
Amgueddfa Cymru – National Museum Wales (www.museumwales.ac.uk) continues to promote
the wider knowledge and better understanding of Wales, its history, culture and place in the world.
The Casgliad y Werin Cymru/People’s Collection Wales bilingual website is dedicated to the story
of Wales and its people, and is free to use. It represents an innovative approach to collecting,
interpreting and discussing Wales’ cultural heritage in an online environment. It is a key
commitment in the Welsh Government’s Programme for Government 2011-2016 to “develop the
potential of digital media to promote culture through Casgliad y Werin Cymru / People’s Collection
Wales and other on-line initiatives.” People’s Collection Wales is delivered under a federated
management structure led by three national cultural and heritage bodies: Amgueddfa Cymru –
National Museum Wales, The National Library of Wales and The Royal Commission on the Ancient
and Historical Monuments of Wales. Core programme funding is provided to the lead partners by
the Welsh Government.
One of the key principles underpinning Peoples' Collection Wales is that it provides a bilingual
online platform to discover, contribute and share material about Wales' history and heritage. The
programme continues to develop tools and resources to encourage and enable individuals, groups
and organisations to contribute material in the language of their choice. The programme is also
developing tools and resources for formal and informal learning, and material contributed to the
site is available for use in developing educational resources.
The Casgliad y Werin Cymru / People’s Collection Wales website is available at:
Cymraeg / Welsh: http://www.casgliadywerincymru.co.uk
Saesneg / English: http://www.peoplescollectionwales.co.uk
The Welsh Books Council continues to provide grants to authors of Welsh language books,
publishes an annual catalogue with books and education resources for children, and organises a
number of events and clubs to promote reading and literacy. The materials used in these
campaigns are Welsh language books and books from Wales. The Welsh language Children’s
Poet Laureate raises the profile of poetry amongst children and young people.

11
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

Para 1.b) The respect of the geographical area of each regional or minority language in
order to ensure that existing or new administrative divisions do not constitute an obstacle
to the promotion of the regional or minority language in question.
Cornish
At the time of the last report, Cornwall was administered through a two-tier local authority system
comprising a county council and six district council, but was preparing for the move to a unitary
authority for the whole of Cornwall (Cornwall Council). Formerly, all six district councils and the
County Council had in place basic policies for the recognition of Cornish, whilst Kerrier Council had
a more comprehensive language policy. Cornwall County Council had been the lead and
accountable body for the Cornish Language Partnership and all six district councils had been in
membership. Following the establishment of the unitary authority, Cornwall Council accepted the
role of lead partner and accountable body and provided representation from each of the political
groupings on the council. The borders of Cornwall remain the same as those for the previous
County Council.
Manx Gaelic
No developments since the last report.
Scots
No developments since the last report.
Scottish Gaelic
No developments since the last report.
Welsh
No developments since the last report.

Para 1.c) The need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in order to
safeguard them
Cornish
Action has been guided by the Cornish Language Development Strategy, adopted in 2005, which
was endorsed by the UK Government as providing the framework for implementing Part II of the
Charter. In 2008, the government renewed and increased its financial support to £150,000 per
annum, thus helping to replace financial aid which came to an end with the end of the Objective
One programme. Cornwall Council renewed support of £20,000 per annum, with additional in-kind
support through the hosting of the Partnership office and staff. In 2011 government funding was
renewed on a tapering basis of annual payments of £140,000, £120,000 and £100,000 with the
rider that central funding may cease after that date. This decision was taken in light of the need
to find savings in public expenditure to address the deficit.

12
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

At the time of the last report a Standard Written Form had been established for Cornish, for use in
official documentation, public life and education. While the freedom for individuals to use whatever
form they personally prefer has been maintained, the agreement has enabled work to be
undertaken with public bodies such as the National Trust and the Environment Agency, and with a
wide range of schools and other organisations - something which was formerly more difficult.
Manx Gaelic
The Department of Education and Children has recently appointed a new Manx Language Officer
to take over from the previous holder who retired at the end of 2011 after seven years in the post.

Scots
The Scots Language Working Group was set up to advise Ministers on the profile and needs of the
Scots language. The Group published its report and recommendations, setting out proposals to
enhance the status of Scots and promote the use of all its dialects. The work of the Group focused
on sectors that have the potential to increase the use and status of Scots, including education,
broadcasting, publishing, literature and the arts.
Scottish Gaelic
No developments since the last report.

Welsh
The Welsh Government demonstrated its commitment to promote the use of Welsh language
through a number of ways during the reporting period. In December 2010, the National Assembly
for Wales approved the Welsh Government-proposed Welsh Language (Wales) Measure, which
became law in February 2011.
The Welsh Government also consulted on and developed a new Welsh Language Strategy, which
was published on 1 March 2011. The Strategy sets out the measures that Welsh Ministers will
take, over a five-year period between 2012-17, to promote and facilitate the use of Welsh.
In addition, the Welsh Government published a new Welsh-medium Education Strategy in April
2010, in order to increase the supply of Welsh speakers for the future.
New impact assessments were developed by the Welsh Government in 2010 (using the existing
checklists as the framework) as part of its ongoing effort to mainstream the Welsh language across
the organisation. Separate Impact Assessments were produced for a) policies and b) services.
These were created to further emphasise the link between any new policies and new services
created and the Welsh language, and can also be used to check that existing policies and services
give due regard to the language. The checklists were designed to be used alongside the Welsh
Government’s Policy Integration Process.
The Welsh Government undertook a programme of language promotion designed to raise the
profile of the language across all sectors. The Welsh Government, through the Welsh Language

13
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

Board, provided grants to a number of organisations whose remit includes the promotion of the
language. In 2011-12, over £7.5m in grants was provided by the Welsh Government, through the
Welsh Language Board, to bodies and organisations that promote the Welsh language. Some of
the main grant recipients included Mudiad Meithrin, a Welsh language nursery education provider
which runs around 1000 community based pre-school and mother and toddler groups, Urdd
Gobaith Cymru, which organises Welsh-medium cultural/leisure activities for young people, and
the National Eisteddfod of Wales. From 1 April responsibility for distributing grants to Welsh
language organisations has been transferred to the Welsh Government.

Para 1.d) The facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of regional or minority
languages, in speech and writing, in public and private life
Cornish
The use of Cornish has been encouraged and facilitated in line with the strategy in a number of
ways.


Signage: Bilingual street signage on a replacement basis has been extended to the whole
of Cornwall. Advice has also been extended to developers and commercial firms with
mixed results. The CLP has been proactive in including signage in its discussions with
other public bodies where possible.



Through official use: The public translation service offered by the CLP continues to grow.
Cornwall Council provides Cornish translations of forewords to official reports, though there
is a need for greater work in other areas, such as the council website and information
leaflets. The CLP has been proactive in seeking to work with other official bodies to
promote the use of Cornish. The National Trust adopted a policy on Cornish a year ago and
Natural England, the Environment Agency and English Heritage are currently looking at
developing policies and provision.



Marketing: The CLP has continued to ensure a presence for Cornish at high density and
high profile events and festivals while the language associations have ensured
representation at more local events. The CLP (MAGA) website and newsletter have grown
and are both fully bilingual. The website also serves as a portal to a number of other
Cornish language websites. Promotional pocket guides with vocabulary in Cornish have
proved a great success with the public and with schools and other organisations. There is,
however, a need to look at better distribution networks for Cornish material including ecommerce. The CLP now makes use of social media, including both Facebook and Twitter,
to disseminate information and engender interest.



Learning Resources: New learning resources have been produced by the Partnership
including a follow up publication to the Key Stage One resources identified in the last
report. Activity packs for schools have been produced, based around Christmas, St Piran’s
Day and Cornish Drama, while the language organisations continue to produce a range of
publications for all levels of ability.



Media: The BBC continues to provide a 5 minute news bulletin in Cornish. A series for
learners consisting of twelve 5 minute programmes has been produced by the CLP in
association with MyCornwall TV and released as a DVD. A second series is has been
prepared and is currently being broadcast. Radio an Gernewegva, a web-based provider
dependent on voluntary effort, produces half an hour of reporting and music in Cornish

14
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

each week. Discussions with community radio stations are under way with the aim of
producing some content in the near future.


Business and Economy: The growth of the use of Cornish in business is worth noting also.
It is evident that small firms are increasingly using Cornish as a mark of origin and quality in
their branding while there has also been some success with multi-national companies
seeking to establish a local presence. This area of work needs to be built on more strongly
in the future.



Community and cultural projects: A number of projects have been organised which highlight
Cornish and place it in a cultural context. The annual song competition in Cornish
organised in conjunction with the Pan Celtic Festival in Ireland has been revived with the
CLP assisting with translation of songs. Work with festivals in Cornwall has provided
everything from taster sessions to karaoke in Cornish, the Govyn Kernewek award
continues to develop Cornish film and a project with a new heritage provider and local
schools resulted in a performance project based on the inheritance of Cornish language
miracle plays this summer. Work with youth groups and in particular scouts and guides has
broadened knowledge and opportunity to learn outside school while co-operation with the
Royal Society for the Protection of Birds on a project around the Cornish chough has
brought Cornish to a new audience.

The Partnership has strategically prioritised awareness raising, enabling a wide range of people to
gain a few words of Cornish, bearing in mind both the importance of the language in reinforcing
culture and community cohesion and the need for widespread visibility as a precursor to
widespread acquisition.
Irish and Ulster-Scots
Media and Broadcasting: Northern Ireland was the final UK region to switch over to full digital
television broadcasting in October 2012. As a result of significant investment in infrastructure, and
close collaboration between the UK and Irish Governments, the broadcasters themselves, and
regulators, over 90% of viewers in Northern Ireland can now receive TG4. This represents a
substantial increase in coverage.
Additionally, in 2010, the then UK Government announced that it would continue to provide £3m
per annum funding to the Irish Language Broadcasting Fund until 2014/15, in recognition of the
contribution the Fund makes to the promotion and development of the Irish language, as well as
the associated benefits for the creative industries in Northern Ireland. A separate Ulster-Scots
Broadcasting Fund was also established at that time, with £1m per annum funding until 2014/15
provided by the then UK Government.

Manx Gaelic
Although English is the official language of business in the Isle of Man’s parliament, Tynwald, its
Members are permitted to use relevant customary words and phrases in Manx Gaelic, provided
that the meaning of those words or phrases is either well understood or the Member provides a
translation into English if requested to so do by the presiding officer. A significant number of the
Members of Tynwald do now use such words and phrases in Manx Gaelic during parliamentary
proceedings.
Manx Radio, which is partly government funded, provides some programming in and about Manx
Gaelic, with assistance from the Gaelic Broadcasting Committee (a body overseen by the Isle of

15
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

Man Government's Communications Commission). This committee presents an annual report of its
activities to Tynwald, the Manx parliament. Copies of the Committee’s reports for the years end
31st March 2009, 2010, 2011 and 2012 are attached.
Coonceil ny Gaelgey, which operates as a sub-committee of the Manx Heritage Foundation,
continues to provide authoritative Manx versions of the titles of Government Departments, street
names etc. and the creation of new words and phrases in Manx Gaelic. These terms are available
at: www.learnmanx.com. This website has been upgraded in recent years so that it now provides a
comprehensive resource for users of the language.
'Manx Radio provides five weekly programmes which use the language. Three of these have
elements in English and Manx, while the two others are entirely in Manx. In addition, selected
Manx Radio news items are translated into Manx once a week and are made available as text and
as sound files on the Manx Radio website:
http://www.manxradio.com/news.aspx?m=70&b1=20&b2=22&b3=24
The Manx Heritage Foundation has an integrated social media presence, including the
www.learnmanx.com website, which is now also is available as a mobile site for smartphones and
tablets; a YouTube channel (www.youtube.com/gaelg) and a twitter feed
(www.twitter.com/greinneyder).
The Manx Heritage Foundation has been supporting the publication of new material in Manx during
2012 which will include material for both young and adult readers. For example, 2012 has seen
the publication of the Gruffalo stories in Manx.
The Manx Heritage Foundation in conjunction with yn Cheshaght Ghailckagh runs a Manx
Language week in the autumn which includes lectures and social events in the language.
Manx National Heritage has a programme of digitisation of archives, records and other resources
which are being released for public access to in person visitors and are planned for full public
release through a website late in 2012.
In November 2012 a Manx Gaelic app for Android phones and tablets, iPhones and iPads was
launched. The 'Learn Manx' app has been produced by the Manx Heritage Foundation’s Manx
Language Development Officer and it is based on the successful adult language course run by the
Manx Heritage Foundation in the Isle of Man. 'Learn Manx' consists of ten units, each consisting of
a variety of activities, together with two additional revision lessons. The app will eventually cover
30 units in total, providing an introduction to the language to those unfamiliar with it, as well as a
great revision course for those who already know some Manx.
Scots
The Committee of Experts of the European Charter for Regional and Minority Languages
requested further information on:
What steps have been taken to encourage and sustain Scots as a community language and
to support and create conditions for Scots-speakers to value and use their language? What
steps have been taken to strengthen the position of Scots within existing language
communities? (Chapter 3, para 1d, 69)


Audit of the Scots Language: The purpose of this research (published 27 January 2009)
was to conduct a baseline audit of provision for the Scots language in Scotland and to
provide a snapshot of current activity. This is the first time that such a piece of research

16
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

has been carried out by government in Scotland, and it has provided baseline data to
which further research, discussions or policy development can refer.


Research into Public Attitudes to Scots: This research (published on 14 January 2010) was
commissioned on behalf of both the Scottish Government’s Culture, External Affairs and
Tourism Directorate and the Schools Directorate. The overall aims of the research were to
explore what people understand the Scots language to be and to investigate public
perceptions of and attitudes to the Scots language amongst adults in Scotland. The
research was paid for by the Scottish Government. Two of the key findings show that Scots
is widely spoken and that there are no strong negative feelings against Scots.



Scots Language Working Group: The Scots Language Ministerial Working Group was
established in November 2009 under the chairmanship of Professor Derrick McClure, and
consisted of representatives from the Scots language community. The Group published its
report and recommendations on 30 November 2010. The Scottish Government Response
was published on 18 March 2011. The report is an important factor in informing Scottish
Government policy development and assisting in identifying the most effective ways for the
Scottish Government and other partners to support and promote Scots. The report
recommendations will form part of upcoming discussions with Learning and Teaching
Scotland (LTS) when planning work for the new education agency.



Scots Language Conference: At the Scottish Government’s Scots language conference
(held at Stirling University on 9 February 2009) the Scottish Government gave a
commitment to undertake further close consultation with experts from the Scots language
community.



Scots Language Question in Census 2011: For the first time, the 2011 Census included a
question on the Scots Language. The Minister for Culture and External Affairs established
a short life Working Group to focus on awareness-raising of the Scots language question in
the 2011 Census to ensure the accuracy of response, give a comprehensive picture of the
situation, and give confidence to people to answer accurately. As well as Scottish
Government officials, there were representatives from the office of the General Register for
Scotland and the Scots Language Centre. From the plan of action developed by the
Group, the campaign to raise awareness was successful. A website was developed by the
SLC with funding of £12,000 provided by the SG. The website received over 500,000 hits.
There was a significant amount of media covered of the Scots language question.



Robert Burns Birthplace Museum: The museum, in Alloway, Ayrshire, opened December
2010. Project to feature more than 5,000 artefacts, including original manuscripts.



General Teaching Council for Scotland (GTCS) Awards: GTCS held an event on 22
February 2011 in Scottish Parliament to formally recognise the work of a group of teachers
on Scots.

Scottish Gaelic
Following significant support from Scottish Ministers and many others, the BBC Trust agreed to
give the Gaelic TV channel access to Freeview. During the period (June to September 2011), BBC
ALBA has attracted a significant number of new viewers averaging a total claimed weekly reach of
12.9% of adults aged 16 and over, equating to 530,000 viewers. Prior to the channel being made
available on Freeview, the total weekly reach for the channel was 220,000.
Gaelic is now recognised as a co-official language of the EU. Co-official languages are languages
that are official in all or part of a Member State but were not designated as the official language of

17
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

the state in membership negotiations. This allows Gaelic to be used in publication of acts and
communication between the EU Institutions and the citizens - be it letters from the citizens or for
speech-making in a large meeting - and requires that the member state in question enter into an
agreement with each institution concerning use of the language and that the Member State pays
any incurred costs.
Welsh
The Welsh Government continues to fund the TWF Project (a programme to encourage new
parents to transmit Welsh to their children) TWF employs 23 field officers, who give presentations
to expectant parents amongst other activities to promote the transmission of Welsh. The Mentrau
Iaith (community Language initiatives) also do work in this area.
The Mentrau Iaith of which there are currently 23 across Wales, aim to extend and expand the use
of Welsh at a community level. This includes providing advice and support to public, private,
business and voluntary organisations. In 2011-12, funding to the Mentrau from the Welsh
Government through the Welsh Language Board was £1.5m.
.
The Welsh Government’s support for Welsh language publishing is channelled through the Welsh
Books Council.
The Welsh Books Council received grant funding of £1,653,500 from the Welsh Government
during 2011-12 to support Welsh language publishing.
This funding was distributed by the Welsh Books Council to:
• support the publishing of new books and magazines
• support authors, illustrators, photographers and designers
• support creative editors in the publishing houses
• support independent booksellers
• provide performance payments to publishers
• support the marketing of new books.
This was equal to the sum allocated in 2010/11, which included an increase of £300,000 on the
allocation for 2009/10. This additional funding has enabled the Council to increase the number of
creative editors in the publishing houses and to increase the funding available for authors and for
artwork and design for more visually ambitious books.
The daily Welsh online news service Golwg360 (www.golwg360.com), owned by Golwg Newydd,
which is a sister company of Golwg Cyf., was launched in May 2009, and use of the site has grown
regularly since then; following a redesign, the number of monthly visits is over 200,000 (as at
March 2012).
A review of the service was commissioned by the Welsh Books Council in the summer of 2010.
This showed that readers were of the opinion that the journalistic quality of the service was of a
high standard and compared favourably with similar services. The review contained several
recommendations on how the service could be developed, and these were accepted by Golwg360.
Following the review, the Welsh Books Council extended Golwg Newydd’s contract for a further
three years, from 2011, so that the company could build on its achievements and further develop
the service.
The Welsh Government continues to provide funding (£200,000 per annum) through the Welsh
Books Council, to Golwg 360. This is in addition to the £171,000 currently being spent by the

18
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

Welsh Government, through the Welsh Books Council, on Welsh-medium news and current affairs
publications.
The investment in Golwg 360 has led to job creation and training in both Golwg Newydd (the
company which owns Golwg 360) and its sister company Golwg Cyf., which owns the print
magazine. A total of seven posts have been created in Golwg 360, four of them journalist posts,
and Golwg itself has created 1.7 new posts. The journalist training has been mostly done in-house
taking advantage of the experience acquired by Golwg over many years. The majority of the jobs
created are located in the Lampeter and Caernarfon areas.
The Welsh Government provides £100,000 per annum for a Community Radio Fund. This funding
is available to radio stations that possess a full community radio licence. The aim of the Fund is to
support small scale, not-for-profit community radio stations which operate for the good of the
community in which they operate, in order to deliver social gain. The terms and conditions of the
fund specify that grant-funded activities should be compatible with the Welsh Government’s aim of
creating a bilingual Wales where people have increased opportunities to use Welsh in their daily
lives. Specific targets vary from station to station but can include increasing the number of hours
of Welsh language programmes broadcast each week, creating a bilingual website and increasing
the amount of Welsh included on promotional materials.
Information about the Fund is attached below:
http://wales.gov.uk/topics/cultureandsport/mediapublishing/radiofund/?lang=en

Para 1.e) The maintenance and development of links, in the fields covered by this Charter,
between groups using a regional or minority language and other groups in the State
employing a language used in identical or similar form, as well as the establishment of
cultural relations with other groups in the State using different languages

Cornish
The Cornish Language Partnership now attends the meetings of the British Irish Council Working
Group on Indigenous and Minority Languages in an observer capacity. It also maintains links with
other language organisations and CLP officers have attended and taken part in various seminars
and conferences. Cultural links through music and dance continue to prosper and the CLP has
taken an active part in assisting with Cornish representation at major festivals.
Manx Gaelic
No developments since last report.

Scots
No developments since the last report.

Scottish Gaelic
No developments since the last report.

19
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

Welsh
The Welsh Government, through the Welsh Language Board, provided financial support of
£52,000 to the London Welsh School during the 2011/12 financial year. The Welsh Language
Board regularly replied to requests for information regarding the Welsh language from Welsh
speakers living in England and its Linkline to Welsh service maintained a list of Welsh tutors
outside Wales.
The Welsh Language Board also hosted the secretariat for the Network to Promote Linguistic
Diversity – NPLD (see www.npld.eu) with the aim of debating issues of common interest to
regional or minority languages across Europe. The Network brings together 28 language planning
organisations from across Europe, including national and regional governments as well as
research centres and NGOs. The NPLD’s aim is to facilitate the sharing of existing best practice
and the development of new and innovative ideas in the field of language planning amongst
Europe’s constitutional, regional and smaller-state languages. The Network meets regularly in
order to share information and since the last report, activities have been held in the following policy
areas:
Language Strategy Planning: The NPLD held a seminar in Dublin in December 2009 to bring
together experts working in the field of legislative and strategic language planning. The seminar
was held over two days and opened by the Irish Minister for Community, Rural and Gaeltacht
Affairs, Éamon Ó Cuív. The seminar coincided with the publication of the "20 Year Strategy for the
Irish Language 2010 - 2030" and included representatives from each of the NPLD’s full partners.
The seminar led to the creation of the NPLD’s Think Tank
Think Tank: The NPLD has established a Think Tank to develop its wider academic scope and to
fill voids in language planning research. This group is aimed at enabling partners to compare and
disseminate high level language promotion strategies as well as producing philosophical
documents in favour of multilingualism. It also enables the network and its partners to connect to
the EU on an evidence-based level as well as responding and contributing to EU resolutions and
consultations with input from internationally recognised experts and specialists in language
planning. Two current studies being undertaken are looking at 1) the benefits of multilingualism to
business and prosperity; 2) a comparison of language strategies across Europe with a view to
providing recommendations on future strategic planning.
Study Visits: The Network has offered opportunity to its members and partner organisations to
benefit from a financial contribution towards study visits aimed at sharing best practice and
experiences first hand. These have included a representative from Ireland visiting Wales to learn
about the formalisation of translation services at the Welsh Government; a study visit was
organised by “Mudiad Dathlu’r Gymraeg” to the Basque Country and Brittany to research the
popular Korrika and Ar Redadeg events, aimed at raising awareness of the target language in the
community and amongst families. Two group study visits were also organised in 2010 and 2011 –
the first in the Basque Country examining Adult Education through the medium of Basque; the
second welcomed representatives to Wales to learn about the initiatives in developing language
within the community and amongst young people. Direct benefits can be seen from these visits to
those taking part and are informative for both visitors and hosts.
Pre-School – MELT; (Multilingual Early Language Transmission) A group originally set up by the
NPLD, the European funded MELT project was awarded a grant of 392.121€ over a period of 2
years. It bought together 4 language communities (Wales, Frisland, Finland and Brittany) to look at
improving language transmission methodology amongst pre-school children. The project worked in
close co-operation with the Welsh language pre-school organisation, Mudiad Ysgolion Meithrin to
assist practitioners with improving the quality and quantity of Welsh language transmitted at a
number of pre-school branches across south Wales. A guide for practitioners with practical
examples of language transmission was published and distributed to pre-schools across Wales –

20
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

the project also produced a booklet providing advice to parents on how to support their young
children in acquiring language at pre-school as well as in the home.
Terminology: The NPLD’sTerminology work strand was launched with a seminar hosted by the
NPLD in Dublin, December 2009. Partners in the Terminology group worked with experts from
organisation such as Microsoft, IATE (the EUs Terminology Directorate) and Eurotermbank to gain
more insight into the technology available and methodologies used to enhance a language
terminology database.
Wales is also leading the work of the British Irish Council’s workstream on Indigenous, Minority and
Lesser-used languages. As a result of the Welsh Language Measure 2011, the Welsh Language
Board (which was delegated responsibility for taking forward the work area by Welsh Government,
including providing the Chairperson) was abolished on 31 March 2012. The Welsh Government
has therefore become responsible for chairing and providing secretariat support for the group since
1 April 2012.
The key objectives of the working group relate to formalising the exchange and dissemination of
information and best practice at government level in the field of indigenous, minority and lesser
used languages.
The exchange of experience, ideas and information has concentrated on the following areas:
community development; use of indigenous, minority and lesser-used languages amongst young
people, legislation, education and broadcasting.
Since the last monitoring report, events have been held in the following policy areas:
Adult Education
In January 2008, a seminar was held in Cardiff to discuss the teaching of indigenous, minority and
lesser-used languages to adults.
Legislation
In February 2010 a seminar was held in Edinburgh to discuss legislation in the field of indigenous,
minority and lesser-used languages, which was attended by policy makers from all BIC Member
Administrations.
Community Development
In October 2010 a seminar was held in Belfast to discuss Promoting Language and Culture within
Minority Language Communities. This seminar was attended by policy makers and practitioners
from all BIC Member Administrations.
Young People
The BIC workstream worked in partnership with the NPLD (Network to Promote Linguistic
Diversity) to organise a seminar to discuss the use of indigenous, minority and lesser-used
languages amongst young people. The seminar was held in Donegal in November 2011, and was
attended by policy makers and practitioners from all BIC Member Administrations, and from other
European Countries/Regions.
Ministerial Meeting in Donegal, November 2011
The meeting considered and endorsed two papers:
 Promoting Language and Culture within Minority Language Communities
 Update on activities and suggestions for a forward work programme
Ministers endorsed the findings of the conference held in Belfast in October 2010 that considered
and shared good practice in the field of promoting language and culture within minority language
communities. Ministers agreed that projects to support the use of IMLs by young people, within
families, and within the wider community should be supported by governments. Ministers also

21
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

noted the importance of adopting a government led strategy to promote the use of IMLs, and
agreed to share best practice within BIC when developing such strategies.
Ministers reviewed the work achieved by the workstream since the last Ministerial meeting in 2006,
and noted its positive contribution in ensuring that best practice is shared amongst Member
Administrations. Ministers then considered and approved proposals for the future work programme
of the Indigenous, Minority and Lesser Used Languages Group. The group will continue with its
work in the areas of education, young people, broadcasting, and the economic impact of IMLs. It
was agreed that the group should revisit the fields of legislation in the context of IMLs. The group
will also focus on two new areas, namely marketing, and ICT (social networking in particular).
Ministers tasked the group with identifying further synergies with the NPLD to gain maximum
leverage from public resources in this area, and asked the group to evaluate the work undertaken
since 2006, and consider how the outcomes can be disseminated to stakeholders.

Para 1.f) The provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of
regional or minority languages at all appropriate stages.
Cornish
Pre-school
The Committee of Experts of the European Charter for Regional and Minority Languages
requested further information:
The Committee of Experts has not received any information about the use of the Cornish
Language at pre-school level and asks the authorities to report about it in the next
periodical report. (Chapter 3, para 1f, 94)
At pre-school level there is some engagement with Cornish and interest is growing. Current
provision includes a Saturday school in the Camborne Redruth area, Movyans Skolyow Meythrin,
which was set up by parents to spearhead provision. The aim was to teach children and parents
concurrently, and this has succeeded, with a small number of children involved. The school has
now achieved Ofsted accreditation in order to be able to extend provision to children who may
attend without their parents, as the level of parent time commitment is not attainable for all who
would like their children to benefit. The CLP is currently consulting with Movyans Skolyow
Meythrin over development and expansion to other centres.
The CLP’s Education Officers have also established contact with the Cornwall Pre-School Learning
Alliance and preschools are now showing an intention to incorporate Cornish into their activities,
though enquiries are tentative at present. Resources established for Key Stage One have in fact
proved effective with pre-school classes and more provision is in preparation. Strategically, the
CLP is looking to sharpen involvement and focus more on the pre-school sector over the coming
year.
Primary Sector
There is a continuing and growing demand for taster and one-off sessions in primary schools,
many based around specific Cornish events e.g. Pirantide. This is met by the use of community
educators and a resource pack that enables teachers to organise a basic programme for
themselves.
In-service training to teachers and support staff in a number of primary schools has allowed the
regular teaching of short programmes in ‘Preparation, Planning and Assessment’ time.
Collaboration with partners has allowed the embedding of Cornish into a variety of school-based
projects and allowed the provision of in-house training to a number of non-school based educators.

22
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

Further resource materials have been published for this sector.
Secondary Schools
Demand from secondary schools remains piece-meal and mainly in the form of ‘taster sessions’
usually as part of a wider languages day or initiative addressing equality, diversity and inclusion
issues. One or two schools do offer it in a limited way, either at 6th form or as an ongoing project.
Support is needed to encourage schools to make time in the curriculum for Cornish.
General
A mentoring scheme is in place for volunteers who wish to improve their teaching skills and
become ‘community educators’. Feedback suggests that this has helped improve their standing in
schools.
A partnership has been formed with a local further education college to produce a public access
virtual learning environment for students and teachers which is now well under way
The challenge is to match growing demand with the capacity to respond with quality provision.
Voluntary work is not the answer if sustainable, high quality provision is to be encouraged and
achieved. There is an urgent need, which is being addressed, to articulate an offer to schools, and
identify the support needed to enable effective, sustainable delivery.
Manx Gaelic
At two of the five secondary schools, Manx is an optional timetabled subject for children in the age
group 11- 14. Examination assessed courses, Teisht Chadjin Ghaelgagh (GCSE equivalent in
Manx) and a full A level in the language are available to all pupils, although in some schools these
are studied as an extracurricular subject.
In addition to teaching, Yn Unnid Gaelgagh/Manx Language Unit prepares resources including
language courses, story books, computer-based teaching materials and games for use in all
schools.
In 2011/12 there were 78 children attending the Bunscoill Ghaelgagh or Manx-medium school
where they receive their education entirely through Manx. On leaving the Bunscoill, children have
the opportunity to learn three subjects through Manx at the secondary school within whose
catchment area the Bunscoill lies.
Mooinjer Veggey operates two Manx Gaelic playgroups and four 'part Manx Gaelic' nurseries. It
also runs the Bunscoill Ghaelgagh and employs an Education Officer, a Pre-School Support Officer
and a Writer/Resource Officer. Mooinjer Veggey is partly government funded and partly funded
from fees and charitable donations.
The Committee of Experts of the European Charter for Regional and Minority Languages
requested further information:
The Committee of Experts was informed during the on-the-spot visit that the Department of
Education intends to set up a Manx Gaelic youth centre. The Committee of Experts looks
forward to receiving information on this initiative in the next periodical report. (Chapter 3,
para 1d, 79)
A weekly youth group for children over 11 years of age is being run by the Department of
Education and Children in conjunction with the Manx Heritage Foundation. This youth group has

23
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

now been running for three years. The Manx Youth Group Possan Aeglagh is based at Peel and
also will be meeting in Douglas to meet the needs of its members. In 2011 the Holiday Venture
Scheme Possan Souree was also run.

Scots
No developments since the last report.

Scottish Gaelic
In recent years Bòrd na Gàidhlig has put in new investment into supporting Gaelic adult education
delivered through the Ùlpan learning classes.
In the last year, new resources have been developed for the teaching of Gaelic Language in the
Primary School and increased resources have been made available to train teachers. The GLPS
Local Authority consortium is committed to training 10 teachers per year.
Welsh
Since the last monitoring round, the Welsh Government has published its first Welsh-medium
Education Strategy. The Strategy, published in April 2010, outlines the Government’s vision for ‘an
education and training system that responds in a planned way to the growing demand for Welshmedium education, reaches out to and reflects our diverse communities and enables an increase
in the number of people of all ages and backgrounds who are fluent in Welsh and able to use the
language with their families, in their communities and in the workplace’.
The Strategy sets out the following six strategic aims:
 to improve the planning of Welsh-medium provision in the pre-statutory and statutory
phases of education, on the basis of proactive response to informed parental demand;
 to improve the planning of Welsh-medium provision in the post-14 phases of education and
training, taking account of linguistic progression and continued development of skills;
 to ensure that all learners develop their Welsh-language skills to their full potential and
encourage sound linguistic progression from one phase of education and training to the
next;
 to ensure a planned Welsh-medium education workforce that provides sufficient numbers of
practitioners for all phases of education and training, with high-quality Welsh-language
skills and competence in teaching methodologies;
 to improve the central support mechanisms for Welsh-medium education and training, and
 to contribute to the acquisition and reinforcement of Welsh-language skills in families and in
the community.
The Implementation Programme that accompanies the Strategy details the work expected of the
Welsh Government and its partners and stakeholders in all phases of education and training. In
order to monitor progress made with implementing the Strategy, fixed five-year and indicative tenyear targets based on outcomes have been set. Progress made against the targets is to be
published in an annual report. The first annual report was published in July 2011, and can be
downloaded from
http://wales.gov.uk/topics/educationandskills/publications/guidance/welshmededstrat/?lang=en.
In 2010/11, there were 1,435 maintained primary schools in Wales. Of these, 33% are Welshmedium or bilingual (419 Welsh-medium primary schools, where Welsh is the sole/main medium of

24
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

instruction, and 48 bilingual schools, where Welsh-medium provision is used for part of the
curriculum). In 2010/11 21.9% of 7-year-old learners were being taught through the medium of
Welsh or bilingually.
There are 32 Welsh-medium schools in the secondary sector in Wales and 24 bilingual schools,
where Welsh-medium provision is used for part of the curriculum. In 2010/11 16.3% of 14-year-old
learners were being taught Welsh as a first language. In August 2011, 81% of learners entered for
GCSE Welsh First Language were entered for at least two further Level 1/2 qualifications through
the medium of Welsh, and 62% of learners entered for GCSE Welsh First Language were entered
for at least five further Level 1/2 qualifications through the medium of Welsh.
In Further Education (FE) colleges and Work-based Learning (WBL), the percentage of students
aged 16–19 studying subjects through the medium of Welsh or bilingually is increasing, albeit from
a low baseline. In 2009/10 6.2% of FE learners and 1.5% of WBL learners studied subjects through
the medium of Welsh or bilingually.
With regard to Higher Education, for the 2009/10 academic year, there were 4,905 student
enrolments at Welsh higher education institutions (HEIs) with some teaching through the medium
of Welsh, 5.9% less than the number in 2008/09 (5,215). This represented 3.8% of student
enrolments at Welsh HEIs compared with 4.2% in 2008/09.

Para 1.g) The provision of facilities enabling non-speakers of a regional or minority
language living in the area where it is used to learn if they so desire

Cornish
Adult class provision has remained steady, and two classes are currently maintained under the
Adult Education system. CLP support to private classes has moved focus from paying for
accessible venues to supporting the teachers. The CLP is also beginning to regulate these classes
to ensure a common level of administration, advise on teaching practice and in the longer term
ensure quality control. Geographical distribution is adequate, although there is room for
improvement. Two new classes have been started in the current year.
The CLP has two part-time education staff, and so the teaching of Cornish is heavily dependent on
volunteer effort. Many of the teachers are untrained but give freely of their time and expertise.
Some training is offered through the annual teacher days organised in conjunction with the Cornish
Language Board. A mentoring scheme is in place to assist those able and willing to work with
schools. The focus now needs to be on building teaching skills and training new teachers to join
the volunteer workforce.
Intensive weekend courses have been created for beginner, intermediate and accomplished
speakers, aimed at increasing fluency. The existing online courses have continued and a new webbased oral course is being developed in conjunction with an existing Welsh scheme. This is
intended to address those would-be learners who find attendance at a regular class difficult and
those who wish to learn conversationally and orally rather than through traditional classes. A
series of short films have been produced in association with MyCornwallTV, a web-based
television channel. The first series was produced as a DVD in March 2012 and the second series is
currently available on-line. Radio an Gernewegva, a web-based radio service for Cornish
speakers produces half an hour of programming per week. Some costs are covered by the CLP,
but this is largely voluntary work.

25
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

Several new learning resources have been published by the voluntary language associations in
membership with the CLP and two of the language associations each run a weekend event every
year. The Cornish Language Board continues to prepare and administer examinations at four
grades, while the Asset language accredited exams are being taken by a growing number of
students.
Manx Gaelic
The Manx Language Development Officer, for the Manx Heritage Foundation, is working towards
the establishment of an integrated Adult Language programme. A course and methodology has
been developed, training established, and a wide range of support materials put in place to
encourage and assist adult learners of the language. 2012 should see the production of a DVD for
learners of Manx together with a new CD for learners and a series of spoken books for adult
learners.

Scots
The Committee of Experts of the European Charter for Regional and Minority Languages
requested further information:
Please provide concrete information on how the offers of learning Scots in school and
university are taken up in practice, also with regard to out-of-school with events organised
by Scots language groups. (Chapter 3, para 1g, 101)


Scottish Language Dictionaries offer Scots Continuing Professional Development for
teachers in Scottish schools. An Education Outreach Officer has been appointed for this
purpose. In addition, the website developed by the Scottish Language Dictionaries to
support teachers and learners of Scots, (Scuilwab www.scuilwab.org.uk) provides CPD
materials for teachers.



Education Scotland is also taking forward a programme of Continuing Professional
Development for teachers. A series of 5 events are planned for the 2011/12 school session
and will take place at venues across Scotland. Follow up materials from these events will
be available on Glow, the online resource for teachers provided by Education Scotland.



Scottish Studies is being developed by the Scottish Government as a strand in the
curriculum. This will focus on ensuring that pupils have the opportunity to study Scottish
aspects of literature, history and language. The intention is that this should also include
opportunities to learn about the Scots language. A working group has been established
under the Chairmanship of the Minister for Learning and Skills. The group comprised
representation from academia, practitioners, Gaelic and Scots language interests, Scottish
literature, Education Scotland and the Scottish Qualifications Authority. In March 2013 the
Scottish Government published the Scottish Studies Working Group recommendations,
which included exploring opportunities for Scotland’s languages to be promoted. Good
progress has been made with Scottish Qualifications Authority on the recommendations for
a Scottish Studies Award and the place of Scottish texts in the English course.

Scottish Gaelic
A Gaelic learners’ website www.learngaelic.net was launched in October 2011. This site combines
both new material and already existing material. It contains Gaelic learning support materials for

26
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

all levels. The group developing this has included the BBC, MG ALBA, Bòrd na Gàidhlig, Sabhal
Mòr Ostaig and many others. The Scottish Government was the principal funder of this resource.

Welsh
All Welsh-medium statutory nursery and primary provision is open to children who come from nonWelsh-speaking homes. In addition, the Welsh Government continues to provide funding to local
authorities for latecomers’ centres. These centres provide intensive Welsh courses for children,
usually between 7 and 11 years old, who have had no previous contact with the Welsh language.
The Welsh Government also continues to fund immersion programmes to boost the Welshlanguage skills of children in Year 5 or 6 of some primary schools leading to entry into secondary
Welsh-medium education at Year 7.
Welsh for Adults continues to be one of the largest adult learning programmes in Wales, with the
most recent data showing 18,205 learners following courses at five different levels across Wales
during the 2010/11 academic year. Since the last monitoring round, two specific courses for
families have been developed, with approximately 300 courses being held across Wales; Welsh in
the Workplace courses continue to be a priority and a project to develop a diagnostic tool to help
employers to assess the Welsh-language skills of their staff is being developed.

Para 1.h) The promotion of study and research on regional or minority languages at
universities or equivalent institutions.
Cornish
There is little to add to the last report. The undergraduate Cornish Studies provision at the
University of Exeter is no longer offered, though the postgraduate research programme continues
through the Institute of Cornish Studies.
The CLP itself has not commissioned further research given the need to concentrate the slender
resources on teaching and learning, providing resource materials and community projects.
Research into the language itself is being carried out through the Partnership’s volunteer working
groups for corpus and signage, and further research and publication on an academic level remains
an aim for the future.
Manx Gaelic
No developments since the last report.

Scots
No developments since the last report.
Scottish Gaelic
In 2010 a Study on Attainment in Gaelic Medium Education (GME), conducted by the University of
Edinburgh, concluded that there were very good levels of attainment in Gaelic medium education.
The research ‘Gaelic-medium Education in Scotland: choice and attainment at the primary and
early secondary school stages’, examined the attainment of pupils in Gaelic medium in comparison

27
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

to pupils in English medium and the reasons why people choose, or do not choose, GME. The
study concluded that pupils in GME are on an equal footing with their peers in English-medium
education in curricular subjects such as science and mathematics and usually better than their
peers in English medium education in reading and writing English.

Welsh
Welsh continues to be taught as a subject at degree level at Aberystwyth, Bangor, Swansea and
Cardiff Universities. A Professional Welsh course is taught at the University of Glamorgan.
The contribution of higher education to Welsh language and culture will be significantly enhanced
through the Coleg Cymraeg Cenedlaethol (National Welsh-language College), established in
March 2011. The Coleg began its first full academic year of operation in September 2011. The
Coleg’s main aim is to develop and broaden the range of Welsh-medium study opportunities at
universities in Wales and to encourage more students to take advantage of these opportunities.
The Coleg will also be building upon the previous work accomplished by the Centre for WelshMedium Higher Education. In working to extend the range of academic provision, the Coleg will
fund the development of high quality Welsh-medium modules and resources, develop effective
collaborative partnerships, and support and train a new generation of lecturers for the future.

Para 1.i) The promotion of appropriate types of transnational exchanges, in the fields
covered by this Charter, for regional or minority languages used in identical or similar form
in two or more States.
Cornish
The Strategy aims to encourage this type of exchange. Over the past three years the Partnership
has taken part in the work of the Network to Promote Linguistic Diversity and has taken the
opportunity to engage in seminars, conferences and schemes of work with European
organisations. Officers have also taken part in and spoken at conferences for the Foundation for
Endangered Languages, the North American Association of Celtic Language Teachers (meeting in
the Isle of Man) and Mercator. Potential linguistic exchanges with Brittany to take place under the
protocol of co-operation between Cornwall Council and the Conseil Regional de Finistere are being
explored.
Manx Gaelic
No developments since the last report.

Scots
No developments since the last report.
Scottish Gaelic
Scottish Ministers have provided the Office of Gaelic Affairs in Nova Scotia, Canada with grant
support to enable people studying Gaelic in Nova Scotia to attend summer courses in Scotland.

28
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

Welsh
The Welsh Government continues to fund the Welsh Language Teaching Project in the Chubut
province of Argentina. This project is managed for the Welsh Government by the British Council in
collaboration with Cymdeithas Cymru–Ariannin (the Wales–Argentina Society) and the Welsh for
Adults Centre – Cardiff and the Vale of Glamorgan, Cardiff University. The project involves the
secondment of teachers from Wales to key target communities, the development of native
teachers, the establishment of structured courses and the promotion of Welsh language activities.
The project received £54,000 from the Welsh Government during the 2011/12 financial year. The
project continues to work closely with Menter Patagonia in association with other partners including
the Urdd. The Menter, which is similar in focus to the Mentrau Iaith which operate throughout
Wales, provides opportunities to socialise through the medium of Welsh in Chubut. Further details
about the project including annual monitoring reports are available on the British Council
Wales website.
http://www.britishcouncil.org/wales-education-welsh-language-project.htm

CyMAL: Museums Archives and Libraries Wales which is a division of the Welsh Government has
promoted co-operation between museums, archives and libraries in Wales and Welsh museums,
archives and libraries in Patagonia. Archivists and digitisation specialists from Wales visited
Patagonia and catalogued, digitised and conserved material there. These were placed on the trilingual www.glaniad.com website (Welsh, Spanish and English), and this information is now being
made available through the Casgliad y Werin Cymru/People’s Collection Wales.
The National Library of Wales’ key purpose is to collect, preserve and give access to all kinds and
forms of recorded knowledge, especially relating to Wales and the Welsh and other Celtic peoples,
for the benefit of the public including those engaged in research and learning.

Para 2. The Parties undertake to eliminate, if they have not already done so, any unjustified
distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference relating to the use of a regional or minority
language and intended to discourage or endanger the maintenance or development of it.
The adoption of special measures in favour of regional or minority languages aimed at
promoting equality between the users of these languages and the rest of the population or
which take due account of their specific conditions is not considered to be an act of
discrimination against the users of more widely used languages.
Cornish
No developments since the last report.
Manx Gaelic
No developments since the last report.
Scots
No developments since the last report.
Scottish Gaelic

29
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

No developments since the last report.

Welsh
The Welsh Government is committed to promoting equality of opportunity for all people.
The Welsh Government’s revised Welsh Language Scheme was approved by the Welsh Language
Board in 2011. The Scheme is subject to an Annual Report on performance and progress against
the commitments made in the Scheme.
The Scheme and the annual reports are available on the following link:
http://www.wales.gov.uk/welshlanguage
The Welsh Government’s Welsh Language Scheme “describes how the Government will give
effect, so far as is both appropriate in the circumstances and reasonably practicable, to the
principle established by the Welsh Language Act that, in the conduct of public business and the
administration of justice in Wales, the Welsh and English languages should be treated on a basis
of equality whenever we provide services to the public in Wales”.
Our policies, legislation, procedures and services will be consistent with the principles set out in
this scheme. We want them to:
 Be compatible with the bilingual nature of Wales.
 Support and facilitate the use of Welsh and, whenever possible, help the public in Wales to
use Welsh as part of their day-to-day lives.
 Respect the principle that public services in Wales should treat the
 Welsh and English languages on a basis of equality.
 Help preserve traditional Welsh-speaking communities.
We have also developed a policy integration tool during the reporting period to ensure that the
Welsh Government’s commitment to sustainable development, the Welsh language and equality of
opportunity are integrated into the Government’s policies.
When appropriate, our consultation documents will discuss the relationship between the Welsh
language and the policies, initiatives and services under consideration.
The introduction of new policies, legislation, initiatives, procedures and services can provide an
opportunity to promote and facilitate the use of Welsh - as can proposals to reorganise Welsh
Government Sponsored bodies, local authorities and other public bodies, or to establish new
services to be delivered by them. We will make the most of these opportunities to improve the level
of service for Welsh speakers, especially where the current standard falls short of the principle that
the Welsh and English languages should be treated on a basis of equality
The Welsh Language (Wales) Measure 2011 contains provision which provides the Welsh
Language Commissioner with the power to investigate allegations of interference in the freedom of
persons wishing to use the Welsh language with one another.
Para 3. The parties undertake to promote by appropriate measures, mutual understanding
between all the linguistic groups of the country and in particular the inclusion of respect,
understanding and tolerance in relation to regional or minority languages among the
objectives of education and training provided within their countries and encouragement of
the mass media to pursue the same objective.

30
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

Cornish
The promotion of Cornish in schools and in the community is premised on the principle of mutual
respect for and between cultures. In many cases, taster and information sessions have been
offered as part fulfilment of work on equality, diversity and inclusion and in some cases have
formed part of discussions around Citizenship.
Manx Gaelic
No developments since the last report.

Scots
No developments since the last report.

Scottish Gaelic
No developments since the last report.

Welsh
No developments since the last report.

Para 4. In determining their policy with regard to regional or minority languages, the Parties
shall take into consideration the needs and wishes expressed by the groups which use
such languages. They are encouraged to establish bodies, if necessary, for the purpose of
advising the authorities on all matters pertaining to regional or minority languages.
Cornish
No developments since the last report.
Manx Gaelic
No developments since the last report.

Scots
No developments since the last report.

Scottish Gaelic
No developments since the last report.

31
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

Welsh
The Government held two consultation processes before publishing its Welsh Language Strategy.
Firstly, the Government held a "Have your say" consultation process between October 2009 January 2010. This was an open answer questionnaire that was published on the Welsh
Government's website. A marketing campaign and public meetings were held to encourage the
public to respond. The consultation document was based on 9 policy areas. This exercise drew
over 120 responses. The consultation document can be viewed on the link, below:
http://wales.gov.uk/consultations/welshlanguage/newwelshlanguagestrategy/?lang=en&status=clos
ed
The responses to the "Have Your Say" consultation process fed into the creation of a draft Welsh
Language Strategy that was consulted upon between December 2010-Feb 2011. The draft
Strategy can be seen on the link below, as can the consultation responses (140), and a Ministerial
statement on how the proposals will be taken forward:
http://wales.gov.uk/consultations/welshlanguage/wlsconsultation/?lang=en&status=closed
The Welsh Government convenes partner forums on a Local Authority basis. These fora provide
opportunities for partners with an interest in promoting the Welsh language locally with an
opportunity to discuss, share ideas, and promote partnership working.
The Welsh Language (Wales) Measure 2011 also established a statutory Welsh Language
Partnership Council (WLPC). The WLPC is chaired by the Government Minister with responsibility
for the Welsh language, and has seven members. The WLPC’s role is to advise and make
representations to Welsh Ministers about:
 matters in relation to the Welsh language strategy including its annual action plan;
 anything it considers appropriate for the purpose of giving that advice and making those
representations; and
 the content of annual action plans setting out how the Government will implement the
proposals set out in the Welsh language strategy, and progress with regard to their
implementation.

32
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

PART III
For each regional or minority language chosen at the moment of ratification, as follows
from paragraph 2 of Article 2 of the Charter, please indicate how the undertakings have
been implemented (see Appendix), focusing in particular on the following aspects:
- Please provide information on new developments that have occurred since the last
monitoring round.
With reference to the most recent evaluation report of the Committee of Experts concerning
the implementation of the Charter in your State:
- For undertakings for which the Committee of Experts did not have sufficient information to
properly evaluate the implementation, please provide detailed information;
- For undertakings which the Committee of Experts considered were not fulfilled, please
indicate what steps your state has taken, for each regional or minority language, to
implement these undertakings;
- For the encouragements and box recommendations of the Committee of Experts, please
give a detailed account of the legal and/or practical measures that your State has taken.

Irish and Ulster Scots
Article 11 – Media
Paragraph 1 f
405. What steps have been taken to apply existing measures for financial assistance also
to audiovisual productions in Irish?
In 2010, the then UK Government announced that it would continue to provide £3m per annum
funding to the Irish Language Broadcasting Fund until 2014/15, in recognition of the contribution
the Fund makes to the promotion and development of the Irish language, as well as the associated
benefits for the creative industries in Northern Ireland.
Paragraph 2
411. Has the coverage of TG4 in Northern Ireland been extended?
Northern Ireland was the final UK region to switch over to full digital television broadcasting in
October 2012. As a result of significant investment in infrastructure, and close collaboration

33
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

between the UK and Irish Governments, the broadcasters themselves, and regulators, over 90% of
viewers in Northern Ireland can now receive TG4. This represents a substantial increase in
coverage.

Scottish Gaelic
Article 8 – Education
Paragraph 1a
222.
What steps have been taken to meet parents’ demand regarding pre-school
education offer in the Scottish Gaelic language? What steps have been taken to overcome
the lack of qualified pre-school teachers who master Scottish Gaelic?
Bòrd na Gàidhlig: Early Years Work
In 2011, Bòrd na Gàidhlig took over the responsibility for Gaelic early years work. Five
development officers have been appointed with regional responsibility. Their role is to support and
promote the establishment of Gaelic early years centres in the 0-3 sector. These officers will also
support and strengthen current provision and work with communities and local authorities to
establish new provision.
Bòrd na Gàidhlig held 3 conferences aimed at supporting early years groups in March 2011. The
focus of the conferences was to identify the requirements of groups in developing the 0-3 sector
and Gaelic language development in the early years. Feedback from participants has helped
identify areas of need.
Bòrd na Gàidhlig have developed resources to assist Gaelic early years work. These include
constitutions, policies and a handbook for groups. Early years resources are being developed and
issued as they become available.
Paragraph 1 b
226. What steps have been taken to make available primary education in Scottish Gaelic?
Gaelic Medium Education
Ongoing encouragement and support to local authorities for the promotion of and establishment of
Gaelic medium education in their areas. This includes offers of support with costs and the
provision of resources.
Gaelic Learner Education
Ongoing encouragement and support to local authorities for the promotion of and establishment of
Gaelic learner education in their areas. This includes offers of support with costs and the provision
of resources.
Teacher Education
The Scottish Government has clearly indicated to the Scottish Funding Council that the recruitment
and education of Gaelic teachers continues to be a priority and that new routes into Gaelic
teaching should be considered. Programmes are also in place to support teachers to transfer to
Gaelic teaching.
Paragraph 1c
230. What steps have been taken to make available secondary education in ScottishGaelic?
Gaelic Medium Education

34
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

Ongoing encouragement and support to local authorities for the promotion of and establishment of
Gaelic medium education in their areas. This includes offers of support with costs and the
provision of resources.
Gaelic Learner Education
Ongoing encouragement and support to local authorities for the promotion of and establishment of
Gaelic learner education in their areas. This includes offers of support with costs and the provision
of resources.
SQA
As part of the new qualifications development process, Gaelic (Learners) Courses are included in
the shared Arrangements for all Modern Languages Courses. Gaelic courses for learners in
Gaelic-medium education have also been developed. This will provide a hierarchy through which
students can progress. This includes an extended range of subjects taught through the medium
of Gaelic.
Scottish Studies
It is intended that the new Scottish Studies curriculum strand will also be available through the
medium of Gaelic. This will add to the opportunities for Gaelic secondary learning.
Gaelic Teacher Education
The Scottish Government has clearly indicated to the Scottish Funding Council that the recruitment
and education of Gaelic teachers continues to be a priority and that new routes into Gaelic
teaching should be considered. Programmes are also in place to support teachers to transfer to
Gaelic teaching.

Paragraph 1 d
233. What steps have been taken to make available technical and vocational education in
Scottish-Gaelic?
SQA
The SQA is developing Gaelic units of study in technical and vocational education for accreditation.
A working group of the National Gaelic Education Strategy Steering Group is also considering
Gaelic needs in FE provision.
Paragraph 1g
236. Please provide further information on the implementation of the measures that have
been taken to ensure that Gaelic history and culture are taught.
Scottish Studies
Scottish Studies is being developed by the Scottish Government as a strand in the curriculum.
This will focus on ensuring that pupils have the opportunity to study Scottish aspects of literature,
history and language. The intention is that this should also include opportunities to learn about the
history and culture of both the Gaelic and Scots languages.

Paragraph 1h
240. What steps have been taken to provide the basic and further training of the teachers
required to implement education in Scottish-Gaelic?

Teacher Education

35
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

The Scottish Government has clearly indicated to the Scottish Funding Council that the recruitment
and education of Gaelic teachers continues to be a priority and that new routes into Gaelic
teaching should be considered. Programmes are also in place to support teachers to transfer to
Gaelic teaching. Education Scotland has developed a CPD programme for Gaelic teachers and is
currently delivering this. Also Storlann provides CPD for Gaelic teachers.
Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services
Paragraph 1c
255. Please provide information about any action taken by the responsible UK authorities
to inform their subsidiary bodies operating in Scotland that they are allowed to draft
documents in Scottish Gaelic. What measures have been taken to facilitate the drafting of
documents in Scottish Gaelic?
Guidance on Gaelic Language Planning
In the Gaelic Language (Scotland) Act 2005, Bòrd na Gàidhlig can request authorities and bodies
to prepare Gaelic Language plans. To assist with this the Bòrd has prepared formal Guidance on
Gaelic Language Plans. This Guidance provides advice on the use of Gaelic in publications and
communications.

259. Please provide further information about the use of Scottish Gaelic in the Scottish
Parliament, Executive and local authorities.

Scottish Parliament
This is regulated by the commitments agreed between the authority and Bòrd na Gàidhlig and
contained in their Gaelic plan.
Scottish Government
This is regulated by the commitments agreed between the authority and Bòrd na Gàidhlig and
contained in their Gaelic plan.
Local Authorities
This is regulated by the commitments agreed between authorities and Bòrd na Gàidhlig and
contained in their Gaelic plans.
Paragraph 2b
262. Please provide further information on the possibility for users of regional or minority
languages to submit oral or written applications in these languages to local and regional
authorities other than the Scottish Executive and those authorities which have adopted
Gaelic language plans.
We are not aware of any restriction on the submission of oral or written applications in Gaelic to
authorities which have not adopted Gaelic language plans.
Paragraph 2d
265. Please provide more precise, concrete and comprehensive information about the
publication by local authorities of their official documents also in Gaelic.
This is regulated by the commitments agreed between authorities and Bòrd na Gàidhlig and
contained in their Gaelic plans.
Paragraph 2f

36
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

268. Please provide information regarding the use of Gaelic in local assemblies other
than Comhairle nan Eilean Siar (the Western Isles Council).
We are aware of the occasional use of Gaelic in meetings of the Highland Council.
Paragraph 2f
271. What steps have been taken to allow and/or encourage the use or adoption of
traditional and correct forms of place-names in Scottish Gaelic?
These matters are largely regulated by Ainmean Aite na h-Alba, the Gaelic place names
committee. Relevant local authorities and key interests are represented in this group.
Article 11 – Media
Paragraph 1e
288. Please provide further information regarding the extent to which the authorities
encourage and/ or facilitate the publication of newspaper articles in Gaelic.
News stories in Gaelic are provided on-line by BBC ALBA. A number of authorities including the
Scottish Parliament, the Scottish Government provide some news releases and statements in
Gaelic for news media to use.

Welsh
Article 8 – Education
1a (i): to make available pre-school education in the relevant regional or minority languages
From the term following their third birthday, all 3 and 4-year-olds are entitled to a free part-time
(minimum of 10 hours a week), early years Foundation Phase place. Through the Foundation
Phase and its statutory curriculum, children will have the opportunity to acquire and progressively
improve their Welsh-language skills through the Language Literacy and Communication Skills Area
of Learning (in Welsh-medium settings) or the Welsh Language Development Area of Learning (in
English-medium settings where Welsh is taught as a second language). The Foundation Phase is
delivered through a mixed economy of providers in the maintained sector (i.e. schools) and the
non-maintained voluntary sector, which predominantly consists of Mudiad Meithrin in the Welshmedium sector.
1b (i): to make available primary education in the relevant regional or minority languages
Primary Welsh-medium and bilingual models of provision are available to parents or guardians who
so desire it for their children in all 22 local authorities. As at January 2011, there were 419 Welshmedium primary schools, where Welsh is the sole/main medium of instruction, and 48 bilingual
schools, where Welsh-medium provision is used for part of the curriculum. Welsh as a second
language was taught in all 968 English-medium schools, and is assessed at the end of Key Stage
2 (11 years old).
The Committee of Experts of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
requested further information on:
1b What steps have been taken by the authorities to meet the demand for Welsh-medium
primary education wherever the situation on the ground justifies it?

37
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

Since the last report, 14 authorities have undertaken parental surveys of demand for Welshmedium education. As a result, 10 new schools or seed classes have opened since 2009 and 5
schools or seed classes are currently being planned for opening from 2012 onwards.
One of the key elements of the Welsh-medium Education Strategy is the introduction of a new
planning framework for Welsh-medium education led by Welsh Government and delivered by local
authorities. This new system will replace the current Welsh Education Schemes which are
submitted to and monitored by the Welsh Language Board under the Welsh Language Act 1993.
From December 2011, each local authority is expected to present an annual Welsh in Education
Strategic Plan (WESP) to the Department for Education and Skills. In the new Plans, authorities
will be expected to carry out an assessment of the demand for Welsh-medium education in those
areas where choice exists between Welsh-medium and English-medium education and the nature
of their plans to address that demand.
Plans are underway to place the WESPs on a statutory footing as part of the School Standards
and Organisation (Wales) Bill. Ensuring the sufficiency of Welsh-medium education will be a key
proposal in the Bill.
The Welsh Government continues to invest annually in the production of Welsh and bilingual
teaching and learning classroom resources to support the teaching and learning of Welsh as a
subject, first and second language, and other subjects through the medium of Welsh. The
resources are learner classroom materials that the commercial market fails to provide and are
available in a variety of media (print, online, CD-ROMs, DVDs). Materials are commissioned
across the whole range of curriculum areas taught in schools, and for pupils of all abilities,
including the provision of materials for those with special educational needs. Original resources are
commissioned as well as the translation/adaptation of existing published materials into Welsh.
To assist with the work of producing Welsh language resources, the Welsh Government has also
supported the production of an on-line educational terminology service. It was launched in 2012,
and may be accessed at www.termiaduraddysg.org.
1c (i): to make available secondary education in the relevant regional or minority languages
Welsh-medium or bilingual secondary education is available throughout Wales to varying degrees.
There are 32 Welsh-medium schools in the secondary sector in Wales and 24 bilingual schools,
where Welsh-medium provision is used for part of the curriculum. One new Welsh-medium
secondary school is currently being planned to open in September 2012. Welsh as a second
language is taught in all 165 English-medium schools.
Welsh in Education Strategic Plans will also require local authorities to outline their plans for
Welsh-medium and bilingual secondary education for approval and monitoring by the Welsh
Government.
The Committee of Experts of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
requested further information on:
1c Which measures have been taken to improve the offer of Welsh-medium secondary
education?
Welsh as a subject has been compulsory for all pupils up to the age of 16 since 1999.
In areas where demand is growing, new Welsh-medium schools have been opened, as outlined
above.

38
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

Since 2007, the Welsh Government, through the Welsh Language Board has held a pilot project to
develop and implement a programme of work with a small number of secondary schools and their
feeder primary schools in those areas where linguistic drift is most prevalent. The aim was to
increase the number of 11-year-old pupils continuing with their education through the medium of
Welsh on transfer to secondary education. The project was successful in increasing the rate of
linguistic progression in each of the project areas. On average 10% more pupils continued into
Welsh-medium education in the secondary phase. This increase emanated from school policies
and systems being modified to support linguistic progression more effectively.
The Welsh in Education Strategic Plans, outlined in 1b (i) above, will also require local authorities
to improve the planning of Welsh-medium and bilingual secondary education, with a view to
increasing the number of learners studying subjects through the medium of Welsh, in response to
the targets set out in the Welsh-medium Education Strategy.
Since the last report, progress has been made in the number of options available to 14-19-year-old
learners through the medium of Welsh. Please see section 1d (i) below for further information.
The Welsh Government continues to commission Welsh and bilingual teaching and learning
classroom resources to support the teaching and learning of Welsh and other subjects through the
medium of Welsh in the secondary sector. The resources are produced in a wide range of media
including online and interactive materials. Materials are commissioned across the whole range of
curriculum areas taught in schools, and for pupils of all abilities, including the provision of materials
for those with special educational needs. Original resources are commissioned as well as the
translation/adaptation of existing published materials into Welsh. On average around half of the
available budget is spent annually on resources for secondary and vocational sector subjects.
1d (i): to make available technical and vocational education in the relevant regional or
minority languages
Technical and vocational qualifications are delivered by schools, Further Education (FE) colleges
and through Work-based Learning providers. The amount of provision provided through the
medium of Welsh or bilingually is increasing, particularly in relation to meeting the requirements of
the Learning and Skills (Wales) Measure 2009, which requires vocational options to be offered to
14-19 year olds.
The Committee of Experts of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
requested further information on:
1d What steps have been taken to develop and strengthen the offer of Welsh-medium
and/or bilingual vocational and technical education?
Welsh Government provides grants to encourage awarding organisations to provide qualifications
through the medium of Welsh in response to demand from centres and learners. A growing
number of vocational qualifications have become available through the medium of Welsh as a
result of the grant programme. In 2010 - 2011, a further 28 qualifications and over a hundred units
were made available through the medium of Welsh as a result of grant support. These
qualifications are mainly taken up by 14-19 year olds. A new section of the Welsh Government’s
website was produced to provide advice on Welsh-medium qualifications, including a
comprehensive list of all Welsh-medium qualifications and a form for learners or centres who wish
to request that further qualifications are made available in Welsh
http://wales.gov.uk/topics/educationandskills/qualificationsinwales/welshmedium/?lang=en.
The Welsh-medium and bilingual 14-19 grant to local authorities has been ring-fenced since 200809. As a result, considerable progress has been made in building effective 14-19 bilingual
partnerships between schools and FE colleges. In 2011-12 £1.6 million was dedicated to the
development of Welsh-medium and bilingual vocational collaborative courses based in schools and

39
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

FE colleges. 14-19 Learning Networks have also utilised a small proportion of their general 14-19
grant to develop new Welsh-medium and bilingual interactive resources in support of the new
vocational courses that have been offered to the learners. These resources have been made
available to all Welsh-medium and bilingual schools through a central electronic resource system.
The Welsh Government also provides grant funding to 3 Welsh-medium Forums, to enable
collaborative planning of linguistic progression routes to post-16 education across the 14-19
Networks.
The Bilingual Champion project was rolled out to an additional 4 FE colleges in 2011-12 for a
period of 3 years, making a total of 8 colleges being supported by the project. The purpose of the
Bilingual Champion is to develop a college’s infrastructure and to plan its strategy to develop
Welsh-medium and bilingual education, enabling learners to continue with their education through
the medium of Welsh or bilingually. Approval has now been received to roll out the scheme further
to all remaining FE colleges from 1 April 2012 for a period of 3 years in each case.
Sgiliaith is a further education sector-related organisation that provides a central all-Wales support
service for the post-16 sector in developing Welsh-medium and bilingual provision. Sgiliaith
provides bilingual methodology training, mentoring and practical support to FE lecturers on
delivering Welsh-medium and bilingual provision, with tailored strategic advice and guidance to
college principals. This contract has now been extended and expanded to provide more support to
the sector until 31 March 2014.
The Welsh-language Sabbaticals Scheme continues to provide Welsh language training to
practitioners from schools, further education and work-based learning. A specific course has been
developed for FE lecturers and is delivered in two locations in Wales. Further information on the
Sabbaticals Scheme and practitioner training can be found under section 1h.
In addition, the Welsh Government continues to commission high-quality teaching and learning
Welsh-medium resources, in a wide range of media, including online and interactive materials,
DVDs, CDs, and printed books, for post-14 vocational subjects to support provision. The
commissioning cycle includes identification of resource needs panels for the six priority subject
areas, namely Business Administration and IT, Leisure and Tourism, Media, Early Years, Care and
Agriculture as well as Construction, Engineering, Public services, Hospitality and Hair and
Beauty.
1e (i): if, by reason of the role of the State in relation to higher education institutions, subparagraphs (i) and (ii) cannot be applied, to encourage and/or allow the provision of
university or other forms of higher education in regional or minority languages or of
facilities for the study of these languages as university or higher education subjects;
Welsh continues to be taught as a subject at degree level at Aberystwyth, Bangor, Swansea and
Cardiff Universities. A Professional Welsh course is taught at the University of Glamorgan.
Enabling higher education study through the medium of Welsh to take place in a wider range of
subjects and locations in Wales is a key target within the Welsh Government strategy, ‘For our
Future’, published in 2009. In response to the strategy, the Higher Education Funding Council for
Wales (HEFCW) has set a target of increasing the number of Welsh domiciled students at Welsh
higher education institutions and further education institutions undertaking some element of their
course through the medium of Welsh from 4,586 in 2008/09 to 5,509 in 2012/13.’
The Coleg Cymraeg Cenedlaethol, established in March 2011 will have a key role in promoting,
maintaining, developing and overseeing Welsh-medium provision in higher education, working with
and through higher education institutions in Wales. From 2011/12 HEFCW will be investing around
of £5.5m per annum to support the development of Welsh-medium higher education.

40
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

Further information is available on the work of the Coleg Cymraeg Cenedlaethol is available on the
Coleg’s website: www.colegcymraeg.ac.uk/en/thecoleg/
1f (i): to arrange for the provision of adult and continuing education courses which are
taught mainly or wholly in the regional or minority languages
1f (ii): to offer such languages as subjects of adult and continuing education
1f (i): The Welsh Government provides funding to local authorities and further education colleges
to deliver adult community learning. The funding enables providers to deliver a range of flexible
learning opportunities for adults and is targeted primarily at those aged 25 or over. The funding is
for both English and Welsh-medium adult community learning. A range of other providers,
including third sector providers, also provide for adult community learning. However, across the
sector the proportion of Welsh-medium provision is low. The on-going review of adult community
learning will take this into consideration when making recommendations for future planning and
delivery.
1f (ii): Welsh for Adults (WfA) (i.e. Welsh language being taught as a subject) continues to be one
of the largest adult learning programmes in Wales, with the most recent data showing 18,205
learners following courses on five levels across Wales during the 2010/11 academic year. A wide
variety of courses are available: weekly evening classes; intensive courses; on-line and distance
learning courses; summer schools and Saturday schools. Six WfA Centres continue to deliver
provision across Wales. An external evaluation of the WfA programme was completed in April
2010. The evaluation concluded that considerable progress has been made in developing WfA and
was generally supportive of the steps taken to move the programme forward. The evaluation
identifies the key successes of the WfA Centres as:
 improvements in the planning of provision within the regions/sub-regions, helping to paint a
clearer picture of regional markets, and helping to eliminate duplication;
 stemming the decline in the numbers of WfA learners witnessed in the period immediately
prior to the WfA Centres’ establishment, and making progress in improving learner
progression between levels of the national framework;
 making progress in introducing increased tailored provision such as Welsh for the Family
and Welsh in the Workplace provision, and placing greater emphasis on intensive courses;
and
 providing high-quality and planned training opportunities for tutors, which was consistent
with the emphasis placed on tutor training within WfA in One Wales, and helping to drive up
the quality of teaching and learning.
1g: to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture which is
reflected by the regional or minority language
Welsh history and culture continues to be included in the National Curriculum for Wales at all levels
via the "Cwricwlwm Cymreig", which ensures a Welsh dimension and ethos for the
National Programmes of Study. This includes other subject areas such as Music, Art and Design,
Geography, History and Anglo-Welsh text in English as a taught subject.
1h: to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to implement those of
paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;
Strategic Aim 4 of the Welsh-medium Education Strategy includes a number of objectives aimed at
ensuring a planned Welsh-medium education workforce that provides sufficient numbers of
practitioners for all phases of education and training, with high-quality Welsh-language skills and
competence in teaching methodologies.

41
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

Initial teacher training continues to be available through the medium of Welsh in all 3 teacher
training centres across Wales.
The Welsh-medium Education Strategy commits the Welsh Government to develop a national,
regional and local training framework for the delivery of continuous professional development
training in Welsh-language and methodology for practitioners in all phases of education and
training. The Sabbaticals Scheme continues to provide Welsh-language and methodology training
for practitioners on a national level. The main aim of the training is to improve the linguistic and
methodology skills of practitioners to enable them to work professionally through the medium of
Welsh or bilingually. There is a specific course to improve the Welsh-language skills of
practitioners teaching in the Foundation Phase and Key Stage 2 in order to improve standards in
Welsh Second Language. Other national training includes provision through Sgiliaith for Further
Education and WJEC delivery of national methodology training.
Local authorities will submit plans in January 2012 outlining how they will use their allocation of the
Welsh in Education Grant (WEG) from 2012 onwards to support the actions outlined in their Welsh
in Education Strategic Plans. One of the intended outcomes is to increase the number of teachers
and practitioners with higher-level Welsh-language skills. Specifically, local authorities will be
expected to gradually re-focus the work of athrawon bro (peripatetic Welsh support teachers), who
currently support English-medium primary schools in delivering Welsh Second Language, to
concentrate on providing Welsh-language and methodology training to practitioners in schools.
1i: to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the measures taken
and progress achieved in establishing or developing the teaching of regional or minority
languages and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings, which will be made public.
The Welsh-medium Education Strategy contains fixed five-year and indicative ten-year targets
based on outcomes which will be used to monitor progress in implementing the Strategy. There is
a commitment in the Welsh-medium Education Strategy to monitor progress made against the
targets contained in the Strategy and to publish an annual report. A Ministerial Advisory Group,
chaired by the Minister for Education and Skills, has been established which includes senior
representation from local authorities and other key stakeholders. The Group has met twice in 2011
to discuss the first annual report on the implementation of the Strategy, which was published in
July 2011, and priorities for implementation following the 2011 National Assembly for Wales
election and formation of a new Government. It met for the third time in March 2012 to approve the
second annual report in principle. The first annual report was published in July 2011
http://wales.gov.uk/topics/educationandskills/publications/guidance/welshmededstrat/?lang=en.
The second annual report is in preparation for publication in May 2012.
The Strategy also commits the Welsh Government to commission an independent evaluation of the
Strategy’s Implementation Programme. An evaluation framework was commissioned and prepared
during 2011. A three-year full evaluation will be commissioned in 2012 to research and evaluate
the Strategy and a number of specific interventions.
Article 9 - Judicial authorities
Her Majesty's Courts & Tribunals Service (HMCTS) is an executive agency of the Ministry of
Justice. It was created on 1 April 2011 to bring together as a single body all the Courts and
Tribunals, excluding those tribunals that have been devolved. It is responsible for supporting the
administration of justice in the courts and tribunals throughout Wales and England and provides
administrative support to the Supreme Court, County Courts, Magistrates’ Courts and Tribunals.
The Supreme Court consists of the Court of Appeal, the High Court (including the probate service)
and the Crown Court.

42
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

1a in criminal proceedings:
ii.

to guarantee the accused the right to use Welsh;

This is provided by virtue of Section 22(i) of the Welsh Language Act 1993.
The cost of Welsh language interpreters in criminal cases is paid for from Central Funds. HMCTS’
policy is to use only those interpreters who have successfully sat the Association of Welsh
Language Interpreters’ Simultaneous translation examinations.
iii.
to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not be
considered inadmissible solely because they are formulated in Welsh;
The Crown, Appeals Court and Magistrates Courts are covered by Her Majesty’s Courts and
Tribunals Service’s Welsh Language Scheme which provides that in the administration of justice in
Wales, the English and Welsh languages should be treated on the basis of equality.
1b

in civil proceedings:

ii.
to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she
may use Welsh without thereby incurring additional expense;
The right to speak Welsh in any civil proceedings in Wales is given by Section 22(i) of the Welsh
Language Act 1993.
iii.
to allow documents and evidence to be produced in Welsh, if necessary by the use
of interpreters and translations;
Documents in Welsh are permitted by rules of court. HMCTS will bear the cost of translating
documents to or from Welsh. If it is possible that the Welsh language may be used by any party or
witness, the parties or their legal representatives must inform the court of the fact so that
appropriate arrangements can be made for the management and listing of the case. The cost of
arranging Welsh language interpreters in civil cases and tribunal hearings is paid for from the
budget of HMCTS’ Welsh Language Unit. If costs are incurred as a result of a party failing to
comply with this direction, a costs order may be made against him or his legal representative.
Hearings may be conducted entirely in Welsh on an ad hoc basis and without notice when all
parties and witnesses directly involved at the time consent.
1c

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:

ii.
to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he or she
may use Welsh without thereby incurring additional expense;
The cost of translating documents and evidence for Court and Tribunal proceedings that come
within the Ministry of Justice’s responsibility is met through HMCTS’ Welsh Language Unit. A
litigant may use Welsh at a hearing in Wales, but if costs are incurred as a result of insufficient
notice, a costs order may be made.
iii.

to allow documents and evidence to be produced in Welsh,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

The cost will be met by HMCTS’ Welsh Language Unit if it comes under its responsibility.
The cost of arranging Welsh language interpreters will be paid for by HMCTS.

43
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

1d
to take steps to ensure that the application of sub-paragraphs (i) and (iii) of
paragraphs b and c above and any necessary use of interpreters and translations does not
involve extra expense for the persons concerned.
As explained above, by virtue of HMCTS’ Welsh Language Scheme, translation of oral evidence is
provided at no extra expense to those giving evidence. Documents are also translated free of
charge.
2b
not to deny the validity, as between the parties, of legal documents drawn up within
the country solely because they are drafted in Welsh, and to provide that they can be
invoked against interested third parties who are not users of Welsh on condition that the
contents of the document are made known to them by the persons) who invokes) it;
Invoking a legal document against a third party would be covered by HMCTS’ Welsh Language
Scheme as referred to in relation to civil proceedings.

Article 10 - Administrative authorities and public services
la (i)

to ensure that the administrative authorities use Welsh;

The Welsh Language (Wales) Measure 2011 provides a new legislative framework regarding the
provision of Welsh language services, and the use of Welsh within, administrative authorities and
public services. As already mentioned, the new framework of duties will be in the form of standards
developed by the Welsh Language Commissioner, and made by Welsh Ministers.
The Welsh language schemes of administrative authorities and bodies delivering public services,
under the Welsh Language Act 1993, will continue to be operational until the body concerned
becomes liable to comply with standards following the receipt of a compliance notice from the
Commissioner.

The Committee of Experts of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
requested further information on the following:
173. Please provide information on the plans to establish a Language Commissioner for
Welsh.
The Welsh Language Measure established the office of the Welsh Language Commissioner
(www.welshlanguagecommissioner.org) with a general power to promote and facilitate the use of
Welsh and to work towards ensuring that Welsh is treated no less favourably than English. The
Commissioner will have a key role to play in safeguarding the rights of Welsh speakers and
contributing to the public debate surrounding the future of the Welsh language.
Paragraph 1a
175.
What steps have been taken to ensure that all UK Government departments that
provide public services in Wales have Welsh Language Schemes and therefore provide
public services through the medium of Welsh?
Statutory Welsh Language Schemes have been adopted by 9 UK Government departments were
approved by the Welsh Language Board.

Paragraph 2

44
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

180.
What steps have been taken to allow and/ or encourage the use of Welsh language
in the framework of local and regional authorities?
All local and regional public authorities in Wales have a statutory Welsh Language Scheme in
place that has been approved by the Welsh Language Board. The Board has encouraged an
increased use of Welsh within the internal administration of authorities through the provision of
funded projects and advice.
Paragraph 3
185.
What steps have been taken by the authorities to ensure that Welsh is used in
public service provided by administrative authorities?
Every public authority is required to comply with a Welsh Language Scheme that specifies the
measures which it proposes to take as to the use of the Welsh language in connection with the
provision of public services in Wales. Authorities report to the Welsh Language Board annually on
any steps taken to improve their performance in line with Welsh Language Scheme commitments.
The Board published sector based overview reports offering an analysis of performance e.g. health
sector, local government, higher and further education. On average a total of 165 reports are
received and responded to each year.
la (i)

to ensure that the administrative authorities use Welsh;

See answer above regarding the new legislative framework for the Welsh language.
1b
to make available widely used administrative texts and forms for the population in
Welsh or in bilingual versions;
See answer above regarding the new legislative framework for the Welsh language.
lc
to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in ' Welsh.
See answer above regarding the new legislative framework for the Welsh language. In addition,
the Standards system will provide greater scope for duties to be imposed on bodies with regard to
their use of Welsh operationally.
2a

the use of Welsh within the framework of the regional or local authority;

See answer above regarding the new legislative framework for the Welsh language, which will
apply to local authorities.
2b

the possibility for users of Welsh to submit oral or written applications in Welsh;

See answer above regarding the new legislative framework for the Welsh language.
2c

the publication by regional authorities of their official documents also in Welsh;

See answer above regarding the new legislative framework for the Welsh language.
2d

the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in Welsh;

See answer above regarding the new legislative framework for the Welsh language.
2e
the use by regional authorities of Welsh in debates in their assemblies, without
excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

45
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

The National Assembly for Wales Commission introduced the National Assembly for Wales
(Official Languages) Bill in the National Assembly on 30 January 2012. This relates to the use of
Welsh and English in the National Assembly for Wales and the provision of bilingual services by
the National Assembly for Wales Commission.
2f
the use by local authorities of Welsh in debates in their assemblies, without
excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;
See answer above regarding the new legislative framework for the Welsh language, which will
apply to local authorities.
2g
the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official
language(s), of traditional and correct forms of place-names in Welsh;
See answer above regarding the new legislative framework for the Welsh language, which will
apply to local authorities. In addition, the Welsh Language Commissioner is now responsible for
co-ordinating work on standardisation of place names.
3a

to ensure that Welsh is used in the provision of the service;

See answer above regarding the new legislative framework for the Welsh language.
4b
recruitment and, where necessary, training of the officials and other public service
employees required;

The Welsh Language Board published guidance on recruitment, which can be viewed here:
http://www.webarchive.org.uk/wayback/archive/20120330015431/http://www.byigwlb.org.uk/english/publications/pages/publicationitem.aspx?puburl=/English/publications/Publicatio
ns/C10797+WLB+Recruitment+Booklet_13+01.pdf
The Welsh Government aims to simplify the way in which it plans its Welsh language skills across
the organisation.
The Government, in conjunction with the Welsh Joint Education Committee, is currently developing
a Welsh language skills diagnostic tool (an on-line portal), which aims to allow employees to
analyse which Welsh language skills are required by their workforce and give them a means to
analyse the Welsh language skills of employees.
In its current Welsh Language Scheme corporate action plan, the Government is committed to
piloting the diagnostic tool, with a view to using it for internal and external recruitment in future.
5.to allow the use or adoption of family names in Welsh, at the request of those concerned.
No additional information since previous report
Article 11- Media
The Committee of Experts of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
requested further information on the following
Paragraph 1a

46
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

191. Has a satisfactory solution been found to the issue of receiving digital radio and television
services?
On 31 March 2010 Wales became the first digital nation of the UK after the analogue television
switch off. During the switchover process Wales had a higher than average level of awareness of
the digital switchover. The Welsh Government worked closely with Digital UK, Ofcom (the
communications regulator) and the Department for Culture, Media and Sport during the switchover
process. Before switchover one-in-three Welsh viewers could not receive Freeview. Following
switchover almost everyone in Wales has that choice.
Although the digital switchover was successful in Wales there continues to be some isolated
problems, mainly related to topographical issues and overlapping signals. The latter is chiefly a
problem in areas bordering England, where changes to local transmitters are affecting those over
the border in Wales.
Although not a devolved issue, the Welsh Government is fully aware of the problems in relation to
receiving digital radio services in parts of Wales. This issue has been raised on a number of
occasions with the BBC, Ofcom and the UK Government. This has also been reflected in the
Welsh Government’s responses to various broadcasting consultations including the BBC Trust
Delivering Quality First consultation in December 2011. The Welsh Government is also
represented on the UK Government’s Digital Radio Government Policy Group and the UK
Government’s Digital Radio Stakeholders Group.
The challenge of providing sustainable and successful radio services in both English and Welsh is
made more complex by the need to also ensure the completion of a transmitter network that
ensures that those services are available throughout the whole of Wales. It is important for
example that content and coverage of the DAB service in Wales is no worse than Welsh AM/FM
radio coverage at present and available in areas where the national radio stations (Radio Wales
and Radio Cymru) can only be transmitted on the AM spectrum. The new DAB service needs to
provide an enhanced service if listeners in all parts of the UK are to be persuaded of the merits of
that service. The Welsh Government would also repeat its view that we would not be in favour of
digital switchover for radio until there was a guarantee of at least 97% coverage for DAB
throughout Wales. We have emphasised this regularly to the UK Government.
We are aware that the BBC has announced the roll-out of an additional 10 ‘national DAB
multiplexers’ in Wales, but it is essential that they also commence a roll-out of ‘local DAB
multiplexers’ in order to ensure that the rural areas of Wales have full coverage of DAB. It is a
matter for the BBC to ensure improvements to transmitters
There is a problem with FM coverage in Wales - almost 40% of Welsh listeners cannot receive
Radio Wales on FM and the lack of DAB would compound the problem.
There is currently an issue in the classification of Radio Wales and Radio Cymru as local stations,
as per English regions, and we are urging the BBC to work with Ofcom to reclassify these as
national stations. In its response to the consultation on the BBC Strategy in 2010 the Welsh
Government suggested that the spectrum vacated by Radio 6 and the Asian network, provided an
opportunity to ensure national coverage of these stations. Otherwise this might result in a situation
where listeners are able to listen to Radio Wales and Radio Cymru on their freeview TV sets, but
not on the radio whilst travelling. This would do nothing to promote those services as key aspects
of the BBC’s radio offer.
The ongoing problems regarding receiving FM radio signals is making the Welsh Government
apprehensive about the implications of the intention to change to digital radio. The Welsh
Government will continue to make representations to ensure that listeners in Wales are not treated
differently from other areas of the United Kingdom.

47
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

1a

to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:

i.
to ensure the creation of at least one radio station and one television channel in the
regional or minority languages;
Whilst broadcasting is a non-devolved matter, the Welsh Government has an interest in the
development of policy and strategy relating to public service broadcasters because of the
significance of these broadcasters to Welsh social, cultural and economic life as well as the
importance of S4C in providing a platform for Welsh language output.
Public service broadcasters in Wales, including BBC Cymru Wales, S4C and ITV Wales, have
played an important role in ensuring that the Welsh language continues to thrive. Although
broadcasting is not a devolved matter, the Welsh Government is committed to doing all it can to
ensure that Welsh-language broadcasting continues to develop and improve, especially in the light
of recent discussions about the future and editorial independence of S4C.
As part of the Comprehensive Spending Review announcement on 20 October 2010, the UK
Government announced that S4C funding will in the future become partly the responsibility of the
BBC. In addition, they announced a 24.4 % cut to S4C’s funding over the four years of the
Spending Review period. Since that announcement the Welsh Government has expressed its
serious concern regarding the scale of the financial cuts being proposed by the UK Government
and their impact on services across Wales.
Additionally, in 2009 the Welsh Government became a significant funder, via the Welsh Books
Council, of an online news service through the medium of Welsh, Golwg 360. The Welsh
Government has also provided funding to the National Library of Wales to acquire and develop
public access to the ITV Wales television archive through the National Screen and Sound Archive
of Wales. The ITV Wales archive spans over 50 years of programme-making in the Welsh
language. The range and standard of Welsh-language programming on S4C and BBC Radio
Cymru helps to maintain Welsh as a modern language and as part of everyday life in Wales. The
broadcasters also help to increase awareness of the language among those who can, and cannot,
speak Welsh. S4C’s services for children, including Cyw and Stwnsh, are recognised as making an
important contribution to the task of normalising the language for children of all ages.
Both the BBC and S4C have performed an important role in helping people from all backgrounds to
learn the Welsh language, with a range of broadcast and online resources. Both S4C and BBC
Cymru Wales already work in partnership with many organisations such as the Urdd, the National
Eisteddfod and others working at community level to promote the Welsh language. For instance
BBC Radio Cymru and the mentrau iaith hold a Battle of the Bands competition every year which
has proved to be very popular among young people and has been an important vehicle for
nurturing musical talent in Welsh. We hope that they will continue to play this role in the future.
However, online service provision through the medium of Welsh has not been given the same
priority as it has through the medium of English. We hope that the new arrangements announced
for the relationship between S4C and the BBC will lead to a strengthening of online provision
through the medium of Welsh, to the same level as that provided through the medium of English.

ld
to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and
audiovisual works in Welsh;

48
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

The Creative Industries Sector
In 2010 the Welsh Government established a team dedicated to developing the Creative Industries
sector in Wales, supported by an external advisory panel of experienced professionals from the
creative industries. The Creative Industries Sector team sits within the department of Business,
Enterprise, Technology and Science and supports the development of the creative industries and
is committed to supporting and promoting the Welsh language across all sub-sectors, which
comprise of advertising, architecture, art & antiques, crafts, design, designer fashion, digital and
entertainment media, film, video & photography, publishing, music, visual & performing arts,
software and electronic publishing and TV & Radio.
The Creative Industries Sector works across the Government to make best use of the levers
available in areas such as education and training, infrastructure, funding and procurement, to
support the growth of the creative sector in Wales, and is committed to serving the diversity which
exists within Wales, whilst prioritising those activities most likely to contribute to Welsh economic
growth. Welsh language projects are represented in all parts of the Strategy which seeks to
encourage Creative Businesses in Wales to compete and succeed in local, national and
international markets.
Wales is a bilingual nation with a long tradition of delivering successful creative content and is wellplaced to take advantage of the opportunities presented by the creative industries. In order to
adhere to Section 78 of The Government of Wales Act 2006, a number of Welsh speaking staff
work within the Creative Industries Sector, and ensure that ‘in the conduct of public business in
Wales the English and Welsh languages should be treated on a basis of equality’.
While a detailed Welsh Government Welsh Language Action Plan exists, the Creative Industries
Sector is drafting a Welsh Language Action Plan specific to the Creative Industries Sector which
will address any industry related issues, and ensure that all correspondence and official
documentation (to include guidelines) can be accessed both in Welsh and English.
Public Service Broadcasters – Strategic Review
The Welsh Government has commissioned a Strategic Review analysing, for the first time, the
economic contribution and economic opportunities which the Public Service Broadcasters are able
to bring to creative businesses all over Wales. This research will enable the Welsh Government to
better understand the economic advantages to Wales that can be practically achieved from the
Public Service Broadcasters, specifically BBC Wales and S4C.

The Digital Development Fund
The Digital Development Fund, launched as a pilot in November 2011, is aimed specifically at
providing seed-funding to support small creative companies in developing new ways of exploiting
creative ideas on digital platforms.
The fund is open to both Welsh and English language projects and provides non-repayable seed
funding for businesses to develop digital opportunities with the aim of accelerating the growth of
the creative industries in Wales. To date the Digital Development Fund has generated a high level
of interest and the pilot has been well received.
Repayable Business Finance
Repayable Business Finance is available to support creative businesses which have opportunities
to sell their products outside Wales. The level of support offered is discretionary but will always be
within state aid ceilings and no more than is necessary to enable the project to go ahead. Dinamo

49
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

productions have recently had their children's animation series The Abadas part funded through
RBF, this was produced in Welsh, English and several other international languages.
The Wales Screen Commission
The Wales Screen Commission sits within The Creative Industries Sector, offering a strong,
economically focussed locations service which promotes and facilitates Wales as a Filming
location.
The Wales Screen Commission provides bespoke support, both in English and Welsh, for film
production with regard to locations, crew, facilities and local support services. Their services are
free of charge.

International Trade Fairs
The Creative Industries Sector supports a Welsh presence at international trade fairs and trade
missions; and is focused on ensuring that the international requirements of all sub-sectors are met
and developed.
Spoke organisations
The Creative Industries Sector has a core budget which currently funds organisations such as Film
Agency Wales and Welsh Music Foundation to deliver projects which promote a growing and
sustainable creative industries sector in Wales. A number of projects and talent supported by the
spoke organisations are Welsh language and bilingual projects.

1e (i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least one
newspaper in Welsh;
The Welsh Government through the Welsh Books Council continues to provide funding to the daily
Welsh language news service Golwg 360; the weekly news publications Y Cymro and the print
version of Golwg; and Barn- the monthly current affairs magazine. In addition, the Welsh
Government continues to fund 55 local (mostly monthly papurau bro (regional papers).
1f (ii) to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual productions
in Welsh;
No additional information since previous report
2. to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television broadcasts from
neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form to Welsh, and
not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television broadcasts from
neighbouring countries in such a language; and to ensure that no restrictions will be
placed on the freedom of expression and free circulation of information in the written
press in a language used in identical or similar form to Welsh.
No additional information since previous report

50
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

2

to ensure that the interests of the users of Welsh are represented or taken into
account within such bodies as may be established in accordance with the law
with responsibility for guaranteeing the freedom and pluralism of the media.

No additional information since previous report
Article 12 - Cultural activities and facilities
Paragraph 3
The Committee of Experts of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
requested further information on:
211. Please provide further information on how the Welsh language and the culture it
reflects are included in the presentation of the United Kingdom abroad.
Information on the Welsh language teaching project in Patagonia; the British Irish Council’s
workstream on Indigenous, Minority and Lesser-used languages; and the NPLD has already been
included in the report. Details about how Wales is marketed overseas are outlined below in Article
13.
Wales was the featured nation at the 2009 which was the 43rd annual Smithsonian Folklife Festival
held from 24th -28th June, 1st – 5th July 2009. The Festival provided a unique and effective
platform from which to raise the profile and awareness of Wales with a largely United States
audience. The Welsh Government’s worked with the Smithsonian Institution to develop and deliver
the project working closely with partner organisations in Wales. Wales’ presence at the Festival
was the biggest Welsh Government-led international cultural project held outside of Wales.
The presentation of Wales in Washington, DC comprised two programme strands: the Smithsonian
Folklife Festival on-site programme and a series of multi-sector Ancillary events which took place
at venues throughout Washington, DC before, during and after the main Festival thereby extending
the depth and breadth of Wales’ presence in Washington, DC.
Welsh culture was presented at the Festival. The Wales programme was shaped by the idea of
connecting the past, present and future for a Sustainable Wales. The programme’s aim was to
draw upon the diversity of Wales’ cultural life, from the strength of deep-rooted traditions through to
innovative new technologies which are often inspired by those traditions. Tying old to new and
heritage to innovation, the programme was structured in order to show how language, food, crafts,
building skills, music and literature have been retained, recycled and re-imagined in every region of
Wales and in the Welsh communities around the globe.
Over 160 Participants from Wales took part in the Washington, DC activities including musicians;
cooks; craftspeople and arts experts in wood, slate, wool, clay, stone and metal; practitioners of
traditional occupations including farming, fishing and coal mining as well as new industries such as
animation, renewable energy production and cultural tourism; poets; storytellers; genealogists;
tourism; basketry and media. Welsh language lessons were organised every morning during the
Festival. Most of the poets and singers gave performances in Welsh. Additionally, most of the
people who actually presented different aspects of culture from Wales at the Festival were Welsh
speakers and the Welsh language was very visible in terms of the overall design.
1a
to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to Welsh and foster the
different means of access to works produced in Welsh;

51
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

Welsh Government funding for the arts in Wales is channelled through the Arts Council of Wales
which provides funding for the arts through the medium of Welsh as well as English.
The Arts Council of Wales Revenue Funding Agreement for all its Revenue Funding Organisations
specifically refers to the following conditions under “Public Benefit” section:
 Demonstrate the approach you are taking to reflect the fact that Wales is a bilingual nation,
and the progress you are making to achieve the goal of all your publicity and public facing
printed and online material being provided in Welsh and English.
 Upload and update your organisation’s profile, events and opportunities bilingually onto
the Arts Directory on the Arts Council’s website.
Additionally two revenue funding organisations - Theatr Genedlaethol and Bara Caws - produce all
of their work through the medium of Welsh.
All Theatre for Young People companies produce bilingual productions. These include Cwmni’r
Fran Wen, Arad Goch, Theatr na n’Og, Theatr Iolo and Clwyd Theatr Cymru Theatre for Young
People. These companies have developed new approaches in the way that they engage with
young people and have been involved in ground breaking experimental work using the Welsh
language in really creative ways.
Galeri in Caernarfon is a prime example of creating a centre in which creative individuals working
through the medium of Welsh can meet, exchange and formulate new ideas.
Literature Wales provides both Welsh and English literature and writer development and Ty Cerdd
in a similar form for music development.
Similar examples can be found across all other art forms e.g. Helfa Gelf (visual arts) dance delivery
through Theatr Felinfach, Dawns i Bawb and Powys Dance.
On many of the Revenue Funding Agreements the Arts Council of Wales is asking a number of
clients to improve their Welsh language provisions in a number of different ways. These include
workshops and promotional material.
The fourth Welsh Public Library Standards Framework states that Welsh public library authorities
shall ensure that they spend either

a) a minimum average for the three-year period up to March 2014 of £750 per annum per
1,000 Welsh speaker total resident population (adults and children under 16) within
their authority from the total library purchasing funds on the purchase, marketing and
promotion of Welsh-language materials
or

b) a minimum of 4% on average for the three-year period of the total library materials
purchasing fund up to March 2014 on the purchase, marketing and promotion of Welshlanguage materials for adults and children under 16
1b
to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced in
Welsh by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling
activities;
No additional information since previous report
1c
to foster access in Welsh to works produced in other languages by aiding and
developing translation, dubbing, post-synchronisation and subtitling activities;

52
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

No additional information since previous report
1d
to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural
activities of various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the knowledge and
use of Welsh and cultures in the undertakings which they initiate or for which they provide
backing;
No additional information since previous report

1e
to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or
supporting cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full command of Welsh,
as well as of the languages) of the rest of the population;
No additional information since previous report
As explained under Article 10, the Welsh Language (Wales) Measure 2011 provides a new
legislative framework regarding the provision of Welsh language services, and the use of Welsh
within, a range of bodies. These include, either directly or as a result of being in receipt of public
funding, organisations which organise or support cultural activities. The new framework of duties
will be in the form of standards developed by the Welsh Language Commissioner, and made by
Welsh Ministers.
1f
to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of Welsh in
providing facilities and planning cultural activities;
No additional information since previous report
The Welsh Government through the Language Board provided grants to a range of organisations,
including the National Eisteddfod, and Urdd Gobaith Cymru, to promote the use of Welsh in
cultural activities. From 1 April 2012 this funding has been channelled direct from the Welsh
Government.
1g
to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for
collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in Welsh;

No additional information since previous report

1h
if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and terminological
research services, particularly with a view to maintaining and developing appropriate
administrative, commercial, economic, social, technical or legal terminology in Welsh.
In 2012, the Welsh Language Board published an on-line version of the Welsh Academy’s EnglishWelsh Dictionary. This resource is available for everyone to use, free of charge. It can be accessed
here:
http://techiaith.bangor.ac.uk/GeiriadurAcademi/?page_id=93&lang=en

53
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

The Board also convened a panel of academic experts and practitioners for the standardization of
terms and place names. A data base of standardized place-names was funded by grant by the
Welsh Government through the Welsh Language Board.
Information Technology terms developed by the Board contributed to the work of localising both
OpenOffice, Agored and to the free Language Interface Packs for Microsoft Windows XP and
Office 2003-2007. The Board also developed a free Language Control Centre (LCC) to enable
easy switching between Welsh and English language interfaces in Windows XP and Vista. In 2006
the Board published Information Technology and the Welsh Language: A Strategy Document for
the normalisation of Welsh in Information Technology, and Guidelines and Standards for Bilingual
Software to offer guidance for technical officers to ensure a high quality bilingual computer service.
In order to ensure that Welsh maintains a fair presence as technology develops, the Board
commissioned a report to assess the implications of web2.0 for bilingual websites in 2009:
http://www.webarchive.org.uk/wayback/archive/20120330014019/http://www.byigwlb.org.uk/English/publications/Pages/PublicationItem.aspx?puburl=/English%2fpublications%2fPu
blications%2f20090812+AD+S+Implications+of+web2.0+for+bilingual+websites+f1.doc
In 2011, the Board published a composite Advice Note giving guidance to bodies regarding
technology and translation.
http://www.webarchive.org.uk/wayback/archive/20120330021405/http://www.byigwlb.org.uk/english/publications/pages/publicationitem.aspx?puburl=/English/publications/Publicatio
ns/20110106+DG+S+Nodyn+Cyngor+Technoleg+a+Chyfieithu.docx
The Welsh Government's Translation Service continues to maintain its own terminology database
– TermCymru. It is published on the internet (www.termcymru.wales.gov.uk) as a useful tool for
bilingual working beyond the translation profession.
Bangor University also has a pioneering terminological standardisation unit, within the Canolfan
Bedwyr Centre. Over the past decade, the Centre has developed an extensive data-base of
educational terminology, published in book format for use by schools. During the past year, the
Welsh Government has supported the production of an on-line educational terminology service
based on this data-base. It was launched in 2012, includes over 50,000 terms and may be
accessed at www.termiaduraddysg.org.
In March 2012, the Welsh Government established a Welsh Language, Technology and Digital
Media Group to develop and action plan to encourage the increased use of Welsh in technology
and digital media.
2
In respect of territories other than those in which Welsh is traditionally used, if the
number of users of Welsh justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate
cultural activities and facilities in accordance with the preceding paragraph.
The Welsh Government continues to fund the Welsh Language Teaching Project in the Chubut
province of Argentina.
The Welsh Government, through CyMAL: Museums, Archives and Libraries Wales division, is
promoting co-operation between museums, archives and libraries in Wales and Welsh museums,
archives and libraries in Patagonia. The trilingual website of resources is now available through
www.glaniad.com and information has also been added to the casgliad y Werin Cymru/People’s
Collection Wales.
There are several active Welsh language societies and networks in cities in the UK outside Wales,
and the National Eisteddfod of Wales network ‘Cymru a’r Byd’ (Wales and the World) is also
relevant in this respect.

54
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

3. to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad, for Welsh and the
cultures it reflects.
Information on this is included above at the beginning of Article 12.
Article 13 - Economic and social life
1a to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without
justifiable reasons the use of Welsh in documents relating to economic or social life,
particularly contracts of employment, and in technical documents such as instructions for
the use of products or installations;
No additional information since previous report
1c
to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of Welsh in connection with
economic or social activities;
No additional information since previous report
2b
in the economic and social sectors directly under their control (public sector), to
organise activities to promote the use of Welsh;
During the period 2008-2011, Business Enterprise Technology and Science Department (BETS) of
the Welsh Government has focussed on development of its outward facing services increasing the
capability of bilingual delivery. This has included geographically focused research into the
perception and engagement of Welsh speakers with the Enterprise Start up Support service, and
an analysis of demographic data collected by contracted start up providers that included Welsh
language capability. This analysis of the data resulted in the Enterprise Start up Service carrying
out a specific marketing campaign aimed at attracting more Welsh speakers to the service, and the
contracted service providers held a number of events designed to raise the numbers of Welsh
Language customers.
The Enterprise and Business Information division of BETS has over the past two years provided
financial support to a ‘Welsh Dragons Den’ competition at the National Eisteddfod which is
specifically aimed at developing Welsh language Entrepreneurs.
An agreement was signed between the Welsh Language Board and the Flexible Support for
Business Service that identified key areas that the two organisations would work together to
promote Welsh Language in its delivery of business support.
BETS has provided core financial support to Menter a Busnes in 2008-2011, whose remit is to
support economic development with a focus on Welsh Language.
Over the last 10 years, Visit Wales has led the delivery and implementation of the Sense of Place
(SOP) programme to the Tourism industry in Wales. The programme’s primary aim is to encourage
businesses to foster and embrace a Welsh identity to provide an unique experience to visitors to
Wales.
SOP is the sensation you get when visiting somewhere for the first time – the first impression, the
look, the feel, the atmosphere, the people. It also embraces the distinctive sights, sounds,
language and experiences that are rooted in a country, those unique and memorable qualities that
resonate with local people and visitors.

55
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

One of the types of standards that will be developed under the Welsh Language Measure will be
‘promotion standards’ in order to require certain organisations to promote the use of Welsh in the
communities they serve. These standards will apply to Welsh Ministers, local authorities and
national park authorities.

2c
to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and hostels
offer the possibility of receiving and treating in their own language persons using Welsh
who are in need of care on grounds of ill-health, old age or for other reasons;
Strategic framework to strengthen Welsh language provision in health and social services
Although progress has been made to strengthen Welsh language provision in both sectors, the
Welsh Government recognises that more needs to be done to consider the language needs of
users as an integral part of the process of care planning and service delivery.
Following discussions with the NHS, the Association of the Directors of Social Services (ADSS)
and the Welsh Local Government Association (WLGA), and the need for a more strategic
approach to the work within health and social services, during 2010 the Welsh Government
decided to develop a strategic framework to strengthen Welsh language provision within health
and social services. The Framework confirms the Government’s commitment to strengthen Welsh
language services to service users and their families with the focus of the work being on
developing front line services. A written statement by the Deputy Minister on the development of
the Framework can be seen here:
http://www.wales.nhs.uk/sites3/page.cfm?orgid=415&pid=56583.
An independent Steering Group comprising of representatives from the services and associated
organisations was established in January 2011 to develop the framework.
In the first half of 2011, the steering group met on a monthly basis to gather evidence which
covered the following:







Children and Older People’s commissioners
Welsh Language Board
Overview of the education and training system
Workforce planning
Users’ experiences
Commissioning of services

Because of the close relationship between health and social services, a one day workshop was
held during 2011 between health, social care and Welsh language officers representing local
government and the health boards. The workshop discussed the development of the strategic
framework and provided an opportunity for them to contribute to its development.
A draft of the strategic framework, entitled More than just words…. , was issued for public
consultation between 08 February 2012 and 30 April 2012. As part of the consultation a number of
regional events were held with individuals, service users and stakeholders. The responses
received will be considered before the final version of the framework is published and implemented
in the second half of 2012.
Further information about the strategic framework is available at:
http://wales.gov.uk/consultations/healthsocialcare/words/?lang=en&status=closed
Research into Welsh language service users’ experiences

56
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

The most recent in-depth report into patients and service users’ experiences dates back to ‘Welsh
in the Health Services’ in 2000. In order to inform the development of the strategic framework, in
2011 the Welsh Government and the Care Council for Wales commissioned research about
service users’ experiences of using bilingual services in health and social care in order to identify
priorities.
The research focussed on the experiences of Welsh speaking service users and / or carers where
language is a crucial issue and not a matter of choice i.e. children who require speech therapy,
older people, people with mental health issues including dementia, and people with learning
disabilities. The report concluded that services are generally provided on the basis of demand
rather than need, but because of the low expectations of Welsh speakers and the vulnerability of
people who come into contact with the services to expect users to ask for services in Welsh is
unrealistic. The report provides a wealth of evidence and some powerful stories and has informed
the development of the strategic framework.
The report can be seen at:
http://wales.gov.uk/consultations/healthsocialcare/words/?lang=en&status=closed
Welsh Language in Health and Social Services Task Group
The Task Group continues to meet on a regular basis under the chairmanship of the Deputy
Minister for Children and Social Services who has provided valuable leadership and stimulus for
action to the service.
To help ensure a more balanced membership between the NHS and Social Services and to ensure
the necessary skills to move forward the work of the Task Group in developing a Strategic
Framework for health and social services, the remit and membership of the Task Group was
revised at the beginning of 2011,
The Task Group has recently focussed on:


Workforce planning – strengthening the Welsh language skills of the workforce and
ensuring that current skills within the workforce are effectively deployed is a key priority for
the Task Group. Work undertaken to date includes ensuring that meaningful Welsh
language skills descriptors are included in the Electronic Staff Record, so that baseline data
about the skills of the workforce is available. However more work needs to be done in this
area in order to enable the service to respond to patient needs.



Working with the NHS Wales Informatics Service to ensure that the IT infrastructure that
supports the NHS makes it possible to deliver services bilingually.



Developing a toolkit to help the health and social services inspectorates to review how they
assess Welsh language provision in their regulatory role. The toolkit can be seen at:
http://www.wales.nhs.uk/sites3/docmetadata.cfm?orgid=415&id=165756



Commissioning a dignity in care Welsh language toolkit which focuses on the importance of
language in mainstreaming dignity in care in the care of older people. Aimed primarily at
carers and managers, educators and trainers, it offers key messages that underpin a
quality service and tools to guide a best practice approach. The toolkit can be viewed at:
http://wales.gov.uk/topics/health/publications/socialcare/reports/dignity/;jsessionid=BPxvPV
KT4r29Y4xMqQZyQdKyDhGrWXX2yNvQZYF4TZbJVPKjxPnz!-1747186160?lang=en



Consideration of the Welsh Language Board’s overview report of NHS Health Boards and
Trusts’ annual monitoring reports. The report has been disseminated to LHBs and Trusts
for discussion at board level.

57
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc



Consideration of the Welsh Language Board’s overview report on Welsh language
provision in social services

Welsh Language and Mental health Task & Finish Group
Towards the end of 2009 the Deputy Minister for Social Services established a “task & finish”
group to look at the Welsh language provision within mental health services in order to strengthen
provision in this field. The group’s remit is to identify the Welsh language dimension in Welsh
Government mental health guidance, review current availability of assessments available in Welsh,
and look at access to services by Welsh speakers with mental health issues. The Group will report
back to the Task Group with recommendations in July 2012.
Welsh Language Conference and Awards
This annual event continues to go from strength to strength and continues to raise awareness
about the importance of providing bilingual care and encouraging innovation. It is recognised as a
valuable source of sharing good practice across Wales.
In recent years the conference has focussed on the patient’s experience, and language need (as
opposed to language choice) as the key to improving the patient’s experience; and most recently
the development of the strategic framework with an opportunity for attendees to contribute to the
discussion on the strategy’s future direction.
Steps taken to inform various organisations / authorities about the European Charter and
the Council of Europe’s recommendation
The report and the recommendation of the third monitoring cycle were discussed at a meeting of
the Task Group in July 2010. The report and its findings were circulated to the Welsh Language
Officers, champions and chief executives in the LHBs and Trusts, directors of social services and
local government Welsh Language Officers.
The issue was also discussed with Welsh Language Officers as part of the network meetings the
Welsh Language Policy Unit in the Welsh Government holds with them and included in the Ebulletin that was issued to the sectors in January 2011.
Welsh Language Officers
Following the Welsh Health Circular issued in 2008 by the Minister for Health and Social Services1,
full time Welsh Language Officers are now in place in all Health Boards and Trusts. This capacity
was safeguarded during the restructuring of the NHS.
The Welsh Language Policy Unit continues to co-operate formally and informally with the Welsh
Language Officers and meets with them every 6 months in order to discuss common issues and
share good practice. Recently the Welsh Language Policy Unit has additionally arranged training
sessions for the Welsh Language Officers. These sessions have covered transformational
leadership, creating bilingual skills strategies and helping the Welsh language officers to address
some of the common challenges they face.
Also, in order to strengthen the link between equality and Welsh language leads in the NHS a joint
meeting of the equality and Welsh language leads was held at the beginning of 2012 to discuss
issues of language, culture and dignity within the healthcare setting.
Language awareness event at the National Eisteddfod
A joint event was held with the Care Council for Wales at the 2011 National Eisteddfod. This event
took the form of an interview in the company of the broadcaster Beti George who interviewed
Elaine Davies from Iaith: Welsh centre for language planning on research commissioned by the
1

Strengthening Welsh Language Provision within NHS services in Wales [WHC (2008) 002]

58
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

Government on the importance of language in health and social care services. As well as
providing an overview of the research work, the public were given an opportunity to respond and
ask questions. Feedback from the session will be fed into the development of the consultation on
the Strategic Framework.

Conclusion
During the past few years considerable work has been undertaken to lay firm foundations to the
work of strengthening Welsh medium provision within health and social care services. However, it
is recognised that there is still a lot of work to be done. The development of a strategic framework
will help ensure that the language is mainstreamed and ensure consistency in terms of provision,
which hopefully will help lead to better services to Welsh speakers.
Question submitted to the Government of the United Kingdom requesting information to be
included in its 4th periodical report
212. In its second evaluation report (paragraphs 265 – 274), the Committee of Experts
acknowledged the positive steps taken by the authorities. However, it concluded that this
undertaking was still not fulfilled and urged the authorities to strengthen their efforts to ensure that
health and social care facilities offer services in Welsh. On the basis of the observations made by
the Committee of Experts in its second evaluation report, the Committee of ministers adopted the
recommendation addressed to the UK authorities, with regard to Welsh, to “take further measures
to ensure that health and social care facilities offer services in Welsh” (RecChL(2007)2).
213. According to the third periodical report, the Welsh Government has undertaken a number of
actions to strengthen provision of Welsh services in social care facilities, including the reestablishment of Taskforce by the Minister for Health and Social Services in 2006. These activities
contributed to the awareness raising among medical staff about the Welsh language, but the actual
use of the language is still not satisfactory. In January 2008, the Welsh Government issued a
Welsh Health Circular [WHC(2008) No 002] requiring that every NHS Trust should appoint a fulltime Welsh language Officer to promote the development of bilingual health care within their
organisations and that Local Health Boards in the Mid, West and South East Regions should pool
funds in order to develop regional Welsh Language Units.
214. However, during their on the-spot visit the Committee of Experts was informed about an
increased number of complaints in this sector. The problems identified include very little training of
medical staff in Welsh and the fact that over 90% of contact with the health service is through the
primary care sector. As this is largely provided by the private sector (i.e. doctors’ surgeries) most
of this work does not come directly under the auspices of the 1993 Welsh Language Act.
215. The information received by the Committee related mainly to the health sector. Very little
was made available about social care which is the responsibility of local authorities, but most care
provision is outsourced to the private sector. Representatives of the Care Council for Wales and of
the Older peoples Commissioner for Wales emphasised the need for further action in this field.
216. The Committee of Experts acknowledges the measures taken by the UK authorities in this
sector. However, in view of the fact that the provision of health and social care in Welsh is still
largely missing, the Committee of Experts has to conclude that the undertaking is still not fulfilled,

Paragraph 2c
216. What steps have been taken to ensure that social care facilities offer the possibility of
receiving and treating in their own language persons using Welsh?

59
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

Details about the steps taken are outlined in the body of the report above. However, through the
leadership of the Ministerial Task Group, the main developments include:






Development of More than just words… ,a Strategic Framework to strengthen Welsh
language services in health and social care
Research commissioned into service users’ experiences of using bilingual services in both
health and social care which informed the development of the Strategic Framework.
Toolkit developed by CSSIW to help the social services inspectorate to review how they
assess Welsh language provision in their regulatory role.
The commissioning of a dignity in care Welsh language toolkit which focuses on the
importance of language in mainstreaming dignity in care in the care of older people
Consideration by the Welsh Language in Health & Social Services Task Group of the
Welsh Language Board’s overview report on Welsh language provision in social services

60
UNCLASSIFIED
P:\ECRML UK\MINLANG PR01 UK PR4.doc

