Strasbourg, 1 July 2002

MIN-LANG/PR (2002) 5

EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR R EGIONAL OR M INORITY LANGUAGES

Initial Periodical Report
presented to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe
in accordance with Article 15 of the Charter

UNITED KINGDOM

Foreword:

During 1997 and 1998, referendums were held in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland on
how those countries and regions should be governed. The referendums decided in favour of
devolved governments. Elections were subsequent ly held for a new Northern Ireland
Assembly, a new Scottish Parliament and a new National Assembly for Wales.
Devolved powers were formally transferred from the UK government to the devolved
administrations in Scotland and Wales on 1 July 1999. At this time, the Welsh Assembly took
over responsibility for a number of the UK government’s functions, including the Welsh
language, education and training, economic development, and local government. The Scottish
Parliament was given responsibility for the Scottish Executive’s existing powers, which
included responsibility for Scottish Gaelic and Scots.
Devolved powers were transferred to the Northern Ireland Assembly and Executive on
2 December 1999. The Assembly and Executive are able to exercise full legisla tive and
executive authority in respect of those matters which fall within the responsibility of the
Northern Ireland Government Departments in Belfast. This gives the Assembly devolved
power over a number of areas, including culture and the arts.
The UK government retains responsibility for foreign affairs, defence, national economic
policy, social security and broadcasting.
There are therefore three devolved bodies which are principally responsible for implementing
the provisions of the European Charter for regional or minority languages in the United
Kingdom.

2

PART ONE

1. Please state the main legal act(s) whereby the European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages has been implemented in your State. If you so desire, please
mention the general considerations which have guided your country in the ratification
process.

The main legal acts which have enabled the UK to ratify the Charter are:

The British Nationality Act 1981
This established that a knowledge of Scottish Gaelic, English, or Welsh satisfies one of the
conditions for naturalisation as a British citizen.

WELSH

a) The 1967 Welsh Language Act
This established the right to use Welsh in the Courts and also provided for Ministers to
prescribe Welsh versions of statutory forms. This provided the means to give the language
validity in public administration. This Act was substantially amended and its provisions
extended by the Welsh Language Act 1993 described below.

b) The 1993 Welsh Language Act
The main provisions of this Act were to establish the Welsh Language Board, a body with the
specific function of promoting and facilitating the Welsh Language, and to provide for the
preparation by public bodies of schemes giving effect to the principle that in the conduct of
public business and the administration of justice in Wales, the English and Welsh languages
should be treated on a basis of equality. Over 180 public sector Welsh language schemes have
now received the approval of the Welsh Language Board.
A number of categories of bodies are named in paragraph 6 of the Welsh Language Act 1993,
as being public bodies for the purposes of the Act. The National Assembly for Wales can,
through introducing subordinate legislation under Section 6(1)(o) of the Welsh Language Act
1993, name further organisations as being public bodies for the purposes of the Act. Four
such pieces of legislation have been made to date, in 1996, 1999 , 2001 and 2002. The naming
of public bodies in this way opens the way for the Welsh Language Board to require that the
organisation prepares a Welsh language scheme setting out how it will give effect to the
principle that, as far as is appropriate in the circumstances and is reasonably practicable, the
Welsh and English languages will be treated on a basis of equality.

3

c) The Government of Wales Act 1998
Section 32 states that the National Assembly may do anything it considers appropriate to
support the Welsh language.

SCOTTISH GAELIC

a) The Education (Scotland) Act 1980
Under the Education (Scotla nd) Act 1980, education authorities have a duty to secure
adequate and efficient provision of school education and further education and both of these
include the teaching of Gaelic in Gaelic-speaking areas.
Under the Grants for Gaelic Language Education (Scotland) Regulations 1986, made under
Section 73 of the Education (Scotland) Act 1980, the Scottish Office and local authorities
have operated a scheme of specific grants for Gaelic education since 1986.

b) The Standards in Scotland’s Schools etc Act 2000
The Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Act 2000 requires education authorities to report on
their plans for Gaelic provision in their annual Improvement Objectives Report. Gaelicmedium education has been incorporated in the National Priorities framework under the
heading: "To promote equality and help every pupil benefit from education, with particular
regard paid to … Gaelic and other lesser used languages".

c) The Broadcasting Acts 1990 and 1996
The Broadcasting Acts of 1990 and 1996 place a duty on the Secretary of State to make
payments to a Gaelic Broadcasting Fund. Scottish Ministers now make these payments.

d) The Small Landholders (Scotland) Act 1911
The Small Landholders (Scotland) Act 1911 requires that one member of the Scottish Land
Court (SLC) must be a Gaelic-speaker. The Crofters (Scotland) Act 1993 makes a similar
requirement for the Crofters Commission. The 1911 Act implies that Gaelic may be used
before the SLC although there have never been any written proceedings in Gaelic.
e) The Local Government (Gaelic Names)(Scotland) Act 1997
The Local Government (Gaelic Names) (Scotland) Act 1997 allows a local authority to adopt
a Gaelic name. Comhairle nan Eilean Siar (formerly the Western Isles Council) changed its
name under the Act with effect from 1 January 1998.

4

f) The Traffic Signs Regulations and General Directions 1981 Statutory Instrument, made
under the Road Traffic Regulations Act 1984
Under Section 12(4), Scottish Ministers can authorise bilingual road signs. The Scottish
Ministers have authorised bilingual (Gaelic and English) signs on the roads for which the
Highland Council are responsible.

SCOTS
There is no legislation pertaining particularly to the Scots language.

IRISH AND ULSTER-SCOTS

a) The Education Order (Northe rn Ireland) 1989
This Order provides for the teaching of Irish as a modern language as an integral part
of the curriculum.
b) The North/South Co-operation (Implementation Bodies) Northern Ireland Order 1999
This came into operation on 2 December 1999 and established The North/South Language
Body. The Body has two separate agencies, Foras na Gaeilge (the Irish Language Agency)
and Tha Boord o Ulstèr Scotch (the Ulster-Scots Agency).

c) The Belfast Agreement (Good Friday Agreement) - signed on 10 April 1998
In the Belfast Agreement (Good Friday Agreement) the Government of the United Kingdom
committed itself jointly with Ireland to take positive action to support linguistic diversity.
d) The Education (Northern Ireland) Order 1998
Under this Order, the Department of Education for Northern Ireland has a duty to encourage
and facilitate the development of Irish Medium Education.
A promotional body Comhairle na Gaelscolaíochta was established by the Department of
Education in August 2000. Some of the objectives of this body are to promote, facilitate and
encourage the development of Irish- medium education in Northern Ireland, to represent the
sector, and to liaise with and provide the Department with advice on various issues relating to
Irish- medium education.

e) The Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) (Northern Ireland) Order 1995
This introduced legislation empowering Councils to erect street names in any other language
alongside the English name. This has enabled the erection of bilingual street names in English
and Irish and in English and Ulster-Scots.
5

f) The Children’s (Northern Ireland) Order 1995
This places a duty on Health and Social Services Trusts when making any decision with
respect to children or young people in care to give due consideration to their linguistic
background.

2. Please indicate all regional or minority languages, as defined in paragraph (a) of
Article 1 of the Charter which exist on your State’s territory. Indicate also the parts of
the territory of your country where the speakers of such language(s) reside.

WELSH
There are Welsh speakers across the whole of Wales. The highest proportions of Welsh
speakers are found in Gwynedd, the Isle of Anglesey and Ceredigion, where the proportion of
speakers aged 3 or over is 74.3%, 62.6% and 60.9% respectively. The lowest concentrations
of Welsh speakers are found in Blaenau Gwent and Monmouthshire, where the proportion of
speakers is fewer than 7.5%. The percentage of Welsh speakers aged 3 or over in Cardiff, the
capital city of Wales, is 9% according to the Household Interview survey 1997. However, the
numbers of speakers in low density speech areas may still be substantial. For example,
according to the 1991 Census there were 17,171 Welsh speakers aged 3+ in the City of
Cardiff.

SCOTTISH GAELIC
The largest concentrations of Gaelic speakers are found in Na h-Eileanan an Iar (the Western
Isles), the Highlands, and Argyll in Scotland. There are also significant concentrations of
Gaelic speakers across the rest of Scotland : in the urban areas of Glasgow, Edinburgh,
Aberdeen and Inverness.

SCOTS
There are Scots speakers throughout Scotland.

IRISH
The Irish language movement in Northern Ireland is essentially revivalist. The last native
[historically] speakers of Iris h died in the 70s but by then Irish-speaking families had
appeared in different parts of Northern Ireland, including a small cluster in Belfast. Irish is
being transmitted intergenerationally in these families. Irish speakers are spread throughout
Northern Ireland with the largest concentration in the greater Belfast area.

6

ULSTER-SCOTS
Ulster-Scots is defined in legislation (The North/South Co-operation (Implementation Bodies)
Northern Ireland Order 1999) as the variety of the Scots language which has traditionally
been used in parts of Northern Ireland and in Donegal in Ireland. The Ulster-Scots language
movement involves both native speakers and revivalists. The Ulster-Scots language is still
actively spoken and transmitted intergenerationally in various parts of Northern Ireland.

3. Please indicate the number of speakers for each regional or minority language. Specify
the criteria for the definition of “speaker of regional or minority language” that your
country has retained for this purpose.

WELSH
Information from the Welsh House condition survey 1998 revealed that there are 570,000
Welsh speakers - 20.5% of the population aged three and over in Wales.

SCOTTISH GAELIC
The 1991 Census of population recorded 69,510 people aged three or over as being able to
speak, read, or write Gaelic. This is 1.4% of the Scottish population.
SCOTS
The 1991 and 2001 Censuses did not include a question on Scots. However, surveys have
indicated that 30% of respondents said they could speak Scots; a large proportion of the
Scottish population speak Scots to a greater or lesser degree.
Scots is on a linguistic continuum with English. Many Scots literally switch between English
and Scots in mid-sentence by using Scots words and Scottish grammar.

IRISH
The Northern Ireland 1991 census provided a breakdown of speakers by local Government
districts. 142,000 people (9.4% of the population) claimed that they could either speak, read
or write Irish. There was no information on the level of competence.

ULSTER-SCOTS
There was no question on Ulster-Scots in the 1991 census and there is no definitive baseline
information on numbers.

7

As criteria for the definition of a regional or minority language, the United Kingdom applies
the definition given in Article 1 of the Charter.

4. Please indicate the non-territorial languages, as defined in paragraph (c), Article 1 of
the Charter, used on your State’s territory and provide statistical data concerning
speakers.
Not applicable.

5. Please indicate if any body or organisation, legally established, exists in your State
which furthers the protection and development of regional or minority languages. If so,
please list the names and addresses of such organisations.

WELSH
The Welsh Language Body was established as a statutory body by the Welsh Language Act
1993, with the specific remit of promoting and facilitating the Welsh Language. The address
of the language Board is:

Welsh Language Board
Market Chambers
5-7 St Mary's Street
Cardiff
CF10 1AT
www.bwrdd-yr- iaith.org.uk
The Welsh Language Board oversees the development and implementation of language
schemes by public bodies. It grant aids organisations which promote the language, promotes
the language through community initiatives (Mentrau Iaith) carries out positive marketing
campaigns, and gives advice and information to the public on the use of Welsh. It works with
the private and voluntary sectors to encourage the use of Welsh by those sectors. The Welsh
Language Board currently employs 31 members of staff. The Welsh Assembly Government
appoints a Board of Members. The current Board comprises 11 members.
The Welsh Language Board is a body sponsored by the Welsh Assembly Government and
receives grant in aid to support its activities. Grant in aid for the 2001/02 financial year was
set at almost £7million.

SCOTTISH GAELIC/SCOTS
Under Section 23 of the National Heritage (Scotland) Act, the Scottish Executive gives
financial support to a number of Gaelic organisations involved in promoting the language and
culture.

8

Comunn na Gaidhlig, the Gaelic development body, was set up in 1984 to promote and
develop the Gaelic language and culture. It is the main advisory and executive body on Gaelic
and its aim is the promotion of the Gaelic language in all sectors, at national, regional and
local levels; and related project development and management. The address of Comunn na
Gaidhlig is:
Comunn na Gaidhlig
5 Mitchell's Lane
Inverness
IV2 3HQ
Comunn na Gaidhlig's corporate policy evolves from national conference discussions at
which all the main organisations involved with Gaelic development have been represented.
Since 1995, CNAG has organised an annual Còmhdhail (Congress) to discuss and develop
national policies for Gaelic.

Other Gaelic organisations funded by the Scottish Executive are:
•

An Comunn Gaidhealach, which organises the annual Royal National Mod and has a
world-wide membership:
Leverhulme House
Perceval Square
Stornoway
Isle of Lewis
HS1 2DD

•

Comhairle nan Sgoiltean Araich, the Gaelic playgroups association:
53 Church Street
Inverness
IV1 1DR

•

Proiseact nan Ealan, the Gaelic Arts Agency:
10 Shell Street
Stornoway
Isle of Lewis
HS1 2BS

•

Cli, the Gaelic learners body:
North Tower
The Castle
Inverness
IV2 3EE

All these bodies are registered companies limited by guarantee.

9

IRISH/ULSTER-SCOTS
The North/South Language Implementation Body’s two separate agencies, Foras na Gaeilge
(Irish Language Agency) and Tha Boord o Ulstèr Scotch (Ulster-Scots Agency) were
established by the Governments of the UK and Ireland to promote Irish and Ulster-Scots. The
addresses of the agencies are:
Tha Boord O Ulstèr Scotch
5th Floor
Franklin House
10-12 Brunswick Street
BELFAST
BT2 7GE

Foras na Gaeilge
7 Merrion Square
DUBLIN
Ireland

The North/South Language Implementation Body has a statutory responsibility for funding a
range of organisations which promote Irish:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Comhdháil Náisiúnta na Gaeilge
Gael Linn
Conradh na Gaeilge
An tOireachtas
An Comhlachas Náisiúnta Drámaíochta
Cumann na bhFiann
Comhluadar
Iontaobhas Ultach

A promotional body ‘Comhairle na Gaelscolaíochta’ was established in August 2000 to
promote and support the strategic development of, and provide guidance and advice to, the
Irish medium sector.
As part of its statutory duty under the 1998 Education Order, the Department of Education
worked with Comhairle na Gaelscolaíochta to establish the Irish- medium Trust Fund known
as “Iontaobhas na Gaelscolaíochta”. The Trust Fund provides support for the development of
Irish- medium sector by awarding grants to independent Irish-medium schools and helping
with capital costs for Irish-medium schools which have been approved for recurrent grant aid
but which are not yet eligible for capital costs.
The Northern Ireland Executive provides funding for a range of legally established
community and voluntary groups which promote the use of Irish or Ulster-Scots.

10

6. Please indicate if any body or organisation has been consulted on the preparation of
this periodical report. In the case of an affirmative answer, specify which one(s).
The Welsh Language Board has been consulted by the Welsh Assembly Government in the
compilation of this response.
All Northern Ireland Departments and a range of associated bodies were consulted for this
report .

7. Please indicate the measures taken (in accordance with Article 6 of the Charter) to
make better known the rights and duties deriving from the application of the Charter.
Ministers within the Welsh Assembly Government have issued press notices drawing
attention to the Charter. The Minister for Culture, Jenny Randerson issued a press notice in
March 2001 welcoming the ratification of the Charter. Opportunities are taken to highlight the
Charter in speeches given by Ministers.
The Welsh Language Board, the Assembly Government's Sponsored Body, publicised the
Charter on its website and wrote to a large number of organisations (including Public Bodies,
Broadcasters, Unitary, Education and Health Authorities and Trusts) enclosing details about
the Charter following its entry into force on 1 July 2001.
The Minister of State for Scotland, George Foulkes, issued a press notice on 27 March 2001
welcoming ratification of the Charter. Opportunities are taken to highlight the Charter in
speeches given by Ministers.
The Scottish Executive has written to local authorities and other public bodies in Scotland
advising them on Gaelic under the terms of the Charter. The advice included details of the
relevant paragraphs of the Charter, a summary of the Scottish Executive's support for Gaelic,
and requested local authorities and other public bodies to review their policy on Gaelic or to
consider drawing up such a policy.
An Interdepartmental Charter Group with representatives from all Northern Ireland (NI)
Departments, the Northern Ireland Office, NI Court Service, Inland Revenue and Customs
and Excise was set up to monitor implementation of the Charter, provide advice on the
preparation of annual Departmental and Executive implementation reports, advise on resource
implications and develop guidance for Departments.
The NI administrative divisions regularly respond to requests for information from the media,
academics and community and voluntary organisations. In addition ministers and officials
take appropriate opportunities to publicise at conferences, meetings, etc.
The Interdepartmental Charter Group has undertaken to convene a meeting of all interested
organisations and persons to inform and discuss the implementation of the Charter.

11

PART TWO

1. Please indicate what measures your State has taken to apply Article 7 of the Charter to
the regional or minority languages referred to in paragraphs 2 and 4 of part I above,
specifying the different levels of government responsible.

Article 7: Objectives and principles
1. In respect of regional or minority languages, within the territories in which such
languages are used and according to the situation of each language, the Parties shall
base their policies, legislation and practice on the following objectives and principles:

a) the recognition of the regional or minority language as an expression of cultural
wealth;

WELSH
Welsh occupies a central position in the National Curriculum for Wales. All pupils of
statutory school age (5-16) in maintained schools are, apart from very limited statutory
exemptions, required to study Welsh either as a first or second language. In addition, it is a
common requirement of the National Curriculum for Wales that pupils should be given
opportunities, where appropriate, in their study of a subject to develop and apply knowledge
and understanding of the cultural, economic, environmental, historical and linguistic
characteristics of Wales. This is known as the Cwricwlwm Cymreig.
Welsh is widely used as a medium of instruction in schools. Some 32% of primary schools
either has Welsh as the sole or main medium of instruction or use Welsh as a medium of
teaching for part of the curriculum. In the secondary sector, about 22% of schools meet the
statutory definition of a Welsh speaking school which is one where more than half of the
foundation subjects of the National Curriculum, other than English, Welsh and Religious
Education, are taught wholly or partly in Welsh.

SCOTTISH GAELIC
Scottish Gaelic now features at all levels of education in Scotland: pre-school, primary,
secondary, further and higher education, including teacher training. Education through the
medium of Gaelic is offered in 60 primary schools and in some subjects in 14 secondary
schools. In addition, Gaelic as a subject is taught in 39 secondary schools and a number of
primary schools.

SCOTS
National Guidelines on the education of 5-14 year-olds advocate the inclusion of Scots
literature in the Scottish curriculum, and the teaching of a proper awareness and appreciation

12

of the language. The Scottish Cons ultative Council on the Curriculum produces teaching
materials in support of this inclusive policy.

IRISH/ULSTER-SCOTS
The Belfast Agreement commits all participants to “recognise the importance of respect,
understanding and tolerance in relation to linguistic diversity including in Northern Ireland
the Irish language, Ulster Scots and the languages of the various ethnic communities, all of
which are part of the cultural wealth of the island of Ireland”.

GENERAL MEASURES IN ENGLAND
The programme of study for Citizenship in secondary schools, to be introduced as part of the
English National Curriculum from September 2002 will ensure that for the first time all pupils
will be taught about the diversity of national, religious and ethnic identities in the UK and the
need for mutual respect and understanding. Furthermore, within the new national framework
for Personal, Social and Health Education, pupils will be taught from an early age to respect
the differences between people, to appreciate each other’s feelings and points of view, to
recognise the effects of stereo typing, prejudice, discrimination and racism and to develop
skills to challenge them assertively.

b) the respect of the geographical area of each regional or minority language in order to
ensure that existing or new administrative divisions do not constitute an obstacle to the
promotion of the regional or minority language in question.

WALES
Within Wales, local government is divided into 22 principal councils as provided for in The
Local Government (Wales) Act 1994. The Local Government Boundary Commission for
Wales has a responsibility to keep the boundaries of the authorities under review and may
recommend changes to boundaries, including the merger of two or more authorities into one,
if it feels that this is in the interests of "effective and convenient local government".
In operational terms, one of the issues they take into account is the "sense of community". In
parts of Wales, that "sense of community" is one which may be connected to the main first
language of that community. In that case, the Commission might well take this into account in
any proposal to divide or move a community in administrative terms. It would, of course, be
weighed against other pertinent factors.

SCOTLAND
In Scotland the Scottish Executive provides specific grants to education authorities for up to
75% of the cost of providing Gaelic Medium Education. The scheme is advertised to local
authorities every year. Education authorities are expected to offer Gaelic Medium Education
where there is a reasonable level of demand from parents of children to be taught through the
medium of Gaelic.
13

NORTHERN IRELAND
The UK government and the Northern Ireland Assembly are committed through the Belfast
Agreement to “recognise the importance of respect, understanding and tolerance in relation to
linguistic diversity including in Northern Ireland the Irish language and Ulster Scots”.

MEASURES IN ENGLAND
In England, changes to the structure or boundaries of local government (administrative areas)
can only happen if the Secretary of State for the Department of Transport, Local Government
and the Regions requests the independent Electoral Commission to make recommendations
for change. When looking at boundaries the statute (the Local Government Act of 1992)
requires, in carrying out this function, that "the Electoral Commission ... shall have regard to (a) the need to reflect the identities and interests of local communities,
(b) the need to secure effective and convenient local government,

Community identities - which are exemplified by many factors including language - are
therefore taken into consideration when considering boundary change.

c) the need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in order to
safeguard them

WELSH
The Welsh Assembly Government has a rolling programme of legislation under Section
6(1)(o) of the Welsh Language Act so as to ensure that coverage of the public sector is as
comprehensive as possible. When new bodies are established which exercise functions of a
public nature, the Welsh Assembly Government seeks to include them in subordinate
legislation as quickly as possible. The Welsh Assembly Government introduced subordinate
legislation in 2002 naming 17 additional bodies for the purposes of the Welsh Language Act.
The Welsh Language Board undertakes a programme of language promotion designed to raise
the profile of the language across all sectors. The Welsh Language Board grant aids numerous
organisations whose remit includes the promotion of the language. For example, it contributes
funding for the Welsh language nursery education movement which runs almost 1000
community based pre school and mother and toddler groups (attended by 13,367 children
daily).

SCOTTISH GAELIC/SCOTS
The Scottish Executive recognises that Gaelic is a valuable part of the heritage of Scotland
and that Gaelic, like other minority languages in Europe, is endangered. It has a commitment
14

to Gaelic under its Programme for Government. The Executive's expenditure in support of
Gaelic is £13m a year, of which £8.5m is the grant to the Gaelic Broadcasting Committee,
£2.8m is specific grant to Education Authorities, and the balance is support for Gaelic
organisations and projects, including those in education. The Executive provided a further
£1.1m on a non-recurrent basis in 2001-02, of which £450,000 was for Gaelic broadcasting.
The Sport, the Arts and Culture Division of the Scottish Executive Education Department is
responsible for providing policy advice, support and guidance to Ministers, colleagues and
others on issues relating to Scottish Gaelic and Scots.

IRISH/ULSTER-SCOTS
The establishment of the North/South Language Body with 2 separate agencies to promote
Irish and Ulster-Scots is an example of resolute action to promote and safeguard these
languages.
A new Linguistic Diversity Branch (LDB) was set up in 1999 in the Department of Culture,
Arts and Leisure. The Branch is responsible for providing policy advice, support and
guidance to Ministers, colleagues and others on linguistic diversity which includes Irish,
Ulster-Scots, the languages of the ethnic minority communities and British and Irish Sign
language. The LDB commissioned and published (in 2002) a research report entitled
“Establishing the Demand for Services and Activities in the Irish Language”. A parallel
report “Establishing the Demand for and Activities in the Ulster Scots Language” was
commissioned and will be published later this year. The LDB has commissioned research
into demand for early years care and education services in Irish and Ulster-Scots. The LDB
also commissioned in 2000 the production for the Ulster-Scots Language Society of “A
Strategic Plan for the Promotion of the Ulster-Scots language”.
There are opportunities for schools to introduce aspects of Ulster-Scots language, literature
and culture in the curriculum as part of the Cultural Heritage and Education for Mutual
Understanding (EMU) cross-curricular themes. There are no current demands from within the
school system for Ulster-Scots to be taught as a language.
The Linenhall Library held in 2000 a programme of classes in Ulster-Scots language and
literature. The Library in partnership with the Ultach Trust has organised Irish language
classes at beginners, intermediate and advanced levels.
Tha Boord o Ulster-Scots and the
University of Ulster jointly fund the Institute of Ulster-Scots Studies set up in the University
of Ulster.
Irish and Ulster-Scots were also represented in activities associated with the European Year of
Languages.

15

d) The facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of regional or minority languages, in
speech and writing, in public and private life

WELSH
The existence of television channel S4C (which is sponsored by the UK government
Department of Culture, Media and Sport) and the extensive Welsh Language broadcasting
provision of the BBC, both on radio, and especially via its internet fora facilitate and
encourage the public use of Welsh, in speech and in writing.
Schemes such as the Language Sensitivity Training Scheme (Law yn Llaw) commissioned by
the Welsh Language Board and the TWF Project (a programme to encourage new parents to
transmit Welsh to their children) also commissioned by the Welsh Language Board target
private use of Welsh. The Mentrau Iaith (community Language initiatives) mentioned above
also do work in this area.
Menter & Busnes (agency to promote entrepreneurship amongst Welsh speakers) addresses
economic life. The Welsh Language Board and the Welsh Development Agency are also in
dialogue regarding holistic language planning strategies in the field of economic
development.
The Arts Council for Wales provides funding for the Arts through the medium of Welsh as
well as English. Funding from the Welsh Assembly Government also supports the Welsh
Books Council in the publication of books in the Welsh language.
SCOTTISH GAELIC/SCOTS
Since 1990, the Gaelic Television Fund has been administered by Comataidh Teledhisien
Gaidhlig (CTG), the Gaelic Television Committee. This has enabled it to fund extra hours of
Gaelic television. In 1996 the CTG became the Comataidh Croalaidh Gaidhlig (CCG), the
Gaelic Broadcasting Committee, and was given the additional remit to fund Gaelic radio
programmes. Radio na Gaidheal, Gaelic radio, is broadcast by BBC Scotland (BBC Alba).
The Scottish Arts Council (SAC) provides funding for the Arts through the medium of Gaelic,
in particular through Proiseact nan Ealan (the Gaelic Arts Agency). SAC also supports
Comhairle nan Leabhraichean (the Gaelic Books Council) in the publication of books in
Scottish Gaelic.
The Scottish Executive has provided funding for associations which support/publish a Gaelic
newspaper and magazine. There are regular articles in Scottish Gaelic in newspapers serving
the Highlands and Islands. The Scottish Executive has written to all Public Bodies in
Scotland asking them to review their policy on Scottish Gaelic.
Scottish Executive departments also accept correspondence in Scottish Gaelic and reply in
Scottish Gaelic. An information leaflet accompanying the 2001 Census form was available to
the public on request in Scottish Gaelic.

16

IRISH/ULSTER-SCOTS
A number of Northern Ireland government departments have translated key documents into
Irish and Ulster-Scots. An information leaflet accompanying the 2001 Census form was
available to the public on request in Irish or Ulster-Scots. Some government departments have
advertised in newspapers in Irish and Ulster-Scots.
BBC Northern Ireland offers regular programmes in Irish on Radio Ulster and occasional
programmes on Northern Ireland BBC TV. It has also broadcast various radio series and
occasional TV programmes on Ulster-Scots.
Government departments are willing to accept correspondence in Irish and Ulster-Scots and a
voicemail system has been set up for callers who wish to make their enquiry in Irish. Options
for a voicemail system for Ulster-Scots are being considered.

e) The maintenance and development of links, in the fields covered by this Charter,
between groups using a regional or minority language and other groups in the State
employing a language used in identical or similar form, as well as the establishment of
cultural relations with other groups in the State using different languages

WELSH
The Welsh Language Board, out of its grant in aid, gives support to the London Welsh
Medium Junior School. The Welsh Language Board regularly replies to requests for
information regarding the Welsh language from Welsh speakers living in England and
maintains a list of Welsh tutors outside Wales.
Wales is represented on the UK committee of the European Bureau of Lesser Used languages.
The Welsh Language Board co-operates with Irish and Scottish Gaelic-interest groups. This
has taken the form of an internationa l conference on marketing in lesser-used languages
organised by the Welsh Language Board, the Board's membership of the European Bureau for
Lesser-used languages partnership for Diversity Forum, and networking through participation
in many academic and practitioners' conferences.
Individuals with digital satellite receivers can watch S4C transmissions UK wide.

SCOTTISH GAELIC/SCOTS
Scottish Gaelic and Scots are also represented on the UK Committee of the European Bureau
for Lesser Used Languages. The Scottish Executive supports the Columba Initiative, which
was launched in 1997 to develop links between the Gaelic communities of Scotland and
Northern Ireland (and Ireland). The initiative embraces and celebrates the similarities between
the two languages (Irish or Gaeilge, and Scottish Gaelic or Gaidhlig) and cultures and
provides a channel for interaction, cultural exchange and relationship building.

17

IRISH/ULSTER-SCOTS
Iomairt Cholm Cille (ICC) (Columba Initiative) was launched in 1997 to foster support for the
Gaelic Languages and to develop links between Gaelic Scotland and Northern Ireland (and
Ireland). The initiative embraces and celebrates the similarities between the two languages
(Irish and Scots Gaidhlig) and cultures and provides a channel for interaction cultural
exchange and relationship building.
Tha Boord o Ulster-Scots (Ulster-Scots Agency) has developed links with Scotland.
Representatives from the Irish and Ulster-Scots language communities sit on the Board of
Directors of the UK Committee of the European Bureau for Lesser Used Languages
(EBLUL).
The European Bureau for Lesser Used Languages held a Partnership for Diversity Forum in
Northern Ireland on 2 February 2001. Michael McGimpsey, the Northern Ireland Assembly
Minister for Culture, Arts and Leisure made a speech on “Breaking the Moulds” – A New
Future for Linguistic and Cultural Diversity in Northern Ireland”. MPs from Scotland, an
MEP from Wales and representatives of countries across Europe attended the Forum which
provided welcome exposure for what is being done to promote Irish and Ulster-Scots.

f) the provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of regional
and minority languages at all appropriate stages

WELSH
As outlined in the answer to Article 7.1(a) above, the statutory programmes of study for
Welsh make provision for the language to be studied either as a first language or as a second
language according to pupils' linguistic backgrounds.
Welsh medium schools exist at both primary and secondary level.

SCOTTISH GAELIC/SCOTS
See the answer at 7.1(a)

IRISH/ULSTER-SCOTS
Irish language education is available at all levels of the education ladder from pre-school
through to university.
There are opportunities for schools to introduce aspects of Ulster-Scots language, literature
and culture in the curriculum as part of the Cultural Heritage and Education for Mutual
Understanding (EMU) cross-curricular themes. There are no current demands from within the
school system for Ulster-Scots to be taught as a language.
Funding is available through the North/South Language Body for projects to develop
educational materials to support teaching of Irish and Ulster-Scots.
18

MEASURES IN ENGLAND
In England, where there are few speakers of the regiona l/minority languages specified in the
UK’s instrument of ratification for the Charter, the National Curriculum requires secondary
schools to offer one of the working languages of the European Union. After that requirement
has been met other non- EU languages may be offered in accordance with individual school’s
wishes. There is no policy to promote learning of the UK’s regional languages in England.

g) the provision of facilities enabling non-speakers of a regional or minority language
living in the area where it is used to learn if they so desire

WELSH
The Welsh Assembly Government has been keen to develop lifelong learning structures and
policies that reflect Wales’ specific needs and priorities. These include having regard to
Wales as a bilingual natio n.
The National Council for Education and Training for Wales was established in April 2001,
inheriting the work of the Further Education Funding Council for Wales, the skills related
work of the former Training and Enterprise Council’s (TECs) and responsibility for adult
continuing education from Welsh local authorities. The National Council is now known,
along with its sister Higher Education Funding Council, under the brand name ‘ELWa’. In
setting the National Council – ELWa’s initial remit, the Welsh Assembly Government has
indicated that it is to respond to the need for post-16 Welsh medium education, Welsh for
Adults, work place Welsh and skills training opportunities through the medium of Welsh. The
Welsh Language Board has received a £200,000 grant from the National Council - ELWa to
develop a range of teaching and learning materials focusing on the workplace and for parents
of children who attend Welsh medium schools.
To meet growing demand for Welsh language courses in the workplace, the Welsh Language
Board, in partnership with BBC Cymru's Education Department, is to produce on- line visual
and aural teaching materials to support workplace courses and for those interested in
acquiring a working Welsh. On -line tutorials will cover elements such as vocabulary,
pronunciation, dialects and place names which will also prove useful for those who lack the
confidence or find it logistically difficult to attend Welsh courses.

SCOTTISH GAELIC/SCOTS
There are courses in Scottish Gaelic available at all levels, including at a number of Higher
and Further Education Institutes in Scotland. The Scottish Qualifications Authority
commissioned a survey in 2001 of Scottish Gaelic immersion course provision in order to
inform future development and action.

19

IRISH/ULSTER-SCOTS
The education system provides adult education classes in Irish in most parts of Northern
Ireland. The Northern Ireland Executive provides, through the North/South language Body,
support for organisations which offer classes in Irish and Ulster-Scots.
The two universities in Northern Ireland have facilities for studying Irish at undergraduate and
postgraduate levels. Queens University in Belfast offers undergraduates studying for a degree
in English the opportunity to study the Ulster-Scots language as part of a module in
Irish/English.
The Linenhall Library in Belfast has run a number of Ulster-Scots language courses.
The Ulster-Scots Language Society has organised a number of Ulster-Scots language classes
and the Ulster-Scots Academy has produced an Ulster-Scots dictionary and a grammar, as
well as various publications in Ulster-Scots.

h) the promotion of study and research on regional or minority languages at universities
or equivalent institutions

WELSH
The Welsh Assembly, via the Higher Education Funding Council for Wales (HEFCW), funds
the Centre for Advanced Welsh and Celtic Studies and the University of Wales Board of
Celtic Studies. Among its other research work, the University of Wales Board of Celtic
Studies is engaged in research work to produce an academic dictionary of the language. In
addition, HEFCW also supports research into Celtic studies at the University of Wales in
Aberystwyth, the University of Wales in Bangor, Cardiff University and the University of
Wales in Swansea. Finally the Assembly via HEFCW supports the University of Wales Press,
which publishes academic works on the Welsh language, history and literature – including
some works in the medium of Welsh. The University of Wales also funds the post of Welsh
Medium Development Officer to increase Welsh medium teaching provision at the constituent
institutions of the University.

SCOTTISH GAELIC/SCOTS
Three Scottish Universities, Edinburgh, Glasgow and Aberdeen, have Departments of Celtic
Studies with undergraduate and post-graduate students. The colleges of the UHI Millennium
Institute promote the study of and research into Gaelic.
The Scots language and literature may be studied at a number of universities in Scotland.
The Scottish Arts Council provides funding in support of the Dictionary of the Older Scottish
Tongue, the Scottish National Dictionary Association and the Scots Language Resource
Centre. The two dictionary bodies are merging into a new Scottish Language Dictionaries
body with effect from 1 May 2002.

20

IRISH/ULSTER-SCOTS
Opportunities are also available at both local universities for research into Irish and UlsterScots.
Tha Boord o Ulstèr Scotch (The Ulster-Scots Agency) and the University of Ulster opened an
Institute of Ulster-Scots Studies on 3 January 2001.

MEASURES IN ENGLAND
Six English Universities offer courses in Welsh and Irish. In England, Manchester University
offers courses in Welsh. Liverpool University, the University of North London, Bath Spa
University College and St Mary’s College all provide courses in Irish language studies.

i) the promotion of appropriate types of transnational exchanges, in the fields covered by
this Charter, for regional or minority languages used in identical or similar form in two
or more States

WELSH
The Welsh Assembly Government provides funding to support the teaching of Welsh in the
Chubut province of Argentina. From 2000-2003, the term of the current project, annual
funding provides for teachers from Wales to live and teach Welsh in the province and for
students from Chubut to visit Wales for an intensive summer school. It also provides training
for native teachers to increase the capacity to teach the language within the resident
population. Almost 700 people in Chubut are currently involved in classes provided by the
project.
The British Council is responsible for a project known as Dolen Ysgolion, which links Welsh
medium schools in Wales and schools in Chubut via the internet.

SCOTTISH GAELIC
The Nova Scotia Initiative encourages cultural and economic links between the Gaelic
communities in Scotland and Nova Scotia, Canada. The Initiative seeks to build on the unique
connection that exists between the Gaelic-speaking areas of Scotland and Nova Scotia on the
basis of:
•
•
•
•
•

a common language
a common culture
family ties
emigration and
the example of entrepreneurship led by people of Gaelic descent

21

IRISH/ULSTER-SCOTS
Transnational co-operation is most evident in the North/South Language Implementation
Body whose two Agencies promote both languages throughout the island of Ireland. The
North/South Language Body is funded jointly by the Northern Ireland Executive and the
Government of Ireland.
See also the ‘Columba initiative’ in (e) on transnational exchanges between the UK and
Ireland.

2. The parties undertake to eliminate, if they have not yet done so, any unjustified
distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference relating to the use of a regional or
minority language and intended to discourage or endanger the maintenance or
development of it. The adoption of special measures in favour of regional or minority
languages aimed at promoting equality between the users of these languages and rest of
the population or which take due account of their specific conditions is not considered
to be an act of discrimination against the users of more widely used languages.
The Welsh Assembly Government is committed to promoting equality of opportunity for all
people.
There is no legislation or public administration rule/practice in Scotland or Northern Ireland
that supports any unjustified distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference relating to the use
of regional or minority languages and intended to discourage or endanger the maintenance or
development of such languages.

3. The parties undertake to promote by appropriate measures, mutual understanding
between all the linguistic groups of the country and in particular the inclusion of
respect, understanding and tolerance in relation to regional or minority languages
among the objectives of education and training provided within their countries and
encouragement of the mass media to pursue the same objective.
The Welsh Assembly Government recognises that the good will towards the language of the
majority of the population of Wales which does not speak Welsh is necessary to its future
well being. Full regard is given to this in the development of policy on the language.
The Scottish Executive's National Cultural Strategy states that: "A wide range of languages
other than English, Scots and Gaelic is spoken in Scotland, representing the culturally diverse
nature of the population and recent patterns of settlement. It is important that there are
opportunities for all Scots to celebrate their language and traditions and to participate fully in
the cultural life of their own community and of Scotland. The different languages and dialects
spoken in Scotland provide clear links with the family and community traditions which enrich
our culture."
This principle is also underpinned in the Belfast Agreement as the UK government and
Northern Ireland Executive are committed to recognise the importance of respect,
understanding and tolerance in relation to linguistic diversity including in Northern Ireland
the Irish language and Ulster-Scots.
22

4. In determining their policy with regard to regional or minority languages, the Parties
shall take into consideration the needs and wishes expressed by the groups which use
such languages. They are encouraged to establish bodies, if necessary, for the purpose
of advising the authorities on all matters pertaining to regional or minority languages.

WELSH
The Welsh Language Board gives advice to the Assembly on Welsh language issues when
requested to do so and has a statutory duty under Section 3 of the Welsh Language Act 1993
to do so. The Welsh Language Board's views are sought on policies as they develop. The
Welsh Language Board presents policy documents to the Welsh Assembly Government and
has made formal submissions and given advice to the Assembly's policy reviews of the Welsh
language and the Welsh Language in Education. The Welsh Language Board also has a
monitoring role in relation to the Welsh Assembly Government's own Welsh Language
Scheme, and that of other public and Crown Bodies.

SCOTTISH GAELIC
An Advisory Group on Gaelic was set up in December 2000 to advise Ministers on Gaelic
policy. This Group consulted widely with the Gaelic community before providing Ministers
with an interim report in December 2001 and a Strategic Plan for Gaelic in March 2002. The
combined report will be published in May 2002.

IRISH/ULSTER-SCOTS
The Linguistic Diversity Branch of the Northern Ireland Executive’s Department of Culture,
Arts and Leisure (DCAL) was established in February 1999. The Branch is responsible for
providing policy advice on support and guidance to Ministers, colleagues and others on
linguistic diversity which includes Irish and Ulster-Scots. This Branch liaises with the
North/South Language Body and with Irish and Ulster-Scots groups.
The functions of the agencies of the North/South Language Body include advising both
administrations, public bodies and other groups in the private and voluntary sectors.
DCAL has initiated a research exercise which will involve all relevant parties in articulating a
vision for Ulster-Scots language and culture and developing an agreed strategy for putting it
into effect. A draft strategy is anticipated by December 2002.

23

5. The parties undertake to apply, mutandis mutandis, the principles listed in paragraphs 1
to 4 above to non-territorial languages. However, as far as these languages are
concerned, the nature and scope of the measures to be taken to give effect to this
Charter shall be determined in a flexible manner, bearing in mind the needs and
wishes, and respecting the traditions and characteristics, of the groups which use the
languages concerned.

Not applicable.

PART THREE

LANGUAGE: WELSH

Article 8 - Education

The United Kingdom’s obligations for Welsh under Article 8 are:

1a (i)

to make available pre-school education in Welsh;

Pre-school education is available to all parents/guardians through the medium of
Welsh: there is a statutory entitlement to at least half-time provision from the child’s
3rd birthday. Voluntary sector provision for under-threes is available in 448 nursery
groups throughout Wales and for 3+ age group in 580 groups. Local Education
Authorities co-ordinate pre-school provision on a County Basis via Early Years
Education and Childcare Partnerships.

1b (i)

to make available primary education in Welsh;

Primary Welsh medium and bilingual models of provision are available to all parents or
guardians who so desire it for their children in all 22 Local Authority Areas. Welsh
medium provision is available in 440 schools where Welsh is the sole/main medium of
instruction, and bilingual provision in 87 schools where Welsh medium provision is
used for part of the curriculum. Welsh as a second language taught in the remainder of
schools.

1c (i)

to make available secondary education in Welsh;

Bilingual/Welsh medium secondary education is available throughout Wales to varying
degrees. There are 52 “Welsh speaking Schools” in the secondary sector in Wales, but
Local Authorities who do not provide such a school ensure provision via cross-county
agreements and by paying transportation costs for pupils who desire Welsh
24

medium/bilingual provision. Defining categories of bilingual provision is complex and
considerable local variation exists in percentages of subjects delivered through the
medium of Welsh. Welsh as a subject has been compulsory for all pupils up to the age of
16 since 1999.

1d (iv)

Technical and vocational education:
to apply one of the measures provided for under (i) to (iii) above at least to
those pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number
considered sufficient;

Technical and Vocational qualifications may be delivered by Welsh speaking schools and
Further Education Colleges. National Vocational Qualifications are being developed
bilingually via a project funded by the National Assembly for Wales. All technical
subjects may be externally assessed to GCSE level via the Welsh Joint Education
Committee. Other awarding bodies and vocational qualifications assessed bilingually, or
through the medium of Welsh, account for around 2.5% of 16+ provision. Some progress
has been made to date in the use of information and communication technology to deliver
Welsh medium provision, but work is at an early stage.

1e (iii)

if, by reason of the role of the State in relation to higher education
institutions, sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii) cannot be applied, to encourage
and/or allow the provision of university or other forms of higher education
in Welsh or of facilities for the study of Welsh as university or higher
education subjects;

Welsh medium provision is allowed in Higher Education. It accounts for around 1.5% of
the total provision.

1f (ii)

to offer Welsh as a subject of adult and continuing education;

Welsh as a subject is taught in further and continuing education to advanced level. Welsh
for Adults courses are available throughout Wales at several levels of learning, including
beginners’ courses, workplace courses and immersion models.

1g

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture
which is reflected by Welsh;

Welsh history and culture is reflected in the Curriculum for Wales at all levels via the
“Cwricwlwm Cymreig”, which ensures a Welsh dimension and ethos for the National
Programmes of Study. This includes other subject areas such as Music, Art and Design,
Geography and Anglo-Welsh text in English as a taught subject.

25

1h

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to
implement paragraphs a to g;

In- house training is provided for Welsh for Adults tutors in further education and higher
education institutions. A new national training pack and video that includes 26 training
modules comprising 120 hours of tuition for new tutors and experienced staff are currently
being developed by Cardiff University in conjunction with the University of Wales,
Bangor. Once the pack is ready, ELWa (Education and Learning Wales) will be holding
discussions with providers to discuss the possibility of modifying the pack to create
TEFL-type qualifications fo r Welsh for Adults tutors. Some Welsh medium initial teacher
training is also available in higher education colleges/Universities in Wales.

1i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the
measures taken and progress achieved in establishing or developing the
teaching of Welsh and for drawing up periodic reports of their findings,
which will be made public.

The Welsh Language Board oversees the development of Welsh Language Schemes under
the Welsh Language Act 1993. These strategy documents are produced by public bodies
and outline steps to be taken to develop Welsh medium and bilingual provision. Local
Education Authorities and the further and higher education system produce Schemes for
approval by the Welsh Language Board. Sche me targets operate within three year
implementation timescales. Other bodies have statutory roles in this context, including
ELWA (Education and Learning Wales), ACCAC (the Curriculum and Qualifications
Authority for Wales – Welsh acronym), GTCW (General Teaching Council for Wales),
WJEC (Welsh Joint Education Committee) and the Welsh Assembly Government

Article 9 – Judicial authorities

The United Kingdom’s obligations for Welsh under Article 9 are:

1a

in criminal proceedings:
ii.

to guarantee the accused the right to use Welsh;

The right to speak Welsh in any criminal proceedings in Wales is given by Section
22(i) of the Welsh Language Act 1993. Documents in Welsh are permitted by rules of Court.
iii.

to provide that requests and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not be
considered inadmissible solely because they are formulated in Welsh;

Sections 22 – 24 of the Welsh Language Act guarantee the use of Welsh in courts in
Wales. The use of Welsh in courts elsewhere in the UK is discretionary.
Responsibility for criminal proceedings is split. The Crown and Appeals Courts are
covered by the Court Service’s Welsh Language Scheme. This provides that in the
administration of justice in Wales the English and Welsh languages should be treated
on the basis of equality. Magistrates Courts in Wales are the responsibility of four
26

Magistrates Courts Committees, all of which have their own Welsh Language Scheme
in place.

1b

in civil proceedings:
ii.

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he
or she may use Welsh without thereby incurring additional expense;

The right to speak Welsh in any civil proceedings in Wales is given by Section 22(i)
of the Welsh Language Act 1993. Documents in Welsh are permitted by rules of
Court.

iii.

to allow documents and evidence to be produced in Welsh,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

Civil Courts are covered by the Court Service’s Welsh Language Scheme. As stated
above, this provides that in the administration of justice in Wales the English and
Welsh languages should be treated on the basis of equality. The Court Service’s
Welsh Language Unit will meet the cost of translating documents from or to Welsh. If
it is possible that the Welsh language may be used by any party or witness, the parties
or their legal representatives must inform the court of the fact so that appropriate
arrangements can be made for the management and listing of the case. If costs are
incurred as a result of a party failing to comply with this direction, a costs order may
be made against him or his legal representative. Hearings may be conducted entirely in
Welsh on an ad hoc basis and without notice when all parties and witnesses directly
involved at the time consent.

1c

in proceedings before courts concerning administrative matters:
ii.

to allow, whenever a litigant has to appear in person before a court, that he
or she may use Welsh without thereby incurring additional expense;

iii.

to allow documents and evidence to be produced in Welsh,
if necessary by the use of interpreters and translations;

The cost of translating documents and evidence for Court and Tribunal proceedings
that come within the Lord Chancellor’s Department and the Court Service’s
responsibility, is met through the Department’s Welsh Language Unit. As explained
above, a litigant may use Welsh at a hearing in Wales, but if costs are incurred as a
result of insufficient notice, a costs order may be made.

1d

to take steps to ensure that the application of sub-paragraphs (i) and (iii) of
paragraphs b and c above and any necessary use of interpreters and
translations does not involve extra expense for the persons concerned.

27

As explained above, by virtue of the Welsh Language Schemes of the criminal courts,
translation of oral evidence is provided at no extra expense to those giving evidence.
Documents are also translated free of charge.
The budgets of the Civil Courts include provisions for translation. The Welsh
Language Schemes of Tribunals and other legal proceedings require the provision of
translation facilities at no extra cost to the persons concerned.
2b

not to deny the validity, as between the parties, of legal documents drawn up
within the country solely because they are drafted in Welsh, and to provide
that they can be invoked against interested third parties who are not users of
Welsh on condition that the contents of the document are made known to
them by the person(s) who invoke(s) it;
Invoking a legal document against a third party would be covered by the Court
Service’s Welsh Language Scheme as referred to in relation to civil proceedings.
Legislation drafted by the National Assembly for Wales is in bilingual form.

Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services

The United Kingdom’s obligations for Welsh under Article 10 are:

1a (i) to ensure that the administrative authorities use Welsh;
The Welsh Language Act 1993 includes provisions requiring public bodies [but not
voluntary and private bodies] to prepare and implement Welsh Language Schemes.
These Schemes need to set out what services and activities are to be provided in
Welsh, how they are to be provided, and by when. They also need to set out how the
body concerned will ensure the Scheme is being implemented.
The process of preparing and implementing Schemes is overseen by the Welsh
Language Board, a statutory body. The Board ensures Schemes comply with the Act.
Where disputes occur between the Board and individual bodies, they may be referred
to the National Assembly for Wales, who can give directions - empowered by court
order if necessary.
The Welsh Assembly Government has developed a Welsh Language Scheme for the
approval of the Welsh Language Board. The former Welsh Office implemented a full
Welsh Langua ge Scheme which received approval from the Welsh Language Board in
1996.
Some of the bodies are also regulators or supervisors of services which are provided
by others, for example the Audit Commission, The Commission for Health
Improvement, and ESTYN (Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education and Training in
Wales), who monitor the quality of services in particular areas of public service. In
their Schemes, these regulatory bodies need to set out how they will monitor the
quality of service in Welsh as part of their function. In this manner, the provision of
28

public services in Welsh, and the regulation of those services, is being normalised and
integrated into orthodox administrative processes.
Although central government departments are not defined as pub lic bodies for the
purpose of the Welsh Language Act, the UK government gave an undertaking that
departments who provide services to the public in Wales will prepare schemes and
comply with the provisions of the Act. If a Crown body decides to develop a Welsh
Language Scheme, the Welsh Language Board must approve it in the same way as for
public bodies. Many central government departments and agencies do have an
approved scheme (a list is at Annex A).
To date some 200 Schemes have been approved, and more are in the course of
preparation. The National Assembly for Wales has powers to name further public
bodies, thus ensuring the Act applies to new or reorganised administrative authorities.
The Board has introduced methods to measure whether bodies are complying with
their Schemes. The Board reports considerable progress since the introduction of the
Act, though not all bodies are performing to the same level.

1b

to make available widely used administrative texts and forms for the
population in Welsh or in bilingual versions;

This is a requirement of individual Welsh Language Schemes – see 1a(i) above. Items
such as forms are of high priority within language schemes.

1c

to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in Welsh.

This is a requirement of individual Welsh Language Schemes – see a(i) above. Where
previous legislation or regulation creates a barrier to the issuing of documents in
Welsh, new legislation or regulation can correct this. The Regulatory Reform Act
2001 provides a mechanism to deal with areas which are otherwise unlikely to be
given Parliamentary time. The areas where barriers remain are now very limited, and
of those, some [e.g. the passport] stem from European law, not UK law.

2a

the use of Welsh within the framework of the regional or local authority;

This is a requirement of individual Welsh Language Schemes.

2b

the possibility for users of Welsh to submit oral or written applications in
Welsh;

This is a requirement of individual Welsh Language Schemes.

2c

the publication by regional authorities of their official documents also in
Welsh;

This is a requirement of individual Welsh Language Schemes.
29

2d

the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in Welsh;

This is a requirement of individual Welsh Language Schemes.

2e

the use by regional authorities of Welsh in debates in their assemblies,
without excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

This is a requirement of individual Welsh Language Schemes.

2f

the use by local authorities of Welsh in debates in their assemblies, without
excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

This is a requirement of individual Welsh Language Schemes.

2g

the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official
language(s), of traditional and correct forms of place-names in Welsh;

This is a requirement of those Welsh Language Schemes where the body concerned is
responsible for or uses place names in its work.

3a

to ensure that Welsh is used in the provision of the service;

This is a requirement of individual Welsh Language Schemes. The requirement to
provide services in Welsh needs to be passed on to any contractor or agent or partner
who delivers the service on the administrative bodies’ behalf.

4a

translation or interpretation as may be required;

This is a requirement of individual Welsh Language Schemes.

4b

recruitment and, where necessary, training of the officials and other public
service employees required;

This is a requirement of individual Welsh Language Schemes. This is a sensitive area,
which needs to be taken forward gradually and strategically, avoiding discrimination.

5

to allow the use or adoption of family names in Welsh, at the request of those
concerned.

This has long been the practice. The Registration of Births and Deaths Regulations
1987 enabled parents to specify a surname which was not necessarily the same as their own,
in line with the customs of their own culture.

30

Article 11 – Media

The United Kingdom’s obligations for Welsh under Article 11 are:

1a

to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:

i.

to ensure the creation of at least one radio station and one television channel
in the regional or minority languages;

BBC Radio Cymru started broadcasting as an entirely Welsh language Radio station
on 1 January 1977. Other regional and commercial stations also broadcast certain
amounts of Welsh language programming, notably Radio Ceredigion, based in
Aberystwyth. Radio Cymru broadcasts around 100 hours of Welsh language
programming per week.
S4C (Sianel Pedwar Cymru), the Welsh language fourth television channel in Wales
first broadcast on 1 November 1982. S4C has created 2 digital television channels, the
first of which broadcasts around 14-15 hours of Welsh language programming per
day, and the second, which provides coverage of the deliberations of the National
Assembly for Wales, and certain Welsh cultural festivals. Viewers possessing correct
digital reception apparatus may choose the language of soundtrack whilst viewing this
second S4C channel.

1d

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and
audiovisual works in Welsh;

Sgrîn, the Media Agency for Wales, is the primary organisation for film, television
and new media in Wales, and is funded jointly by the Arts Council of Wales, BBC
Wales, British Film Institute, Film Council, S4C, TAC (Teledwyr Annibynol Cymru Welsh Independent Television Producers) and the Welsh Development Agency. It is
responsible for the formulation of a strategic vision for the development of the
industrial and cultural aspects of these industries to their full potential. It is
responsible for awarding National Lottery film production funding for works which
may be in Welsh or English. It also awards exhibition grant aid which is used to
support or assist in exhibiting both Welsh and English- language films.

1e (i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least
one newspaper in Welsh;
There are a large number of news publications available in Welsh. ‘Y Cymro’ and
‘Golwg’ appear weekly, ‘Barn’, a current affairs magazine, monthly, and 61 local
[mostly monthly] regional papers, or Papurau Bro.

1f (ii) to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual
productions in Welsh;

31

Sgrîn, the Media Agency for Wales, administers funding for audio-visual productions
in Welsh and English. This includes the core funding from its funding bodies, and, in
co-operation with Media Antenna Cymru Wales and the European Commission, the
MEDIA programme, which has been used to support the development and distribution
of audio-visual works in Welsh.

2

to guarantee freedom of direct reception of radio and television broadcasts
from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or similar form
to Welsh, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language; and to ensure
that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and free
circulation of information in the written press in a language used in
identical or similar form to Welsh.

All these criteria are current practice. No legal obstructions exist to prevent reception
of Welsh al nguage media programming from neighbouring countries. In practice, in many
areas, Welsh language programming can be heard and viewed in England and abroad. Radio
Cymru is now streamed live on the internet and digital satellite, and S4C 1 & 2 are available
in Wales and outside on digital satellite. BBC Wales provides an extensive interactive Welsh
Language service on the internet, which contains many streaming audio and video broadcasts
in Welsh.

3

to ensure that the interests of the users of Welsh are represented or taken
into account within such bodies as may be established in accordance with the
law with responsibility for guaranteeing the freedom and pluralism of the
media.

Many bodies undertake pertinent activities in this field. Amongst them, the Press
Complaints Commission and OFTEL (Office of Telecommunications), which is about
to publish its statutory language scheme. The Radio Authority and Broadcasting
Standards Commission have been named by the National Assembly under Section
6(i)0 of the Welsh language act to prepare a statutory Welsh language scheme. The
Independent Broadcasting Commission also has responsibilities in this field. The UK
government recently announced a Bill setting up OFCOM (Office of
Communications) which is already in discussions with the Welsh Language Board
regarding a statutory language scheme. OFCOM will draw many of the
aforementioned bodies together.

Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities

The United Kingdom’s obligations for Welsh under Article 12 are:

1a

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to Welsh and foster
the different means of access to works produced in Welsh;

The Welsh Arts Council provides direct grant aid to many Welsh language cultural
activities. The Welsh Books Council funds much of the Welsh language publishing
32

industry, and independent publishing houses frequently publish works in Welsh on
paper, and CD Rom. All public bodies mentioned in this paragraph are sponsored
bodies of the National Assembly for Wales. Another Assembly project, Cymru’n
Creu, will provide a bilingual portal site for all cultural activities in Wales.

1b

to foster the different means of access in other languages to works produced
in Welsh by aiding and developing translation, dubbing, postsynchronisation and subtitling activities;

The EU-funded Mercator Minority Language Network based in Aberystwyth, hosts
the Welsh Literature Abroad project, which promotes literature produced in Welsh
into other languages. Several publishing houses have also translated works composed
in Welsh into English, for example Pestilence (William Owen Roberts, translation of
Y Pla). S4C subtitles a large proportion of its Welsh language programming in
English, and in simplified Welsh (for those learning Welsh) as a ma tter of course. S4C
International exists to promote the Welsh language produce of S4C abroad.

1c

to foster access in Welsh to works produced in other languages by aiding and
developing translation, dubbing, post -synchronisation and subtitling
activities;

The Mercator Project in Aberystwyth mentioned above carries out translation work.
Many classic works of French Literature have been translated into Welsh. S4C
regularly airs programmes dubbed from other languages into Welsh.

1d

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural
activities of various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the
knowledge and use of Welsh and cultures in the undertakings which they
initiate or for which they provide backing;

When orga nising or supporting cultural activities, public bodies should comply with
their statutory Welsh Language Schemes. When public bodies such as the Arts
Council Wales provide financial backing or a grant for cultural activities, the
applicants are asked how they will reflect the bilingual nature of the community in the
event they wish to hold, thus forming part of the selection criteria.

1e

to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or
supporting cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full
command of Welsh, as well as of the language(s) of the rest of the
population;

Public bodies and third party contractors are bound by the staffing sections of the
organisations' Welsh Language Schemes and therefore, must have an overview of their
linguistic skills capacity to ensure that the service can be delivered in the service users
preferred language. Linguistic capacity would also be a consideration within the grants
allocation criteria of public bodies such as Arts Council Wales.

33

1f

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of Welsh in
providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

When organising public activities (including public meetings, conferences and cultural
activities), Public bodies with language schemes are required to offer, establish and act upon
the service user’s language choice. Direct participation by representatives of minority
language users can be encouraged by ensuring a bilingual culture to the event in terms of the
visual displays and by providing simultaneous translation facilities.

1g

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for
collecting, keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works produced in
Welsh;

The National Library of Wales in Aberystwyth, one of 6 Copyright libraries in the
UK, holds a copy of every book published in the UK. It also houses copies of all
University Theses (of Research Masters and Doctorate Level), and copies of taught
Masters’ theses relating to Wales in any way. The National Library also has an
extensive collection of works in other Celtic languages, notably Breton. A high
proportion of the Library’s staff speaks English and Welsh, and it is a thoroughly
bilingual institution. The Cymru’n Creu project described above will also be working
in this field.

1h

if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and
terminological research services, particularly with a view to maintaining and
developing appropriate administrative, commercial, economic, social,
technical or legal terminology in Welsh.

The Welsh Language Board has been at the forefront of Corpus planning activities and
terminological standardisation since its inception. It has co-ordinated the production of
the following Welsh - English dictionaries, amongst others:
• A Dictionary of Procedural Terms for the National Assembly for Wales
• A Dictionary of Finance Terms
• A Dictionary of Educational Terms
• A Glossary of Bilingual Terms for Shops

It also convenes a panel of academic experts and practitioners for the standardisation
of terms and place names. The University of Wales, Bangor, also has a pioneering
terminological standardisation unit, within the Canolfan Bedwyr Centre. The Board
has given substantial grant and project aid to the Centre to produce spellchecking and
grammar checking software for Welsh, and a computerised dictionary, CySill, which
serves as a plug- in to Word processing programs. Another similar CD Rom dictionary,
the Termiadur Ysgol, was commissioned by ACCAC, the Curriculum and
Qualifications Authority for Wales.
The Board is also active in the field of translation, and gives substantial funding to
Cymdeithas Cyfieithwyr Cymru/The Association of Welsh Translators, and its website
includes a list of accredited translators. Future developments include research into the
widespread use of networked translation memory software.
34

Modern legal dictionaries of Welsh also exist, and the University of Wales has funded
an undergraduate Welsh- medium module textbook (‘Cymraeg a’r Gyfraith’ – Welsh
and the Law) to teach law students Law terminology and procedures through the
medium of Welsh.

2

In respect of territories other than those in which Welsh is traditionally used,
if the number of users of Welsh justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or
provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in accordance with the
preceding paragraph.

The Welsh Language Board provided £25,000 in grant aid to the London Welsh
Medium primary school during the present financial year. The National Assembly for
Wales provides funding and the British Council, and Cardiff University jointly
oversee and manage a project to teach Welsh in Chubut, Argentina, where a
substantial Welsh-speaking community exists. There are several active Welsh
language societies and networks in cities in the UK outside Wales, and the National
Eisteddfod of Wales network Cymru a’r Byd (Wales and the World) is also relevant in
this respect.

3

to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their cultural policy abroad,
for Welsh and the cultures it reflects.

The Welsh language is acknowledged as a marketing tool as well as a medium within
the tourism industry in Wales. The Welsh language is recognised as a distinctive ‘raw
material’ within the Welsh Tour ist Board’s Cultural Tourism Strategy and its ‘Sense
of Place Toolkit’. The Welsh Language Board made a formal submission on
‘Promoting Wales Abroad’ to the Welsh Affairs Committee of the UK Parliament in
November 2000.

Article 13 – Economic and social life

The United Kingdom’s obligations for Welsh under Article 13 are:

1a

to eliminate from their legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting
without justifiable reasons the use of Welsh in documents relating to
economic or social life, particularl y contracts of employment, and in
technical documents such as instructions for the use of products or
installations;

There are no legislative provisions preventing the use of Welsh in economic or social
life other than a few outstanding areas where steps have yet to be taken to remove barriers
stemming from historical legislation. [See 10 1.c above]. Barriers still remain in practice,
however, because for instance, contracts of employment are provided in Welsh at the
discretion of employers. Instructions for the use of products or installations, or information
about them, also are rarely provided in Welsh – while there are no legislative barriers, there is
no obligation on companies to do so.
35

1c

to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of Welsh in connection
with economic or social activities;

The main economic agencies in Wales, such as the Welsh Development Agency
operate under a Welsh Language Scheme.

2b

in the economic and social sectors directly under their control (public
sector), to organise activities to promote the use of Welsh;

There are examples of such activities, such as the Wales Tourist Board’s Cultural
Tourism Strategy (supported in some localities by a small grants scheme) and the
Welsh Development Agency’s Taste of Wales project, where the use of Welsh is
encouraged as part of a broader economic objective. The Welsh Language Board's
Bilingual Design awards are a further example.
Indirectly, the provision of services in Welsh by bodies in the economic and social
sectors is a form of passive promotion of the language.

2c

to ensure that social care facilities such as hospitals, retirement homes and
hostels offer the possibility of receiving and treating in their own language
persons using Welsh who are in need of care on grounds of ill-health, old
age or for other reasons;

In the public sector, this is a requirement of individual Welsh Language Schemes – see
a(i) above. However, the Welsh Language Board reports that there is considerable
scope for improvement by health and social care public bodies in implementing their
Schemes. Private sector care or treatment in Welsh is minimal.
The Minister for Health and Social Care in the National Assembly for Wales has now
established a Task Force to tackle these issues.

2e

to arrange for information provided by the competent public authorities
concerning the rights of consumers to be made available in Welsh.

This is a requirement of individual Welsh Language Schemes (such as that of the
Welsh Consumer's Council).
ANNEX A

Central government departments and agencies which have an approved Welsh
Language scheme:

National Savings
Office of National Statistics
OFWAT
Driver and Vehicle Licensing Authority
36

Companies House
Teacher Training Authority
Health and Safety Executive
Contributions Agency
Inland Revenue
HM Customs and Excise
Valuation Office
Employment Service
Benefits Agency
Child Support Agency
HM Land Registry
Department of Social Security
OFGEM
Forestry Commission
Defence Administration
Ministry of Defence
Crown Prosecution Service
Department for Education and Skills
Department for Trade and Industry
British Cattle Movement Service
Intervention Board
Ordnance Survey
Driving Standards Agency
Food Standards Agency
Home Office

LANGUAGE: SCOTTISH GAELIC

Article 8 - Education

Under the Education (Scotland) Act 1980 education authorities in Scotland have a duty to
provide teaching of Gaelic in Gaelic-speaking areas. Education authorities also have the
power to provide nursery schools and nursery classes, which may include the teaching of
Gaelic in Gaelic-speaking areas. The Grants for Gaelic Language Education (Scotland)
Regulations 1986 empowered Ministers to provide grants to education authorities for the
teaching of Gaelic or the teaching of other subjects in Gaelic.
The Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Act 2000 requires education authorities to report on
their plans for Gaelic provision. Gaelic, which includes Gaelic- medium education, has also
been incorporated in the National Priorities Framework for schools in Scotland.

37

The United Kingdom’s obligations for Scottish Gaelic under Article 8 are:

1a (iii) Pre-school education
to apply one of the measures provided for under (i) and (ii) above at least to
those pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered
sufficient;
There are currently 403 children in Gaelic-medium pre-school education in 36
registered nurseries in Scotland. Most, but not all, of these are linked to a primary
school with a Gaelic- medium unit.

b (iv) Primary education
to apply one of the measures provided for under (i) and (iii) above at least to
those pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered
sufficient;
There is one dedicated Gaelic- medium primary school in Glasgow, and a further 58
Gaelic- medium units in primary schools in Scotland, with a total of 1859 pupils.
Pupils in Gaelic- medium education receive most of their instruction in Gaelic. Every
pupil is expected to be able to speak, read and write Gaelic when his or her primary
education is completed.

c (iv) Secondary education
to apply one of the measures provided for under (i) and (iii) above at least to
those pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number
considered sufficient;
There are 14 secondary schools, mostly situated in the Highlands and Western Isles,
offering Gaelic- medium education in some subjects, with a total of 302 pupils. In
addition, there are 2131 pupils in Gaelic (Learners) Classes and 928 in Gàidhlig
(Fluent Speakers) Classes across Scotland.

d (iv) Technical and vocational education
to apply one of the measures provided for under (i) and (iii) above at least to
those pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number
considered sufficient;
Technical and vocational training in Scottish Gaelic is available at Sabhal Mòr Ostaig,
the Gaelic College on Skye, and at Lews Castle College in Stornoway.

e (iii) if, by reasons of the role of the State in relation to higher education
institutions sub paragraphs (i) and (ii) cannot be applied, to encourage
and/or allow the provision of university or other forms of higher education
38

in Scottish Gaelic or of facilities for the study of Scottish Gaelic as university
or higher education subjects;
Three universities in Scotland (the universities of Aberdeen, Edinburgh and Glasgow)
have Departments of Celtic Studies with both undergraduate and post-graduate
students. Furthermore, the colleges of the UHI Millennium Institute (UHIMI),
particularly Lews Castle College, Stornoway, and Sabhal Mòr Ostaig, Skye, promote
the study of and research into Gaelic.

f (iii) if the public authorities have no direct competence in the field of adult
education, to favour and/or encourage the offering of Scottish Gaelic as a
subject of adult and continuing education;
As well as the courses available at Lews Castle College and Sabhal Mòr Ostaig, there
are Gaelic immersion courses at a number of colleges including Clydebank, Falkirk
and Inverness Colleges.

g

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture
which is reflected by Scottish Gaelic;

The ‘Curriculum and Assessment in Scotland National Guidelines - Gaelic 5-14’
recommend that as well as developing language skills it is "equally necessary to
develop a parallel awareness and gr asp of the richness and diversity of the culture and
its significance to the pupils' own lives". The guidelines also stress that culture is
more than language and literature, but "also, for example, history, music, the visual
arts, dance, legend, drama, the mass media, architecture, ways of work, habits of
thought and feeling and human relationships".

h

to provide the basic and further training of teachers required to implement
paragraphs (a) to (g);

The Scottish Higher Education Funding Council (SHEFC) is responsible for funding
students at Teacher Education Institutions. The Scottish Executive has advised
SHEFC that the supply of teachers able to teach in the medium of Gaelic is a priority
for Scottish Ministers. Furthermore, the list of priority subjects at secondary school
includes Gaelic and Gaelic- medium history and geography. The Ministerial Advisory
Group on Gaelic recently estimated that there is a shortage of 15 primary school
teachers.

i

to set up a supervisory body or bodies responsible for monitoring the
measures taken and progress achieved in establishing or developing the
teaching of regional or minority languages and for drawing up periodic
reports of their findings, which will be made public.

As part of its supervisory responsibility, the UK government’s Inspectors of
Schools are required to monitor the development of Gaelic- medium education.

39

2

with regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in
which Scottish Gaelic is traditionally used, to allow, encourage or provide
teaching in or of the regional or minority language at all the appropriate
stages of education

There are schools, at both primary and secondary level, in parts of Scotland
other than the Highlands and Islands which provide Gaelic- medium education.
Gaelic immersion courses are available at Clydebank and Falkirk Colleges.
University education and research in Gaelic is available at Aberdeen, Edinburgh,
Glasgow, Glasgow Caledonian and Stirling Universities.
Language and culture related research is undertaken at these universities and at the
UHIMI institutions of Sabhal Mor Ostaig, Lews Castle College and Inverness College.

Article 9 - Judicial authorities

The United Kingdom’s obligations for Scottish Gaelic under Article 9 are:

1b
iii.

in civil proceedings:
to allow documents and evidence to be produced in Scottish Gaelic, if
necessary by the use of interpreters and translators;

Provision has been made for the use of Gaelic in the civil courts in Lochmaddy,
Portree and Stornoway, which cover the Western Isles and the Isle of Skye, areas
where more than 40% of the population at the time of the 1991 Census was Gaelicspeaking. Explanatory leaflets are available from the sheriff clerk's office, and local
solicitors were informed of the provision.

Article 10 - Administrative authorities and public services

The United Kingdom’s obligations for Scottish Gaelic under Article 10 are:

1c

to allow administrative authorities to draft documents in Scottish Gaelic

Where appropriate, the Scottish Executive produces Gaelic versions of important
national documents. These include:
•

Revitalising Gaelic: a National Asset, 2000
•

•

A Fresh Start for Gaelic, 2002

New Laws on Racial Equality in Scotland, 2002

40

•

Consultation Document on Community Budgeting, 2002
•
•

The Scottish Parliament's Annual Report
Various Inspector of Education Reports, where the council, school or college
offers Gaelic- medium education.

The Local Government (Gaelic Names) (Scotland) Act 1997 allows a local
authority to adopt a Gaelic name. Comhairle nan Eilean Siar (CNES) (formerly the
Western Isles Council) changed its name under the Act with effect from 1998. CNES
and Highland Council are the local authorities in the main traditional Gaelic-speaking
area.
2.

to allow and/or encourage:

a

the use of Scottish Gaelic within the framework of regional or local
authorities;

CNES and Highland Council operate a bilingual policy in its contacts with the public.
They also have a policy for Gaelic development and each employs a Gaelic
Development Officer.

b

the possibility of users of Scottish Gaelic to submit oral or written
applications in the language;

Members of the public wishing to conduct their business with CNES and Highland
Council through the medium of Gaelic are encouraged to do so.

d

the publication by local authorities of their official documents also in
Scottish Gaelic;

Major documents, reports, agendas and minutes produced by CNES and Highland
Council are produced in bilingual format where appropriate.

e

the use by regional authorities of Scottish Gaelic in debates in their
assemblies, without excluding, however, the use of the official language of
the state;

Standing Orders for the Scottish Parliament state that: "The Parliament shall normally
conduct its business in English but members may speak in Scots, Gaelic or in any
other language with the agreement of the Presiding Officer". Four debates and five
Committee meetings in 2001 have been conducted at least partly in Gaelic with
simultaneous interpretation service provided for non-Gaelic speakers.

f

the use by local authorities of Scottish Gaelic in debates in their assemblies,
without excluding, however, the use of the official language of the state;

41

Members of CNES and of Highland Council are encouraged to use Gaelic at
Committee and Council meetings with a simultaneous interpretation service provided
for non-Gaelic speakers.

g

the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official
language, of traditional and correct forms of place-names in Scottish Gaelic.

Under Section 12(4) of the Traffic Signs Regulations and General Directions 1981
Statutory Instrument, made under the Road Traffic Regulations Act 1984, Scottish
Ministers can authorise bilingual road signs.
The Highland Council erects bilingual street and welcome signs in towns and villages
within the Highland Council area. The Highland Council is also involved in liaising
with private sector organisations, like Scotrail and Caledonian MacBrayne, to focus on
the needs of the Gaelic language community.

5.

to allow the use or adoption of family names in Scottish Gaelic, at the
request of those concerned.

There is no restriction in Scotland on the use of the Gaelic version of family names.

Article 11 - Media

The United Kingdom’s obligations for Scottish Gaelic under Article 11 are:

1a

to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:

iii

to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer programmes in
Scottish Gaelic;

The Independent Television Commission (ITC) has responsibility for ensuring
compliance with the 1990 and 1996 Broadcasting Acts. The ITC requires Scottish
Television to transmit not less than 90 minutes per week of Gaelic, including 30
minutes of repeats. The ITC requires Grampian Television to include at least 72 hours
of Gaelic programming per annum. There is no statutory requirement on the British
Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) to produce a specified quantity or genre of Gaelic
programmes.

b (ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in
Scottish Gaelic on a regular basis;
The 1996 Broadcasting Act gave the Comataidh Telebhisein Gaidhlig (CTG), the
Gaelic Television Committee, the remit to fund Gaelic radio programmes from April
1997. Radio nan Gaidheal, Gaelic radio, with an output of approximately 45 hours per
42

week, is broadcast by BBC Scotland (BBC Alba). The BBC is extending the coverage
of Radio nan Gaidheal.

c (ii)

to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of television programmes in
Scottish Gaelic on a regular basis;

The 1990 Broadcasting Act established the Gaelic Television Fund to be administered
by CTG, enabling it to fund extra hours of Gaelic television.
The 1996 Broadcasting Act re-designated CTG as Comataidh Croalaidh Gaidhlig
(CCG), the Gaelic Broadcasting Committee, and gave it the additional remit to fund
Gaelic radio programmes. The Committee is appointed by the Independent Television
Commission and has no powers to commission or schedule. Gaelic television
programmes are broadcast primarily by the BBC, with some by the Scottish Media
Group (known as SMG), which holds the ITV Scottish and Grampian licences.
Approximately 150 hours of Gaelic programmes are broadcast per year.

d

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and
audiovisual works in Scottish Gaelic;

Proiseact nan Ealan, funded by the Scottish Arts Council and the Scottish Executive, is
an arts development agency promoting Gaelic music, theatre and visual arts through
initiatives such as exhibitions, publications, festivals, television programmes, CDs and
training courses.

e (ii)

to encourage and/or facilitate the publication of newspaper articles in
Scottish Gaelic on a regular basis;

The Scottish Executive provides funding for ‘An Comunn Gaidhealach’ (a Gaelic
membership organisation), which has supported a Gaelic newspaper, and ‘Cli’ (a
Gaelic learners association), which publishes a quarterly magazine ‘Cothrom’ in both
Gaelic and English. There are regular articles in Gaelic in newspapers serving the
Highlands and Islands, such as the West Highland Free Press and the Stornoway
Gazette. There is also a weekly Gaelic article in the ‘Scotsman’.

f (i)

to cover the additional costs of those media which use Scottish Gaelic,
wherever the law provides for financial assistance in general for the media;
or

The Scottish Executive provides funding for the CCG, the Gaelic Television
Committee, of £8.5m a year.

g

support the training of journalists and other staff for media using Scottish
Gaelic.

43

Sabhal Mòr Ostaig (Gaelic College on Skye), funded by the Scottish Higher Education
Funding Council and the Scottish Executive, provides media courses in Gaelic (Gaelic
and Communications, and TV and Multimedia). The courses are supported by the
Comataidh Craolaidh Gaidhlig (CCG).

2.

to guarantee freedom of the direct reception of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or
similar form to Scottish Gaelic, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio
and television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language;
and to ensure that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression
and free circulation of information in the written press in a language used in
identical or similar form to Scottish Gaelic.

There are no restrictions throughout the UK.

Article 12 - Cultural activities and facilities

The United Kingdom’s obligations for Scottish Gaelic under Article 12 are:

1a

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to Scottish Gaelic and
foster the different means of access to works produced in the language;

A number of organisations have been set up to develop cultural activities and facilities
in Gaelic:
•

Proiseact nan Ealan (PnE) is an arts development agency promoting Gaelic
music, theatre and visual arts through initiatives such as exhibitions, publications,
festivals, television programmes, CDs and training courses. PnE receives funding
from the Scottish Executive.

•

•

Fèisean nan Gaidheal organises Gaelic arts tuition festivals for young people.
These now take place throughout the Highlands & Islands and in some of
Scotland’s cities (Aberdeen, Edinburgh and Glasgow). Comunn na Gaidhlig, the
Gaelic development body, also receives funding from the Scottish Executive.
• Comunn na Gaidhlig (CnaG), the Gaelic development body, also receives funding
from the Scottish Executive.
An Comunn Gaidhealach organises the annual Royal National Mod, a competitive festival
of Gaelic music and song.
•
The Gaelic Books Council (Comhairle nan Leabhraichean), funded by the
Scottish Arts Council, encourages the publication of works in Gaelic.

d

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural
activities of various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the
knowledge and use of the Scottish Gaelic language and culture in the
undertakings which they initiate or for which they provide backing;
44

The Boards of Directors of PnE, Fèisean nan Gaidheal and CnaG contain members
covering a wide range of Gaelic interests - broadcasting, education, local government,
the arts, language development. CnaG holds an annual Comhdhail (Congress) in June,
open to all organisations and individuals with an interest in Gaelic, where current
issues and future development needs are discussed. Both An Comunn Gaidhealach and
Fèisean nan Gaidheal are membership- led organisations.

e

to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or
supporting cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full
command of Scottish Gaelic, as well as of the language(s) of the rest of the
population;

The Chief Executives/Directors of the organisations listed in (1a) are all fluent Gaelic
speakers. As a matter of course the organisations employ staff who are Gaelic
speakers.

f

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of Scottish
Gaelic in providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

In line with the organisation’s role as a major advocate of traditional Gaelic arts in
Scotland, and elsewhere, Fèisean nan Gàidheal maintains strong links with other key
agencies in the sector. As well as this, they regard meaningful collaboration as an
effective way of maximising development, and regard this approach as essential.
The links between the Fèis movement and Sradagan groups (Gaelic youth groups)
throughout Scotland remained strong. In many communities, both are organised and
attended by the same groups of parents and participants respectively.
Pròiseact nan Ealan, An Comunn Gàidhealach, Comhairle nan Leabhraichean, CCG
(Gaelic Broadcasting Committee), Tosg (Gaelic Theatre Company) and Fèisean nan
Gàidheal have also been collaborating in a new group: Gaelic Arts Strategic
Development (GASD). Meetings have been held regularly since November 2000.

g

to encourage and/or facilitate the creation of a body or bodies responsible for
collecting and keeping a copy of and presenting or publishing works
produced in Scottish Gaelic;

Comhairle nan Leabhraichean, or the Gaelic Books Council, is an organisation set up
in 1968 to promote Gaelic books. It is a charitable company, and its main funding
comes from the Scottish Arts Council. The Books Council has a small staff (three fulltime, with additio nal occasional part-time help), responsible to a small board of
Directors drawn from various areas of expertise. The Council provides publication
grants for publishers to issue new books and commission grants for authors to write
them. They also have an editorial and proofing service. On the sales side, they stock
every Gaelic and Gaelic-related book in print in their Glasgow bookshop. They also
go out to sell at special events throughout the country, as well as mailing books all
over the world .

45

h

if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and
terminological research services, particularly with a view to maintaining and
developing administrative, commercial, economic, social, technical or legal
terminology in Scottish Gaelic.

Fosglan (a Cultural Services Agency) at Lews Castle College provides a Gaelic
translation service. Research into Gaelic language subjects is undertaken at postgraduate level in the Departments of Celtic Studies at Aberdeen, Edinburgh and
Glasgow Universities.

2.

In respect of territories other than those in which Scottish Gaelic is
traditionally used, to allow, encourage and/or provide appropriate cultural
activities and facilities in accordance with the preceding paragraph.

Cultural activities and facilities are available in Glasgow, such as the
‘Highlanders Institute’ and the ‘Glasgow Gaelic Choir’ and in Edinburgh, such as the
‘Edinburgh Gaelic Community Association’, the ‘Edinburgh Gaelic Choir’ and the
‘Gaelic Walking Club’. Both Glasgow and Edinburgh are outside the "Gaidhealtachd",
the informally recognised Gaelic areas.

3.

to make appropriate provision, in pursuing cultural policy abroad, for
Scottish Gaelic and the culture it reflects.

Cultural links have been established through the Columba Initiative with
Ireland, and through the Nova Scotia Initiative with that area in Canada. Information
on these two initiatives is found in paragraphs (e) and (i) (of Article 7) in part II of this
report.

Article 13 - Economic and social life

The United Kingdom’s obligations for Scottish Gaelic under Article 13 are:

1a

to eliminate from legislation any provision prohibiting or limiting without
justifiable reasons the use of Scottish Gaelic in documents relating to
economic or social life;

There are no provisions prohibiting or limiting without justifiable reasons the use of
regional or minority languages in documents relating to economic or social life,
particularly contracts of employment, or in technical documents such as instructions
for the use of products or installations.

c

to oppose practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority
languages in connection with economic or social activities;

46

There are no practices designed to discourage the use of regional or minority
languages in connection with economic or social activities.

Article 14 - Transfrontier exchanges

The United Kingdom’s obligations for Scottish Gaelic under Article 14 are:

1a

to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements with States in which
Scottish Gaelic is used in identical or similar form, or if necessary to seek to
conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster contacts between users
of the language;

The Columba Initiative is one such agreement with Ireland (see Article 12, paragraph
3).

b

to facilitate and/or promote co-operation across borders, in particular
between regional or local authorities in whose territory Scottish Gaelic is
used in identical or similar form.

The Columba Initiative links Scotland, Northern Ireland and Ireland.

LANGUAGE: IRISH

Article 8 - Education

The United Kingdom’s obligations for Irish under Article 8 are:

1a (iii) Pre-school education
to apply one of the measures provided for under 1a (i) and (ii) at least to
those pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered
sufficient;
Irish- medium pre-school settings are eligible for funding under the ‘Pre-school
Education Expansion Programme’ in the same way as other voluntary and private preschool playgroups that meet the requirements of the programme. 468 places were
funded in 2001/2002.
Irish- medium nursery units are eligible for full grant-aided nursery status where there
is evidence of sufficient demand to ensure the viability and effectiveness of the unit.
Foras na Gaeilge (the Irish language agency) has provided core funding for Altram
and for Forbairt Naonrai Teo (voluntary Irish- medium pre-school organisations).
47

1b (iv) Primary education
to apply one of the measures provided for under 1b(i)-(iii) at least to those
pupils whose families so request and whose number is considered sufficient;
Grant-aided status has been approved for several Irish- medium primary schools: to
qualify for grant- maintained status a school must meet certain viability and other
criteria. The viability criteria for Irish- medium (and integrated) primary schools were
reduced in December 2000. Initial thresholds were reduced to intakes of 15 for new
schools in Belfast and Derry and 12 for developments elsewhere. These initial
thresholds will be the key to recurrent funding for schools, but will not bring
immediate entitlement to capital funding. Instead, it was decided to set medium-term
targets - intake levels of 20 in Belfast and Derry and 15 elsewhere - and to link capital
funding to these medium-term targets.
Foras na Gaeilge has provided grant-in-aid to Gaeloiliúint (a voluntary support
organisation for Irish-medium primary education), interim grant- in-aid to Irish
medium primary schools awaiting departmental recognition and grant-in-aid to Irish
medium teaching/learning resources for Irish medium primary schools.

1c (iv) Secondary education
to apply one of the measures provided for under 1c(i)-(iii) at least to those
pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number
considered sufficient;
Meanscoil Feirste (an Irish- medium secondary school based in Belfast) is a grantmaintained Irish-medium school. In addition, an Irish- medium secondary unit
Coláiste Bhríde, attached to St Brigid’s High School, Carnhill, is also grant-aided by
the Department of Education. It is anticipated that a second unit at St Catherine’s
College, Armagh, will receive grant-aid from September 2002.
Foras na Gaeilge has provided grant- in aid to Gaeloiliúint and grant-in-aid to Gael
Eagras Um Shainriachtanais Oideachais (GESO) (a voluntary organisation for special
needs in Irish- medium education) to develop special education resources for Irish
medium secondary schools. The agency has also provided grant- in-aid to Áisaonad (a
resource centre for teaching materials in Irish-medium education) for the provision of
Irish medium teaching/learning resources for Irish medium post primary schools.

1d (iv) Technical and vocational education
to apply one of the measures provided for under 1d(i)-(iii) at least to those
pupils who, or where appropriate whose families, so wish in a number
considered sufficient;
In Northern Ireland the Further Education (FE) colleges are key players in the delivery
of vocational training. The FE colleges offer Irish language courses at various levels.
48

During the 2001/02 academic year the Department for Education and Learning (DEL)
provided funding, on a one-off basis and as a pilot, for a Jobskills-based Irish language
vocational training programme delivered by Forbairt Feirste and funded through the
Belfast Institute of Further and Higher Education. The aim is to address the training
needs of pupils who leave Irish- medium secondary schools at age 16. DEL is now
considering whether an extension to this pilot should be supported.
In addition, the North West Institute of Further and Higher Education and other
training organisations which deliver DEL programmes have provision and support for
the Irish language.
In 2001 DEL funded research carried out by Gairm (a voluntary organisation focussed
on Irish- medium vocational training) on the demand for Irish medium vocational
training. Gairm recently presented its findings to the Department.
DEL is now preparing a scoping paper as the basis of an initial consultation with
interested groups on future policy on Irish language vocational training. The Minister
responsible expects to issue a policy statement on this in the near future.

1e (iii) if, by reason of the role of the State in relation to higher education
institutions, sub-paragraphs 1e(i) and (ii) cannot be applied, to encourage
and/or allow the provision of university or other forms of higher education
in Irish or of facilities for the study of Irish as a university or higher
education subject;
Facilities are already provided for the study of Irish as a university and higher
education subject at the University of Ulster & Queen’s University of Belfast.
In addition, DEL provides targeted financial support to students in higher and further
education, including students of Irish.

1f (ii) to offer Irish as a subject of adult and continuing education;
Irish language classes are delivered at 2 levels (Beginners and Intermediate) in The
Ulster People’s College (a voluntary organisation established in 1982 as a residential
cross community education centre).
The Workers’ Education Association is an adult education body which offers an Irish
language course for beginners.
Foras na Gaeilge provides grant aid for adult education initiatives, e.g. Ogmios, An
Gaeláras, Comhaltas Uladh etc. (voluntary organisations)

1g

to make arrangements to ensure the teaching of the history and the culture
which is reflected by Irish;

The statutory Northern Irish Curriculum includes the cross-curricular scheme of
cultural heritage and a common programme of study for the teaching of history. The
49

theme of cultural heritage is concerned with enabling young people to understand the
common, diverse and distinctive aspects of their culture.

1h

to provide the basic and further training of the teachers required to
implement those of paragraphs a to g accepted by the Party;

Initial training is provided for aspiring teachers of the Irish language and for those
who will be employed in schools which teach through the medium of Irish. The
Education and Library Boards provide in-service training courses in conjunction with
Gael Linn and also run summer school courses for serving teachers of Irish and for
those who teach in Irish medium schools. The Education and Training Inspectorate
inspect all teacher training.
Foras nas Gaeilge has funded a language laboratory for Coláiste Mhuire (St Mary’s
University College, Queen’s University, Belfast).

2

With regard to education and in respect of territories other than those in which Irish
is traditionally used, the Parties undertake, if the number of users of Irish justifies
it, to allow, encourage or provide teaching in or of Irish at all the appropriate stages
of education.
The Irish language is included in the National Curriculum in England. Irish is
available as an optional GCSE subject and Irish exams are available to be taken at
GCSE and “A” level. Irish is also available as a subject at University level in Britain.

Article 9 – Judicial authorities

The United Kingdom’s obligations for Irish under Article 9 are:

3

The Parties undertake to make available in Irish the most important national
statutory texts and those relating particularly to users of this language,
unless they are otherwise provided.

The following national statutory texts have been translated and are available in Irish:
•

The Education (Northern Ireland) Order 1998 No 1759

•

The North South Co-operation (Implementation Bodies) (Northern Ireland) Order 1999
No 589 (Part)

•

The Northern Ireland Act 1998 – Chapter 47

50

Article 10 – Administrative authorities and public services

The United Kingdom’s obligations for Irish under Article 10 are:

1a (iv) to ensure that users of Irish may submit oral or written applications in Irish;
Departments of the Northern Ireland Executive and their associated bodies facilitate
customers who wish to conduct their business in Irish either orally or in writing. A
telephone voicemail facility has been set up for members of the public who wish to
conduct their business in Irish.
Similar procedures apply within the Northern Ireland Office (NIO). The NIO has
some internal translation services, allowing letters to be received in Irish, and can call
upon assistance from the Executive’s Department of Culture, Arts and Leisure if
required (see 4a below).
The Northern Ireland Court Service facilitates customers who wish to conduct their
business in Irish either orally or in writing. A telephone answering arrangement allows
callers to conduct their business in Irish. A system has also been established for the
handling and translation of correspondence. The central provision offered by DCAL
can be called upon if required.

1c

to allow the administrative authorities to draft documents in Irish;

Government departments and their associated bodies have produced a range of key
documents in Irish ranging from ‘The Programme for Government’ and the Good
Friday (Belfast) Agreement to equality schemes (eg. of the Police Service for Northern
Ireland), consultative documents, executive summaries and a customer care guide.
The Northern Ireland Court Service translated its draft Equality Scheme into Irish.

2

In respect of local and regional authorities, to allow and/or encourage:

b

the possibility for users of Irish to submit oral or written applications in
Irish;

Government policy does not prohibit local (District councils) or Regional (Assembly)
authorities accepting oral or written applications in Irish. The Local Government
Division of the Department of Environment has issued some initial information to
District Councils on the Charter. A further guidance circular is due to issue shortly.

2e

the use of Irish by regional authorities in debates in their assemblies, without
excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;
51

The regional authority in this case is the Northern Ireland Assembly which permits
and has made provision for the use of Irish in debates. An Irish language speaker is
employed as a full-time official in the Assembly for Irish language translation and
interpretation.
Foras na Gaeilge has compiled a dictionary of parliamentary terms, launched by the
Speaker of the Northern Ireland Legislative Assembly, Lord Alderdice on 27 May
2002.

2f

the use by local authorities of Irish in debates in their assemblies, without
excluding, however, the use of the official language(s) of the State;

Newry & Mourne District Council provides a bilingual translation system for use by
all members in all council committees and has appointed a development officer to
promote its policy of promoting the Irish Language in internal administration. Other
Councils have asked Newry and Mourne Council to provide advice and guidance on
Irish language issues and discussions will be arranged soon.

2g

the use or adoption, if necessary in conjunction with the name in the official
language(s), of traditional and correct forms of place-names in Irish.

District Councils have the power under Article 11 of the Local Government
(Miscellaneous Provision) (NI) (Order) 1995 to erect street names in English and in
any other language. In doing so Councils must have regard to the views of the
residents living in the premises of that street. There are no restrictions on using Irish
versions of other parts of an address, eg townland, town, county.
The Ordnance Survey of Northern Ireland’s cultural map and gazetteer of Ireland
North includes settlement names in English and the authenticated Irish form. The
Irish versions of approved street names are shown on the Ordnance Survey of
Northern Ireland’s large scale maps and will be included in the Common Address file
which is currently being developed.
The latest editions of the Ordnance Survey of Northern Ireland’s street maps include
the Irish street name in the gazetteer. The Road Atlas of Ireland, a joint production
with Ordnance Survey Ireland, includes the main settlement names in Irish as well as
English.
The Northern Ireland Place Names Project in Queens University is focussed on
preserving the Townland Heritage and re- instating townlands in the Post Office
address database.

3

Public services provided by the administrative authorities

c

to allow users of Irish to submit a request in Irish.

The administrative authorities accept requests in Irish. A telephone voicemail facility
has been set up for members of the public who wish to conduct their business in Irish.
52

The Northern Ireland Court Service also accepts requests in Irish.

4

With a view to putting into effect those provisions accepted in 1,2 and 3, to
undertake:

a

translation or interpretation as may be required;

The Linguistic Diversity Branch in the Department of Culture, Arts and Leisure
(DCAL) facilitates translation requests for other government departments and their
associated bodies. DCAL arranged for a review of Irish langua ge translation
/interpreting requirements in the Northern Ireland Civil Service to be carried out by
the Business Development Service. DCAL has bid for funds to establish a Central
Translation Service. In the short term DCAL has contracted the services of two Irish
language translators and an editor to address the needs of Departments and their
associated bodies.
An Advisory Committee of language experts comprising
academics, officials and experienced translators has been set up to develop a house
style for use in public sector translations in Northern Ireland.
The Northern Ireland Office has some internal services and has access to DCAL’s
facilities if required. The Police Service for Northern Ireland trains a number of
officers each year in the Irish language. There are Irish speaking officers who visit
and address children in Irish in Irish speaking schools. The Police Service for
Northern Ireland also seeks to ensure that all relevant forms of Irish are deployed and
a recent training video had an Irish sign language translation.
The Northern Ireland Court Service will arrange translations and interpreters as and
when requested. The Service has access to a number of providers as well as to
DCAL’s facilities if required.

5

to undertake to allow the use or adoption of family names in Irish, at the
request of those concerned.

There is no statutory prohibition on a person’s use of the Irish version of their name.
The Northern Ireland Court Service accepts the use of a person’s name in Irish.

Article 11 – Media

The United Kingdom’s obligations for Irish under Article 11 are:

1a

to the extent that radio and television carry out a public service mission:

iii

to make adequate provision so that broadcasters offer programmes in Irish;

53

BBC Northern Ireland offers regular programmes in Irish on Radio Ulster and
occasional programmes on TV.

1b (ii) to encourage and/or facilitate the broadcasting of radio programmes in Irish
on a regular basis;
BBC Radio Ulster transmits Irish programmes on a daily basis.

1d

to encourage and/or facilitate the production and distribution of audio and
audiovisual works in Irish;

The principle source of production funding is the Northern Ireland Film and
Television Commission (NIFTC). The NIFTC has been delegated responsibility by
the Arts Council for the distribution of the film and moving image element of
Northern Ireland’s share of National Lottery proceeds for the Arts. There are
currently no special discrete measures for Irish language production/distributio n
although such productions are eligible for assistance from the limited funds currently
available for production.

1e (i) to encourage and/or facilitate the creation and/or maintenance of at least
one newspaper in Irish;
The UK government funded ‘Lá’, an Irish language newspaper, for a number of years.
It is now funded by Foras na Gaeilge.

1f (ii) to apply existing measures for financial assistance also to audiovisual
productions in Irish;
Irish language productions are eligible for assistance under the Northern Ireland Film
and Television Commission Lottery Scheme. Only one Irish script has been received
in the last five years – and that was financed by the NIFTC. The NIFTC’s Operating
Plan for 2002-2003 contains a commitment to offering support for minority language
production proposals and an aim to achieve some Irish language short productions
during the year”.

1g

to support the training of journalists and other staff for media using Irish.

The BBC recruited Irish speakers and provided them with in- house training for their
role as current affairs journalist/presenters of Irish language programmes. The
Department for Culture, Arts and Leisure has funded a pilot training course in Irish
language TV and Film Production – the course with 14 trainees started in
February 2002. The Department for Education and Learning has assisted the
participants on this course.
It is open to ‘Lá’ to recruit New Deal employees to train in- house, with one day per
week subsidised training. In 1997 the Training and Employment Agency, which has

54

since been integrated into the Department for Employment and Learning, provided
support for an Irish medium course for media technicians at Springvale, Belfast.

2

to guarantee freedom of the direct reception of radio and television
broadcasts from neighbouring countries in a language used in identical or
similar form to Irish, and not to oppose the retransmission of radio and
television broadcasts from neighbouring countries in such a language; and
to ensure that no restrictions will be placed on the freedom of expression and
free circulation of information in the written press in a language used in
identical or similar form to Irish.

Irish language radio and television broadcasts from Ireland (RTE and TG4) are widely
available in Northern Ireland. As a result of new transmission arrangements the
coverage of RTE and TG4 has been increased from 30% to between 65 and 70% of
the population of Northern Ireland. Irish language publications circulate freely and are
not subject to censorship.

Article 12 – Cultural activities and facilities

The United Kingdom’s obligations for Irish under Article 12 are:

1a

to encourage types of expression and initiative specific to Irish and foster the
different means of access to works produced in Irish;

The Belfast and Education Library Board offers free public access to a range of
websites, two of which have links to Irish language newspapers ‘Lá’ and ‘Beo’ and are
available in four libraries.
Belfast Central Library has a substantial collection of Irish language material and a
range of periodicals and tapes at selected libraries in the Belfast area. Irish stock is
selected in response to direct contact with teaching staff from local schools. All
selection is made using the expertise of Irish speaking library staff, Irish speakers in
local bookshops and bilingual bibliographical information. Belfast Central Library
has staged several events in partnership with the University of Ulster and Foras na
Gaeilge involving Irish speaking writers talking about their work.
The Southern Board’s Library Service records Irish language material output by local
broadcasters and records Telefis na Gaeilge (TG4) broadcasts. It has an agreement
with RTE (Rádió Teilifís Eireann – Irish- medium broadcasting station based in
Ireland) to record and broadcast on subjects relating to the school curriculum in
Northern Ireland.
This material, while not available to the general public for
copyright reasons, is however accessible to any educational establishment in Northern
Ireland that holds a licence from the Educational Recording Agency.
The Southern Board’s Irish and Local Studies Library has since its inception
maintained a wide-ranging collection of material in the Irish language, including
journals and newspapers. Its value is recognised both in academic circles and by those
organizations, such as Ti Chulainn, engaged in the promotion of the Irish language.
55

The South Eastern Education & Library Board (SEELB) adopted a policy on
‘Library Provision for Minority Languages’ in February 2000. Welcome information
packs in Irish are available in Irish giving details of membership, services and
guidance on completing forms. As part of the policy in the year 02/03 the SEELB will
move on its plans for pilot schemes for Ulster Scots and Chinese language provision.
The SEELB purchases Irish language stock in various formats: books, newspapers,
periodicals, tapes, videos and CR-ROM for children and for adults. Collections are in
Castlewellan, Dairy Farm, Downp atrick and Poleglass libraries. In the last year over
£2,000 was spent on Irish language books, tapes and CD-ROMs. A weekly Irish
language newspaper is taken in Dairy Farm library, where there is a weekly
programme of class visits for the local Irish language school (nursery to Primary 7
level). Until very recently the same happened in Poleglass library but the school has
closed there. A class visit booklet on using the library was developed and made
available in Irish. Shelf guiding in Irish is also a feature in Dairy Farm Library. Staff
bookmark good Irish language sites on the Internet for users. Irish language and
culture is featured in the SEELB library programmes for culture and arts, eg the
SEELB ‘Library Beyond Words’ festival. The SEELB has developed links with Irish
language, Ulster-Scots, Chinese and Indian groups.
The Western Education and Library Board (WELB) provides books and tapes
through the medium of Irish, and Irish newspapers in some libraries. From time to
time Irish schools visit the libraries and story telling takes place. The WELB also
organises an Irish language day. There is also a video in Irish in the Central Library in
Derry and bookmarks and leaflets are available in Irish.
The North-Eastern Education and Library Board (NEELB) offers free public
access to a range of websites in 23 libraries. Work is in hand to identify appropriate
websites in a number of minority languages for the Northern Ireland Libraries portal,
which will be accessible to all libraries in Northe rn Ireland. The North-Eastern
Education and Library Board also buys Irish language material in various formats on
request and to meet local demand. Specific questions were asked in the CIPFA PLUS
user survey in 1999-2000 about the range of languages required by library users and
this information was used to inform purchasing policies. A separate budget has now
been established for minority languages and arrangements are currently in hand to
identify and provide improved resources, in consultation with Irish language speakers.
The team of Young People’s librarians have provided class visit material in Irish for
classes taught through the medium of Irish for use in NEELB libraries. Irish speaking
schools are encouraged to visit local libraries and these visits are facilitated by library
staff.
The Arts Council has encouraged writing in Irish by assisting the publication of books
and magazines; instituting the first Writer- in-Residency in Irish in the island,
supporting Irish language arts centres in Armagh and Belfast; and promoting literacy
readings with traditional music. Two years ago it launched a statement “Scrievens,
Language, Traidisium” setting out its position in relation to Irish language and Ulster
Scots. The Arts Council has also supported individual artists working through the
medium of Irish (the Individual Artist programme) and will continue to consider
applications from artists working through Irish or Ulster-Scots.
The National Museums and Galleries of Northern Ireland (MAGNI) are in the process
of developing a Linguistic Diversity Policy. MAGNI provides and has provided a
56

range of materials and services through Irish, for example, the sound archive at the
Ulster Folk and Transport Museum has significant Irish content. The archive which
also holds material relevant to the study of Ulster Scots is open to the public five days
a week during office hours. Most of the material is available for reference. MAGNI
have provided occasional tours for Irish speakers and the curator of music regularly
lectures in Irish.
The Public Record Office of Northern Ireland has among its holdings a manuscript
version of the ‘Rathlin Island Catechism’ c.1720 which was later published in 1722
and which contains details of the island inhabitants who received Irish catechisms, an
unsigned letter relating to the translation of the Book of Common Prayer into Irish and
two pages of Irish-English vocabulary.
Foras na Gaeilge supports and sponsors a wide range of community events and
cultural festivals. It has also conducted a series of training workshops for writers and
dramatists.

1d

to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or supporting cultural
activities of various kinds make appropriate allowance for incorporating the
knowledge and use of Irish and cultures in the undertakings which they
initiate or for which they provide backing;

The Arts Council has established administrative and decision making structures that
enables it to work in tandem with such bodies as the Ultach Trust, POBAL, Ti
Chulainn, Conradh na Gaeilge (Derry) and An Culturlann McAdam-O Fiaich. (DCAL)
The Public Records Office of Northern Ireland welcomes documentary/historical
material relating to the use of Irish or material in Irish.
Foras na Gaeilge provides core and project funding for a range of Irish language
activities for bodies including the Ultach Trust, POBAL, Conradh na Gaeilge (Derry)
and An Culturlann McAdam-O Fiaich.
1e

to promote measures to ensure that the bodies responsible for organising or
supporting cultural activities have at their disposal staff who have a full
command of Irish as well as of the language(s) of the rest of the population;

Belfast Central Library has two Irish speaking staff and bilingual bibliographic
information is available. These two staff are available for translations of conversation
if a library client wishes to converse in Irish. In the South Eastern Education &
Library Board, two staff, one in Poleglass and one in Dairy Farm, are fluent Irish
speakers and work with local children and adults in the language. Local staff in these
two libraries have been trained to greet and work with users.
The head of the Linguistic Diversity Branch in the Department of Culture Arts and
Leisure has some competence in Irish.
The Arts Counc il of Northern Ireland (ACNI) employs two staff with some
proficiency in Irish. ACNI has a working group on its approach to language issues
which has conducted an internal review of the Council’s use of minority languages.
57

With respect to Irish, the group is progressing the following agenda: procure a
redesigned corporate brand using Irish on all stationery, publications, business cards,
signage, etc; initiate training for all staff in the use of simple greetings, the elements of
pronunciation, etc.; conduc t a benchmarking exercise with respect to POBAL’s Cairt
na Gaeilge, or Irish Language charter, with a view to adopting its action guidelines
with respect to publications, publicity, correspondence, public presentations,
administrative practice, etc.

1f

to encourage direct participation by representatives of the users of Irish in
providing facilities and planning cultural activities;

The Arts Council’s grant support programmes have assisted the development of
facilities and artistic programmes: Culturlann McAdam-O Fiaich, Ti Chulainn,
Conradh na Gaeilge (Derry), Comchoiste Na Gaeilge, Aisling Gear. Funded projects
include: education programmes and outreach, workshops, performances, script
development and the construction of facilities. The Arts Council of Northern Ireland
has commissioned a comprehensive review of the Arts of Irish and Ulster Scots. The
aim of the study is to provide the Arts Council with comprehensive and strategic
knowledge of the existing situation. The study will also make a comparative analysis
of activities, audiences, boundaries, developmental needs and the financial
implications for the sector in order to inform its future policy making.

1h

if necessary, to create and/or promote and finance translation and
terminological research services, particularly with a view to maintaining and
developing appropriate administrative, commercial, economic, social,
technical or legal terminology in Irish.

The Government has given support, in conjunction with the ROI Government for Teli
(The European Language Initiative) to the production of a Dictionary of
Administrative Terminology. Coiste Tearmaíochta (Terminology Committee) is
funded by Foras na Gaeilge, the Irish Language Agency of the NS Language
Implementation Body.
Schemes to support translators have been devised by Foras na Gaeilge, and two
agencies, one in Belfast and one in Derry, have been grant aided.
Foras na Gaeilge is compiling a comprehensive and fully revised English/Irish
dictionary. The previous dictionary was published in 1959.

2

In respect of territories other than those in which Irish are traditionally
used, if the number of users of Irish justifies it, to allow, encourage and/or
provide appropriate cultural activities and facilities in accordance with the
preceding paragraph.

Comhaltas Ceoltoirí Éireann (an all- Ireland cultural organisation) has branches in
England in London, Luton, Middlesex, Cambridge, Coventry, Nottingham, Telford,
Ashton- in-Makerfield, Leeds, Merseyside, and Preston. It promotes the culture of
Ireland in music, song, dance, and language. Conradh na Gaeilge promotes Irish

58

language and culture through Language classes and social events. It has branches in
Birmingham, Liverpool, and Manchester.

3

The Parties undertake to make appropriate provision, in pursuing their
cultural policy abroad, for Irish and the cultures it reflects.

Through travel awards and international residency schemes, the Arts Council in
conjunction with the British Council and An Chomhairle Ealaion (Arts Council of
Ireland ) promote abroad the arts from Ireland including Irish language arts.

Article 13 – Economic and social life

The United Kingdom’s obligations for Irish under Article 13 are:

1d

to facilitate and/or encourage the use of Irish by means other than those
specified in the sub-paragraphs 1a-c.

Throughout the UK, the use of Irish in the private/non-governmental sector is
facilitated on the same basis as any English-using private sector enterprise or nonGovernmental organisation, and such enterprises/NGOs are open to apply for public
sector support on the same basis as any other enterprise/NGO.
Article 14 – Transfrontier exchanges

The United Kingdom’s obligations for Irish under Article 14 are:

a

to apply existing bilateral and multilateral agreements which bind them with the
States in which the same language is used in identical or similar form, or if
necessary to seek to conclude such agreements, in such a way as to foster contacts
between the users of the same language in the States concerned in the fields of
culture, education, information, vocational training and permanent education;
The North/South Language Implementation Body, the cross border co-operation
provisions of the EU Peace and Reconciliation Programme, and ‘Interreg’ (a European
programme designed to help border counties) are examples of multilateral agreements
and cross border co-operation

b

for the benefit of Irish, to facilitate and/or promote co-operation across
borders, in particular between regional or local authorities in whose territory
the same language is used in identical or similar form.

59

The Department of Education is supporting the production of teaching materials in the
Irish medium (Ulster dialect).
Regarding District Councils, there is some material cross border activity including
Fermanagh District Council. There is also more general District Council support for
cultural traditions projects.
Within the UK, there are strong links between Newry and Mourne District Councils
and Comhairle Nan Eilean Siar (Western Isles Council) in Scotland.

60

