Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 1

Education (Scotland) Act 1980
1980  CHAPTER 44
Sweet & Maxwell Ltd.
UK Statutes Crown Copyright. Reproduced by permission of the Controller of Her Majesty's Stationery Office.

An Act to consolidate certain enactments relating to education in Scotland with amendments to
give effect to recommendations of the Scottish Law Commission.
[1st August 1980]
PART I
PROVISION OF EDUCATION BY EDUCATION AUTHORITIES
School education and further education
1.—   Duty of education authorities to secure provision of education.
(1)  Subject to subsections (1A) and (2A) below, it shall be the duty of every education authority
to secure that there is made for their area adequate and efficient provision of school education and
further education.
(1A)  The duty imposed on education authorities by subsection (1) above shall, in relation to children
who are under school age, be exercisable only as respects children of such description or descriptions
as may be prescribed by order.
(1B)  Where an order is made under subsection (1A) above, the amount of school education with
which children of a description prescribed in that order are to be provided shall also be prescribed
in the order.
(1C)  An education authority shall have power in relation to pre-school children to secure for their
area the provision of such school education, other than that which they are required by subsection
(1) above to secure, as they think fit.
(2A)  The duty imposed on an education authority by subsection (1) above shall not include the
provision of further education within the meaning of Part I of the Further and Higher Education
(Scotland) Act 1992, but an education authority shall have power to provide such further education
for their area.
(3)  Every education authority
(a)   Shall have power to secure for their area, and
(b)   be under a duty to secure for pupils in attendance at schools in their area,
the provision of adequate facilities for social, cultural and recreative activities and for physical
education and training.
(4)  The facilities for further education that may be provided by an education authority shall include
facilities for vocational and industrial training.
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 2

[ (4A)  The power to make an order under this section shall be exercisable by statutory instrument
subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of the Scottish Parliament.
(4B)  In this section “pre-school children” means–
(a)   children who are under school age and have not commenced attendance at a primary
school (other than a nursery class in such a school); and
(b)   children who have attained school age but have not commenced attendance at such a
school.
]1
(5)  In this Act—
(a)   “school education” means progressive education appropriate to the requirements of
pupils, regard being had to the age, ability and aptitude of such pupils, and includes—
(i)   activities in schools and classes (such schools and classes being in this Act
called “nursery schools”and “nursery classes”), being activities of a kind suitable
in the ordinary case for pupils who are under school age;
(ii)   provision for special educational needs;
(iii)   the teaching of Gaelic in Gaelic-speaking areas;
(b)   further education includes—
(ii)   voluntary part-time and full-time courses of instruction for persons over school
age;
(iii)   social, cultural and recreative activities and physical education and training,
either as voluntary organised activities designed to promote the educational
development of persons taking part therein or as part of a course of instruction;
(iv)   the teaching of Gaelic in Gaelic-speaking areas;
(c)   “provision for special educational needs”, in relation to a child who has attained school
age or to a young person receiving school education, means educational provision which
is additional to, or otherwise different from, the educational provision made generally for
children or, as the case may be, young persons of his age in schools under the management
of the education authority for the area to which he belongs in accordance with section 23(3)
of this Act;and in relation to any other child means such educational provision as is
appropriate to those needs
(d)   “special educational needs”, in relation to a child or young person, are needs caused
by a learning difficulty which he has which calls for provision for special educational needs
to be made for him, and a child or young person has a learning difficulty for the purposes
of this paragraph if—
(i)   he has significantly greater difficulty in learning than the majority of children
or, as the case may be, young persons of his age; or
(ii)   he suffers from a disability which either prevents or hinders him from making
use of educational facilities of a kind generally provided for children or, as the case
may be, young persons of his age in schools under the management of the education
authority for the area to which he belongs in accordance with section 23(3) of this
Act; or
(iii)   he is under the age of five years and is, or would be if provision for special
educational needs were not made for him, likely to fall within sub-paragraph (i) or
(ii) above when over that age,
1

added by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) s. 32(5)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 3

but a child or young person is not to be taken as having a learning difficulty solely because
the language in which he is or will be taught (the “teaching language”) is different from a
language, or from a form of the teaching language, which has at any time been spoken in
his home.
2.   Secretary of State may prescribe standards, etc., for education authorities.
The Secretary of State may make regulations prescribing the standards and […] 2 requirements
to which every education authority shall conform in discharging their functions under section 1 of
this Act and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, such regulations may include
provision as to the testing of pupils in primary schools.
2A.—   Assessment of secondary school pupils.
(1)  The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision for the testing and assessment of
pupils undertaking the first or second year of secondary education in public schools.
(2)  It shall be the duty of an education authority […] 3 to comply with the provisions of regulations
made in pursuance of subsection (1) above.
(3)  Regulations made in pursuance of subsection (1) above may make different provision as to
different cases or circumstances.
3.—   Fees not to be charged in public schools, etc: exceptions.
(1)  Subject to the provisions of subsections (2) to (5) below, school education provided by an
education authority shall be provided without payment of fees.
(2)  An education authority shall have power to charge fees for school education in some or all of
the classes in a limited number of schools under their management.
(3)  An education authority may award to any pupil in a class in which fees are charged by virtue
of subsection (2) above a scholarship, by way of remission in whole or in part of the fee, in any
case where, having regard to the pupil's ability and aptitude, it appears to the authority proper to
do so; but such a pupil shall not be regarded for the purposes of section 11(1)(a) of this Act (provision
of free books, etc.) as receiving free education.
(4)  An education authority shall not exercise the power conferred by subsection (2) above except
where it may be exercised without prejudice to the adequate provision of free school education for
their area whether—
(a)   at schools under their management, or
(b)   at other schools by virtue of arrangements made by them with the managers of those
schools or, in the case of schools under the management of another education authority,
with that authority.
(5)  Where an education authority are providing school education for an outwith-area pupil in a
school under their management—

2
3

Word repealed by Education (Scotland) Act 1996 c. 43 Sch. 6 para. 1
words repealed by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) Sch. 3 para. 1
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 4

(a)   in classes in which fees are charged under the provisions of subsection (2) above, the
education authority may charge in respect of that pupil, in addition to the fee charged by
virtue of that subsection, such extra fee as they think proper,
(b)   in classes in which no fees are charged, the education authority may charge in respect
of that pupil such fee as they think proper.
In this subsection “outwith-area pupil” means, in relation to any education authority, a pupil who
is not deemed to belong for the purposes of section 23 of this Act to the area of that authority.
(6)  An education authority shall have power to make charges in respect of the use of some or all
of—
(a)   any facilities for further education provided by them,
(b)   any facilities provided by them under section 1(3) of this Act.
[ (7)  This section does not apply as respects the provision of school education by virtue of
subsections (1) and (1A), or as the case may be subsection (1C), of section 1 of this Act. ] 4
4.   Duty of education authorities to provide child guidance service.
It shall be the duty of every education authority to provide for their area a […] 5 psychological
service in clinics or elsewhere, and the functions of that service shall include—
(a)   the study of children with special educational needs;
(b)   the giving of advice to parents and teachers as to appropriate methods of education for
such children;
(c)   in suitable cases, provision for the special educational needs of such children in clinics;
(d)   the giving of advice to a local authority within the meaning of the Social Work
(Scotland) Act 1968 regarding the assessment of the needs of any child for the purposes of
any of the provisions of that or any other enactment.
5. […]6
6.—   Social activities, physical education, etc.
(1)  For the purpose of securing , under section 1(3) of this Act, the provision of facilities for social,
cultural and recreative activities and physical education and training, and education authority may—
(a)   establish, maintain and manage—
(i)   camps, outdoor centres, playing fields and swimming pools;
(ii)   play areas and centres;
(iii)   sports halls, centres and clubs;
(iv)   youth, community and cultural centres and clubs,
and other places at which any such facilities as aforesaid are available;
(b)   organise holiday classes, games, expeditions and other activities.
(2)  In the exercise of their powers under subsection (1) above an education authority may assist
any body whose objects include

4
5
6

added by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) s. 33(4)
words repealed by Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994 c. 39 Sch. 14 para. 1
Repealed by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 9
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 5

the provision or promotion of social, cultural and recreative activities and physical education and
training or the facilities for such activities, education and training.
(3) […]7
7.—   Provision of educational facilities to be in accordance with schemes.
(4)  In considering and determining for the purposes of their functions under the foregoing provisions
of this Act in relation to the provision of school education what amount of public school
accommodation or additional public school accommodation is required for their area, an education
authority shall have regard to and take into account every school, whether public or not, and whether
situated in the area or not, which, in their opinion, gives, or will when completed give, efficient
school education, and is, or will when completed be, suitable and available for the education of the
pupils in their area.
(5)  An education authority shall for the purposes of subsection (4) above have power to call upon
all head teachers and managers of schools other than public schools for such information and for
access to and delivery of all such documents as shall to the education authority appear to be necessary
to enable them to discharge their duties under this Act, and an education authority may from time
to time appoint fit and proper persons to procure such information and to inspect such documents.
(6)  In the performance of their functions under the foregoing provisions of this Act in relation to
the provision of school education, an education authority shall, in particular, have regard to the
expediency of securing the provision of boarding accommodation, either in boarding schools or in
hostels, for pupils for whom education as boarders is considered by their parents and by the authority
to be desirable.
(7) […]8
(8) […]9
8.—   Religious instruction.
(1)  Whereas it has been the custom in the public schools of Scotland for religious observance to
be practised and for instruction in religion to be given to pupils whose parents did not object to
such observance or instruction, but with liberty to parents, without forfeiting any of the other
advantages of the schools, to elect that their children should not take part in such observance or
receive such instruction, be it enacted that education authorities shall be at liberty to continue the
said custom, subject to the provisions of section 9 of this Act.
(2)  It shall not be lawful for an education authority […] 10 to discontinue religious observance or
the provision of instruction in religion in terms of subsection (1) above, unless and until a resolution
in favour of such discontinuance duly passed by the authority has been submitted to a poll of the
local government electors for the education area taken for the purpose, and has been approved by
a majority of electors voting thereat.
7
8
9
10

repealed by Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994 c. 39 Sch. 14 para. 1
repealed by Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Act 1992 c. 37 Sch. 10 para. 1
repealed by Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Act 1992 c. 37 Sch. 10 para. 1
words repealed by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) Sch. 3 para. 1
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 6

(3)  A poll under subsection (2) above shall be by ballot and shall be taken in accordance with rules
to be made by the Secretary of State, which rules may apply with any necessary modifications any
enactments relating to parliamentary or local government elections.
9.   Conscience clause.
Every public school[ and every grant-aided school] 11 shall be open to pupils of all denominations,
and any pupil may be withdrawn by his parents from any instruction in religious subjects and from
any religious observance in any such school; and no pupil shall in any such school be placed at any
disadvantage with respect to the secular instruction given therein by reason of the denomination
to which such pupil or his parents belong, or by reason of his being withdrawn from any instruction
in religious subjects.
10.   Safeguards for religious beliefs.
Where the parent of any pupil who is a boarder at any public school or other educational
establishment under the management of an education authority requests that the pupil be permitted
to attend worship in accordance with the tenets of a particular religious denomination on Sundays
or other days exclusively set apart for religious observance by the religious body to which his parent
belongs, or to receive religious instruction or to practise religious observance in accordance with
such tenets outside the working hours of the school or other educational establishment, the education
authority shall make arrangements for affording to the pupil reasonable opportunities for so doing,
and such arrangements may provide for affording facilities for such worship, instruction or
observance on the premises of the school or other educational establishment, so however that such
arrangements shall not entail expenditure by the education authority […] 12 .
11.—   Provision of books, materials and special clothing free of charge.
(1)  An education authority shall provide free of charge for all pupils belonging to their area who
are given free education—
(a)   at schools […] 13 under their management, or
(b)   at other schools by virtue of arrangements made by them with the managers of those
schools or, in the case of schools under the management of another education authority,
with that authority,
books, writing materials, stationery, mathematical instruments, practice material and other articles
which are necessary to enable the pupils to take full advantage of the education provided; and the
authority may make similar provision, with or without charge, for other pupils resident in their area
and attending any school or other educational establishment.
(2)  An education authority may provide—

11

12

13

words substituted by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) Sch. 2 para.
3(3)
words repealed by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) Sch. 2 para.
3(4)(d)
Words repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.39), s. 82(2), Sch. 11
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 7

(a)   for pupils in attendance at any school, […] 14 or other educational establishment under
their management, articles of clothing suitable for physical exercise or for other activities
of the school, […] 15 or establishment for which special clothing is desirable, and
(b)   for persons who make use of facilities for physical education or training provided by
the authority under section 1(3) of this Act, articles of clothing suitable for such physical
education or training.
12.—   Library service.
(1)  An education authority may, as an ancillary means of promoting education, provide, by purchase
or otherwise, such books and other printed matter, pictures, gramophone records, tape recordings,
films and other materials as they may think desirable, for pupils attending schools, […] 16 or other
educational establishments in their area.
(2)  For the purposes of this section, an education authority may—
(a)   make such arrangements as they consider necessary for the management of a library
service provided by them including the accommodation and distribution of books and other
materials, and
(b)   enter into arrangements with the managers of public libraries.
13.   Provision of hotels.
An education authority may provide and maintain hostels for pupils attending educational
establishments in their area.
[14   Education for children unable to attend school etc.
(1)  If an education authority are satisfied that, by reason of–
(a)   any extraordinary circumstances (not being circumstances mentioned in paragraph (b),
or subsection (2) or (3), below)–
(i)   a pupil is unable; or
(ii)   it would be unreasonable to expect a pupil,
to attend a suitable educational establishment for the purpose of receiving education, they
may;
(b)   a pupil's prolonged ill-health–
(i)   the pupil is unable; or
(ii)   it would be unreasonable to expect the pupil,
to attend such an establishment for that purpose, they shall, without undue delay after those
circumstances become apparent to them,
make special arrangements for the pupil to receive education elsewhere than at an educational
establishment.
(2)  If an education authority have, under section 34(1) of this Act, granted a pupil exemption from
the obligation to attend school, the exemption being to enable the pupil to give assistance at home
14
15
16

Words repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.39), s. 82(2), Sch. 11
Words repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.39), s. 82(2), Sch. 11
Words repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.39), s. 82(2), Sch. 11
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 8

in circumstances arising out of the illness or infirmity of a member of the pupil's family, they shall
in so far as is practicable and without undue delay make such special arrangements as are mentioned
in subsection (1) above.
(3)  If a pupil withdraws, excluded by the education authority (or with the consent of the authority
in circumstances where he would have been so excluded but for his withdrawal), from a public
school in their area they shall, without undue delay–
(a)   provide school education for him in a school managed by them;
(b)   make arrangements for him to receive such education in any other school the managers
of which are willing to receive him; or
(c)   make such special arrangements as are mentioned in subsection (1) above.
] 17
[14ZA.   Meaning of pupil in sections 12 to 14.
In sections 12 to 14 of this Act and in section 52 of this Act as it relates to the said section 13, any
reference to a pupil shall include a reference to a student attending a college of further education
within the meaning of section 36(1) of the Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Act 1992. ] 18
[14A.—   Education in social work establishments.
(1)  An education authority may, in accordance with this section, provide for their area school
education in any establishment provided by a local authority under section 59(1) or (2) of the Social
Work (Scotland) Act 1968 which is provided wholly or mainly for children under school age (other
than any establishment whose provision is secured by them under paragraph (c) of the said section
59(2)).
(2)  The provision of school education referred to in subsection (1) above shall consist of the making
available by the education authority, in accordance with arrangements made by them in that behalf
with the local authority providing the establishment, of the services of any teacher who is employed
by them.
(3)  Arrangements under subsection (2) above may make provision for—
(a)   the supply of equipment for use in connection with the provision of school education
made available under the arrangements;
(b)   any supplementary or incidental matters connected with the arrangements.
(4)  A teacher whose services are made available by an education authority in pursuance of
arrangements under subsection (2) above shall, during the period in which his services are made
available, be deemed to be in a post in a primary department of a school under the management of
the education authority.
] 19

17
18
19

substituted by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) s. 40
added by Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Act 1992 c. 37 Sch. 9 para. 7(2)
S. 14A inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), s. 12
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 9

Transference of schools to education authorities
15.—   Transference of endowed schools to education authorities.
(1)  The governing body of any school providing a course of secondary education administered
under a scheme approved in terms of the Act of 1882, or under any Act or any provisional order
confirmed by Act of Parliament, may, with a view to the maintenance of such school as a school
providing a course of secondary education resolve to transfer the management thereof, together
with the school buildings, and the revenue of the school from endowments in whole or in part, or,
where the endowments are held solely for the purpose of such school, together with the endowments,
to the education authority of the education area in which the school is situated. The education
authority shall have power to receive the same, to manage the school as a school providing a course
of secondary education and to make good any deficiency in the income of the school as managed
by them.
(2)  The Secretary of State may by order make provision for all matters which appear to him
necessary or proper for giving full effect to any transfer under this section, including provision for
the determination of any existing trust whose whole endowments are so transferred.
(3)  A resolution by a governing body under this section shall not take effect unless it is confirmed
by a subsequent meeting called for that special purpose with not less than three weeks notice by
circular sent to each member of the governing body and held not sooner than one month nor later
than two months after the date of the first meeting, and at such second meeting the requisite majority
to secure confirmation shall be not less than the absolute majority of the governing body.
16.—   Transference of denominational schools to education authorities.
(1)  It shall be lawful for the person or persons vested with the title of any school established after
21st November 1918, to which section 18 of the Act of 1918 would have applied had the school
been in existence at that date, with the consent of the trustees of any trust upon which the school
is held and of the Secretary of State, to transfer the school together with the site thereof and any
land or buildings and furniture held and used in connection therewith, by sale, lease or otherwise,
to the education authority, who shall be bound to accept such transfer, upon such terms as to price,
rent, or other consideration as may be agreed, or as may be determined, failing agreement, by an
arbiter appointed by the Secretary of State upon the application of either party.
(2)  The consent of trustees to the transference of a school to an education authority under this
section may be given by a majority of not less than two thirds of the trustees present at a meeting
duly summoned for that purpose. The transference may be effected
(a)   by an ordinary disposition or other deed of conveyance by the persons vested with the
title, recorded in the register of sasines ; or
(b)   where—
(i)   the [transferee's right in the land] 20 is registrable under the Land Registration
(Scotland) Act 1979; or
(ii)   the transference itself is so registrable,
by registration under that Act
20

words substituted by Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 5 (Scottish Act) Sch. 12(1) para.
41(2)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 10

and no stamp or other duty shall be exigible on such disposition or other deed; and the persons
whose consent is hereby required need not be parties to the conveyance, and the validity of the
transference and the title of the education authority shall not be subject to challenge on the ground
that the requisite consents were not duly given, unless such challenge shall be judicially made
within six months after the recording of the deed of conveyance or, as the case may be, registration
.
(3)  The existing staff of teachers in a school transferred under this section shall be taken over by
the education authority and shall as from the date of transfer be placed upon the same scale of
salaries as teachers of corresponding qualifications appointed to corresponding positions in other
schools of the same authority; and any question which may arise as to the due fulfilment or
observance of any provision or requirement of this subsection shall be determined by the Secretary
of State.
Provision, maintenance and equipment of schools and other buildings
17.—   Provision, maintenance and equipment of schools and other buildings.
(1)  Subject to subsection (6) below, It shall be the duty of an education authority , in the performance
of their functions under sections 1 to 6 of this Act, to provide for their area, sufficient accommodation
in public schools (whether day schools or boarding schools), and other educational establishments
under their management to enable them to perform their said functions .
(2)  In any case where an education authority are satisfied, whether upon representations made to
them by any church or denominational body acting on behalf of the parents of children belonging
to such church or body or otherwise, that a new school is required for the accommodation of children
whose parents are resident within the area of the authority, regard being had to the religious belief
of such parents, it shall be lawful for the education authority to provide a new school.
(3)  Subject to subsection (6) below, An education authority shall maintain and keep efficient every
public school, and other educational establishment under their management, and shall from time
to time provide such additional accommodation as may be necessary to enable them to perform
their functions under sections 1 to 6 of this Act. .
(4)  An education authority may, for the purposes of their duty under this section, provide, alter,
improve, enlarge, equip and maintain schools, and other educational establishments outwith as well
as within their area.
(5)  An education authority may provide, alter, improve, enlarge, equip, maintain and furnish houses
and hostels, with such outbuildings and gardens as they think expedient, for teachers and other
officers employed by them (whether or not employed in or about an educational establishment).
[ (6)  Subsections (1) and (3) above shall have effect as regards further education only to the extent
that the education authority is under a duty to do anything under the said sections 1 to 6. ] 21

21

added by Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Act 1992 c. 37 Sch. 9 para. 7(3)(b)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 11

18.—   Improvements as to premises of educational establishments for the safety of pupils.
(1)  Subject to the provisions of this section, an education authority may for the purpose of reducing
the risk of accident to pupils going to or returning from schools or other educational establishments
in their area and under their management, or while actually present at such schools or establishments,
do work to improve the safety of any private road which is used by these pupils or which is in the
vicinity of such a school or establishment, and provide or arrange for the provision of safety barriers
at or near the entrances to such schools and establishments.
(2)  Any work for the purpose of subsection (1) above may be undertaken by the education authority
in co-operation with any other person.
(3)  For the purpose of subsection (1) above an education authority may enter on and carry out
work on any land:
Provided that where an education authority propose to carry out any such work on land
which is in possession of another person, the authority shall obtain the consent of the owner
and of the occupier of such land, unless the owner or the occupier cannot be found.
(4)  Where an education authority propose to provide or arrange for the provision of safety barriers
for the purpose of subsection (1) above on any road, the authority shall—
(a)   if it is a public road, obtain the consent of the authority responsible for the maintenance
of such road;
(b)   if it is a private road, consult the authority responsible for the maintenance of public
roads in the area in which that private road is situated.
[ (5)  In this section “road”, “public road” and “private road”have the meanings ascribed to them
by section 151(1) of the Roads (Scotland) Act 1984. ] 22
19.—   Power of Secretary of State to prescribe standards for premises, etc., of educational
establishments.
(1)  The Secretary of State may make regulations prescribing standards and requirements which
are to apply to the premises and equipment of educational establishments under the management
of education authorities and regulations under this subsection may prescribe different standards or
requirements in respect of such different classes (however defined) of educational establishment
as may be specified in the regulations.
(2)  It shall be the duty
(a)   of an education authority to secure that the premises and equipment of any educational
establishment under their management conform to the standards and requirements applicable
to that establishment;
and, in particular, that the premises and equipment of all educational establishments under their
management are maintained in such a condition as to conduce to the good health and safety of all
persons occupying or frequenting the premises or using the equipment.
(3)  Where the premises or equipment of any educational establishment under the management of
an education authority […] 23 do not conform to the standards or requirements applicable to that

22
23

S. 18(5) substituted by Roads (Scotland) Act 1984 (c.54), s. 156(1), Sch. 9 para. 80
words repealed by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) Sch. 3 para. 1
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 12

establishment […] 24 or are not maintained as mentioned in subsection (2) above, the Secretary
of State may, after consultation with the authority […] 25 direct that the premises or equipment be
brought into conformity with the said standards or requirements or into the state of maintenance
mentioned in that subsection (as the case may be) within a period to be specified in the direction;
and it shall thereupon be the duty of that authority […] 26 to comply with the direction.
[19A.—   Secretary of State's power to control use of dangerous materials or apparatus in
educational establishments.
(1)  The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision for requiring his approval to be
obtained for the use in such educational establishments as may be specified in the regulations of
such materials or apparatus as may be so specified, being materials or apparatus which could or
might involve a serious risk to health.
(2)  The power referred to in subsection (1) above includes power to make different provision in
respect of different educational establishment.
] 27
20.—   Acquisition of land and execution of works.
(1)  In order to enable them to execute any of their functions, an education authority may, from
time to time—
(a)   acquire, whether by way of purchase, […] 28 lease, excambion or donation, any land
whether situated within or outwith the area of the authority;
(b)   erect and furnish buildings or execute any other works on any land belonging to them,
or on land leased by them;
(c)   convert, alter, enlarge or improve any existing building or other works belonging to
the authority or leased by them;
Provided always that paragraphs (b) and (c) above shall not of themselves authorise the
authority to do anything contrary to the conditions contained in the title to or lease of any
such land, buildings or other works.
(4)  For the purpose of the acquisition of land by an education authority under this Act, the Land
Clauses Acts, except in so far as they relate to the purchase and taking of land otherwise than by
agreement, shall be incorporated with this Act.
(5)  An education authority may be authorised by the Secretary of State to purchase land compulsorily
for the purposes of this Act, and the Acquisition of Land (Authorisation Procedure) (Scotland) Act
1947. shall apply in relation to any such compulsory purchase as if this Act had been in force
immediately before the commencement of that Act.
(6)  In this section, and in the Lands Clauses Acts as hereby incorporated, “land”includes water
and any right or servitude in or over land or water.
24
25
26
27
28

words repealed by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) Sch. 3 para. 1
words repealed by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) Sch. 3 para. 1
words repealed by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) Sch. 3 para. 1
S. 19A inserted by Education (Amendment) (Scotland) Act 1984 (c.6), s. 1
word repealed by Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 5 (Scottish Act) Sch. 13(1) para. 1
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 13

Management of denominational schools
21.—   Management of denominational schools.
(1)  Any school transferred to an education authority under section 16(1) of this Act shall be held,
maintained and managed by the education authority as a public school.
(2)  [Subject to subsections (2A) and (2C) below,] 29 in any such school the education authority
shall have the sole power of regulating the curriculum and of appointing teachers:
[ (2A)  A teacher appointed to any post on the staff of any such school by the education authority
shall […] 30 satisfy the Secretary of State as to qualification, and [shall be required to be ] 31
approved as regards [his ] 32 religious belief and character by representatives of the church or
denominational body in whose interest the school has been conducted; ] 33
[ (2B)  Where the said representatives of a church or denominational body refuse to give the approval
mentioned in subsection (2A) above they shall state their reasons for such refusal in writing. ] 34
(2C)  subject to the provisions of section 9 of this Act, the time set apart for religious instruction
or observance in any such school shall not be less than that so set apart according to the use and
wont of the former management of the school.
(3)  For each such school the education authority shall appoint as supervisor of religious instruction,
without remuneration, a person approved as regards religious belief and character as aforesaid, and
the supervisor so appointed shall report to the education authority as to the efficiency of the religious
instruction given in such school, and shall be entitled to enter the school at all times set apart for
religious instruction or observance.
(4)  In every such school the education authority shall give facilities for the holding of religious
examinations.
(5)  Subsections (1) to (4) above, so far as applicable, shall have effect in relation to any school
provided by an education authority under section 17(2) of this Act as they have effect in relation
to schools transferred to an education authority as mentioned in subsection (1) above, subject to
the modification that the time set apart for religious instruction in any school so provided shall be
not less than that so set apart in schools in the same education area which have been transferred as
mentioned in subsection (1) above.
(6)  Any question which may arise as to the due fulfilment or observance of any provision or
requirement of the foregoing provisions of this section shall be determined by the Secretary of
State.

29
30

31
32
33

34

Words inserted by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.39), s. 82(1), Sch. 10 para. 8(7)(a)
Words repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.39), s. 82(1)(2), Sch. 10 para. 8(7)(c), Sch.
11
Words substituted by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.39), s. 82(1), Sch. 10 para. 8(7)(d)
Word substituted by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.39), s. 82(1), Sch. 10 para. 8(7)(e)
S. 21(2A) substituted by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.39), s. 82(1)(2), Sch. 10 para. 8(7)(c),
Sch. 11
S. 21(2B) inserted by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.39), s. 82(1), Sch. 10 para. 8(7)(f)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 14

(7)  In this section, the reference to section 16(1) or 17(2) of this Act shall include a reference to
the corresponding provision of the Act of 1918, the Act of 1946 and the Act of 1962.
Discontinuance and moves of educational establishments
22.—   Discontinuance and moves of educational establishments.
(1)  Subject to any special conditions attaching thereto , an education authority may—
(a)   sell, […] 35 excamb or let any land vested in them; and
(b)   discontinue or change the site of, any educational establishment under their
management, or part thereof.
(2)  Where an education authority propose to discontinue any educational establishment under their
management, or to discontinue the use, in connection with such an educational establishment, of
any part of that establishment, or of any building or part of a building ancillary to the establishment,
and land forming the site, or part of the site, of that establishment or of that part of the establishment
or of that building or part of a building, as the case may be, is subject to—
(a)   the third proviso to section 2 of the School Sites Act 1841 (which provides that, if any
land granted in accordance with the provisions of that section ceases to be used for the
purposes mentioned in that Act, that land shall revert to the grantor), or
(b)   any condition of a similar nature in any Act, deed or other instrument,
the Secretary of State, on the application in that behalf of the education authority, may by order
direct that the said proviso or condition shall not have effect in relation to that land:
Provided that such a direction shall not be given in relation to any land unless the Secretary
of State is satisfied either—
(i)   that the person to whom the land would revert in accordance with the said
proviso or condition cannot after due inquiry be found, or
(ii)   that, if that person can be found, he has consented to relinquish his rights in
relation to the land under the said proviso or condition, and that, if he has consented
to do so in consideration of the payment of a sum of money to him, adequate provision
can be made for the payment to him of that sum.
(3)  A direction given by the Secretary of State under subsection (2) above in relation to any land
may make provision for the payment out of the proceeds of any sale of that land of any sum which
is payable to any person in consideration of the relinquishment of his rights in relation to the land
under the said proviso or condition.
(4)  If at any time after the expiry of ten years from the transfer of a school under section 16 of this
Act, or from the provision of a new school under section 17(2) of this Act, the education authority
by whom the school is maintained are of opinion that the school is no longer required, or that,
having regard to the religious belief of the parents of the children attending the school, the conditions
prescribed in subsections (1) to (4) of section 21 of this Act or in the said subsections so far as
applicable and having effect by virtue of subsection (5) of that section, as the case may be, ought
no longer to apply thereto, it shall subject to sections 22A, 22B, 22C and 22D of this Act be lawful
for the education authority thereafter to discontinue the school, or, as the case may be, to hold,
maintain and manage the same in all respects as a public school not subject to those conditions:
35

word repealed by Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 5 (Scottish Act) Sch. 13(1) para. 1
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 15

Provided that—
(i)   in the case of any school which has been transferred as aforesaid to an education
authority, that authority shall in either of those events make to the trustees by whom
the school was transferred, or to their successors in office or representatives, such
compensation (if any) in respect of the school or other property so transferred as
may be agreed, or as may be determined, failing agreement, by an arbiter appointed
by the Secretary of State upon the application of either party; and
(ii)   if before the expiry of ten years from the transfer of any such school, the
education authority are of opinion as aforesaid and so represent, and the trustees
by whom the school was transferred, or their successors in office or representatives,
formally intimate to the authority that they concur with the authority in their opinion
as represented, then in such case, , it shall subject to sections 22A, 22B, 22C and
22D of this Act be lawful for the education authority forthwith to discontinue or to
hold, maintain or manage the school as aforesaid, subject to the like provision with
respect to compensation.
(5)  In subsection (4) above, the reference to section 16 or 17(2) of this Act shall include a reference
to the corresponding provision of the Act of 1918, the Act of 1946 and the Act of 1962.
Consultation on, and consent for, changes in certain educational matters
[22A.—   Consultation on certain changes in educational matters.
(1)  Where an education authority make a proposal of a prescribed kind, they shall, in such manner
as may be prescribed, publish it or otherwise make it available and consult such persons as may be
prescribed and shall not reach a decision on it without having regard to any representations made
to them on it by those persons.
(2)  In this section “prescribed” means prescribed for the purposes of this section by the Secretary
of State by regulations and in so prescribing kinds of proposals the Secretary of State shall include
proposals to discontinue or change the site of any school under the management of an education
authority.
] 36
[22B.—   Consent for certain changes in educational matters.
(1)  An education authority shall submit to the Secretary of State for his consent any proposal of
theirs of a prescribed kind and shall not implement such a proposal without his consent.
(2)  In this section “prescribed” means prescribed for the purposes of this section by the Secretary
of State by regulations and the Secretary of State may prescribe different kinds of proposals in
relation to different education authorities.
] 37

36
37

Ss. 22A–22D inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), s. 6
Ss. 22A–22D inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), s. 6
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 16

[22C.—   Consent for certain changes affecting denominational schools.
(1)  An education authority shall submit to the Secretary of State for his consent any proposal of
theirs to which this section applies and shall not implement such a proposal without his consent.
(2)  A proposal to which this section applies is one which—
(a)   relates to a school transferred to an education authority under section 16(1) or provided
by them under section 17(2) of this Act; and
(b)   will, if implemented, have the effect that all or some of the pupils who attend the school
will no longer receive school education in a school of the kind referred to in paragraph (a)
above or that all or some of the children who would, but for the implementation of the
proposal, have been likely to attend it will not be likely to receive such education in a school
of that kind.
(3)  The Secretary of State shall not grant consent under this section unless he is satisfied that
adequate arrangements have been made for the religious instruction of pupils and children who
would, as a result of implementation of the proposal, no longer receive or be likely to receive school
education in a school of the kind referred to in paragraph (a) of subsection (2) above.
(4)  In granting consent under this section the Secretary of State may impose such conditions as he
thinks fit with regard to the religious instruction of the pupils and children referred to in paragraph
(b) of subsection (2) above and to related matters and conditions imposed by the Secretary of State
under this section may be revoked or amended by him at any time.
(5)  Any question which may arise—
(a)   whether a proposal is one to which this section applies;
(b)   as to the implementation of a proposal to which the Secretary of State has consented
under this section;
(c)   as to the fulfilment or observation of any conditions upon his consent imposed under
subsection (4) above shall be determined by the Secretary of State and the education authority
shall perform their duties under this Act in accordance with any such determination.
(6)  In this section, the reference to section 16(1) or 17(2) of this Act shall include a reference to
the corresponding provision of the Act of 1918, the Act of 1946 and the Act of 1962.
] 38
22D.—   Further provisions relating to denominational schools.
(1)  An education authority shall submit to the Secretary of State for his consent any proposal of
theirs to which this section applies and shall not implement such a proposal without his consent.
(2)  A proposal to which this section applies is one—
(a)   which relates to a school transferred to an education authority under section 16(1) or
provided by them under section 17(2) of this Act;
(b)   to—
(i)   discontinue the school or a part of it;
(ii)   amalgamate the school or a part of it with another school;
(iii)   change the site of the school;
(iv)   change the arrangements for admission to the school; or
38

Ss. 22A–22D inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), s. 6
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 17

(v)   disapply to the school the conditions prescribed in subsections (1) to (4) of
section 21 of this Act or in the said subsections so far as applicable and having effect
by virtue of subsection (5) of that section; and
(c)   in relation to which the Secretary of State, having consulted any education authority
affected by it, is satisfied, upon written representations made, in the case of any church or
denominational body in whose interest the school is conducted other than the Roman Catholic
Church, by a person authorised for that purpose by that church or denominational body and,
in the case of the Roman Catholic Church, by the Scottish Hierarchy of that Church, that—
(i)   if implemented, it will have any of the results specified in subsection (3) below;
and
(ii)   the education authority submitting the proposal under subsection (1) above and
the church, denominational body or Hierarchy, as the case may be, have, after
discussion, failed to reach agreement that it should be implemented.
[ (3)  The results referred to in subsection (2)(c)(i) above are—
(a)   a significant deterioration for pupils belonging to the area of the education authority
submitting the proposal under subsection (1) above; or
(b)   a significant deterioration for pupils belonging to the area of any other education
authority; or
(c)   where neither paragraph (a) nor paragraph (b) above applies, such a deterioration for
pupils as mentioned in the said paragraph (a) and pupils belonging to the area of another
education authority as, taken together, amounts to a significant deterioration,
in the provision, distribution or availability of school education in schools of the kind referred to
in subsection (2)(a) above compared with such provision, distribution or availability in other public
schools.
] 39
(5)  The Secretary of State shall not grant consent under this section in relation to a school unless
he is satisfied that adequate arrangements have been made for the religious instruction of the children
who will no longer receive or be likely to receive school education in a school of the kind referred
to in subsection (2)(a) above.
(6)  In granting consent under this section in relation to a school the Secretary of State may impose
such conditions as he thinks fit with regard to the religious instruction of the children who will no
longer receive or be likely to receive school education in a school of the kind referred to in subsection
(2)(a) above and to related matters and, in doing so, he shall have regard to the duties imposed by
section 21 of this Act on education authorities in relation to schools of that kind, and conditions
imposed by the Secretary of State under this section may be revoked or amended by him at any
time.
(7)  Any question which may arise—
(a)   whether a proposal is one to which this section applies;
(b)   as to the implementation of a proposal to which the Secretary of State has consented
under this section;
(c)   as to the fulfilment or observation of any conditions upon his consent imposed under
subsection (6) above

39

subsection (3) substitutes subsections (3) and (4) by Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994 c. 39 Pt IV s.
144(c)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 18

shall be determined by the Secretary of State and the education authority shall perform their duties
under this Act in accordance with any such determination.
(8)  In this section the reference to section 16(1) or 17(2) of this Act shall include a reference to
the corresponding provision of the Act of 1918, the Act of 1946 and the Act of 1962.
Co-operation between education authorities and others
23.—   Provision by education authority for education of pupils belonging to areas of other
authorities.
(1)  An education authority shall have power to provide in or in connection with any public school,
or other educational establishment under their management, school education or further education
and other services under this Act for any pupil belonging to the area of some other education
authority or of a local education authority in England and Wales
(1A)  Without prejudice to any other provision of this Act, for the purposes of their duty under
section 1 of this Act an education authority shall have power to make arrangements with another
education authority (in this subsection referred to as a “provider authority”) for the provision of
school education or further education for any pupils belonging to the area of the authority in a
school or educational establishment under the management of the provider authority.
(1B)  Arrangements made under this Act by an education authority for the placing of children in
schools may include provision to give effect to any arrangements made under subsection (1A)
above.
(1C)  Where the arrangements for the placing of children in schools subsisting before the
establishment of new local government areas under Part I of the Local Government etc. (Scotland)
Act 1994 lead, as a consequence of such establishment, to school education for pupils belonging
to the area of one education authority being provided at schools or educational establishments under
the management of another education authority, nothing in this Act shall prevent such arrangements
from continuing until they are changed by an education authority in accordance with this Act.
(2)  Where an education authority have provided school education with or without other services
for any pupil belonging to the area of some other authority, the education authority , may, if a claim
therefor is made within the prescribed period, recover from that other authority such contributions
in respect of such provision as may be agreed by the authorities concerned , or, in default of such
agreement, as may be determined by the Secretary of State, who shall have regard to the estimated
cost of such provision:
(3)  The Secretary of State may make regulations prescribing the areas to which particular classes
of pupils receiving school education are to be deemed to belong for the purposes of this section
and sections 1(5)(c) and (d), 28A(1) (as it has effect under Schedule A2 to this Act), 50, 51 and 60
to 65F of this Act and any such pupil to whom the regulations apply shall be deemed to belong to
the area determined in accordance with the regulations. Any other pupil receiving school education
shall, for the aforesaid purposes, be deemed to belong to the area in which his parent is ordinarily
resident, and any pupil receiving further education shall be deemed to belong to the area in which
he himself is ordinarily resident:

(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 19

Provided that any pupil who becomes ordinarily resident in any area wholly or mainly for
the purposes of attending an educational establishment providing further education shall
be deemed to belong not to that area but to any area to which he was deemed to belong
immediately before he became so resident.
[ (3A)  Where an education authority's arrangements for the placing of children in schools under
their management give any priority to siblings of pupils attending such schools, those arrangements
shall not discriminate between siblings belonging to the area of that education authority and siblings
belonging to the area of another education authority. ] 40
(4)  Where on 1st January 1947 or at any subsequent date it was or is the practice of an education
authority or of the managers of a school situated in the area of that authority to provide school
education for pupils belonging to the area of another education authority, then whether contributions
have been recovered under section 24(2) of the Act of 1946, section 24(2) of the Act of 1962 or
this section or not, they shall not be entitled to discontinue such practice except after giving such
notice as the Secretary of State may, in the event of a dispute, consider reasonable.
24.—   Power of education authorities to make payments to persons providing education, etc.
(1)  An education authority may, for the purpose of promoting education generally, or of improving
the facilities for education available, or the education provided, for their area in particular, make
payments—
(a)   to another education authority,
(b)   to a university, or to the managers of a hostel or other residence used by students
attending a university,
(c)   to the managers of any school (other than a public school),
(d)   to the managers of any educational establishment (other than a school),
(e)   to any other person providing education or educational services,
(f)   to any person to assist the carrying out of educational research,
and any such payment may be made either unconditionally or subject to such conditions as may
be agreed between the parties.
(2)  Where—
(a)   it is agreed between an education authority and the managers of any educational
establishment, as a condition of the making of payments under subsection (1) above, that
the authority shall have representation or additional representation on the governing body
of that establishment, but
(b)   the provisions of any trust deed or other instrument relating to the establishment will
not, unless they are modified, permit provision to be made for such representation or
additional representation as aforesaid,
the Secretary of State may, on being requested to do so by the managers of the establishment, by
order make such modifications in the provisions of that trust deed or other instrument as may be
necessary to enable provision to be made for such representation or additional representation, as
the case may be, as aforesaid, and any such trust deed or other instrument shall, so long as the said
payments continue to be made, have effect subject to any modifications so made.

40

added by Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994 c. 39 Pt I c. 6 s. 32(3)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 20

Promotion of educational developments
25.   Educational research.
An education authority may make such provision for conducting or assisting the conduct of research
as appears to the authority to be desirable for the purpose of improving the education provided for
their area.
26.   Educational conferences.
An education authority may arrange or organise, or participate in the arrangement or organisation
of, conferences or meetings for the discussion of questions relating to education, and may expend
such sums as may be reasonable in paying or contributing towards any expenditure incurred in
connection with conferences or meetings for the discussion of such questions, including the expenses
of any person authorised by them to attend any such conference or meeting.
27.—   Provision of museums by education authorities.
(1)  An education authority may provide and maintain museums within their area, and shall have
power—
(a)   to acquire any objects which, in their opinion, it is desirable to include in a collection
contained in a museum maintained by them under this section;
(b)   to lend any object vested in them and comprised in any such collection, on such terms
and conditions as they think fit, to any person for any purpose;
(c)   subject to subsection (3) below, to transfer any object vested in them and comprised
in any such collection to the governing body of a museum maintained by a person other
than the education authority, for the purpose of being included in a collection contained in
that museum;
(d)   subject to subsection (3) below, to sell, exchange, give away or otherwise dispose of
any object vested in them and comprised in a collection contained in a museum maintained
by them under this section, if for any reason that object is not, in their opinion, required for
retention in any such collection;
(e)   to co-operate with any other education authority or any other body;
(f)   generally to do all such things as they may consider necessary or expedient for or in
connection with the provision and maintenance of museums under this section.
(2)  An education authority may, if they think fit, make such charge as they consider reasonable
for admission to a museum maintained by them under this section, and in determining whether,
and in what manner, to exercise their powers under this subsection in relation to any museum, an
authority shall take into account the need to secure that the museum plays its full part in the
promotion of education in their area, and shall have particular regard to the interests of children
and students.
(3)  Where an object has become vested in an education authority subject to any trust or condition—
(a)   that object shall, on being transferred under subsection (1)(c) above, be subject to the
like trust or condition in the hands of the transferee;
(b)   the powers conferred by subsection (1)(d) above shall not be exercisable in relation to
that object in a manner inconsistent with that trust or condition.

(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 21

PART II
RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF PARENTS AND FUNCTIONS OF EDUCATION AUTHORITIES
IN RELATION TO INDIVIDUAL PUPILS
General principle
28.—   Pupils to be educated in accordance with the wishes of their parents.
(1)  In the exercise and performance of their powers and duties under this Act, the Secretary of
State and education authorities shall have regard to the general principle that, so far as is compatible
with the provision of suitable instruction and training and the avoidance of unreasonable public
expenditure, pupils are to be educated in accordance with the wishes of their parents.
(2) […]41
28A.—   Duty to comply with parents requests as to schools.
(1)  Where the parent of a qualifying child makes a written request to an education authority to
place his child in the school (other than a nursery school or a nursery class in a school) specified
in the request, being a school under their management, it shall be the duty of the authority, subject
to subsections (2), (3), (3A) and (3F) below, to place the child accordingly. Such a request so made
is referred to in this Act as a “placing request” and the school specified in it is referred to in this
Act as the “specified school”.
(1A)  The education authorities shall–
(a)   in carrying out the duty imposed on them by subsection (1) above; and
(b)   in deciding when that duty does not apply,
have regard to such guidance as the Scottish Ministers may give in that respect.
(2)  Where a placing request relates to two or more schools under the management of the education
authority to whom it was made, the duty imposed by subsection (1) above shall apply in relation
to the first mentioned such school, which shall be treated for the purposes of this Act as the specified
school.
(3)  The duty imposed by subsection (1) above does not apply—
(a)   if placing the child in the specified school would—
(i)   make it necessary for the authority to take an additional teacher into employment;
(ii)   give rise to significant expenditure on extending or otherwise altering the
accommodation at or facilities provided in connection with the school;
(iii)   be seriously detrimental to the continuity of the child's education;
(iv)   be likely to be seriously detrimental to order and discipline in the school;
(v)   be likely to be seriously detrimental to the educational well-being of pupils
attending the school;
(vi)   assuming that pupil numbers remain constant, make it necessary, at the
commencement of a future stage of the child's primary education, for the authority
to elect either to create an additional class (or an additional composite class) in the

41

Repealed by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 9
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 22

specified school or to take an additional teacher into employment at that school; [
or] 42
[ (vii)   though neither of the tests set out in sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii) above is
satisfied, have the consequence that the capacity of the school would be exceeded
in terms of pupil numbers; ] 43
(b)   if the education normally provided at the specified school is not suited to the age, ability
or aptitude of the child;
(c)   if the education authority have already required the child to discontinue his attendance
at the specified school;
(d)   if, where the specified school is a special school, the child does not have special
educational needs requiring the education or special facilities normally provided at that
school; or
(e)   if the specified school is a single sex school (within the meaning given to that expression
by section 26 of the Sex Discrimination Act 1975) and the child is not of the sex admitted
or taken (under that section) to be admitted to the school,
but an education authority may place a child in the specified school notwithstanding paragraphs
(a) to (e) above.
(3A)  the duty imposed by subsection (1) above does not apply where the acceptance of a placing
request in respect of a child who is resident outwith the catchment area of the specified school
would prevent the education authority from retaining reserved places at the specified school or in
relation to any particular stage of education at the school; but nothing in this subsection shall prevent
an education authority from placing a child in the specified school.
(3C)  In subsection (3A) above, “reserved places” means such number of places (not exceeding
such number or, as the case may be, such percentage of places at the school or relating to the
particular stage of education as may be prescribed by regulations) as are in the opinion of the
education authority reasonably required to accommodate pupils likely to become resident in the
catchment area of the school in the period from the time of consideration of the placing request up
to and during the year from 1 August to which the placing request relates; and different numbers
or, as the case may be, percentages may be prescribed under this subsection for the purpose of
different cases or circumstances.
(3D)  In subsections (3A) and (3C) above, “catchment area” means the area from which pupils
resident therein will be admitted to the school in terms of any priority based on residence in
accordance with the guidelines formulated by the authority under section 28B(1)(c) of this Act.
(3F)  Where an education authority are carrying out the duty imposed on them by subsection (1)
above in respect of a child such as is mentioned in subsection (6)(c) below, they shall place the
child in the specified school–
(a)   on the date (being the date fixed for that school under section 32(1) and (2) of this Act)
next following the making of the placing request; or
(b)   where that date has passed, as soon after that date as is reasonably practicable.
(4)  An education authority shall inform a parent in writing of their decision on his placing request
and, where they decide to refuse it, shall give him written reasons for their decision and inform
him of his right to refer it under section 28C of this Act to an appeal committee.
42
43

added by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) s. 44(4)
added by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) s. 44(4)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 23

(5)  The Secretary of State may, by regulations, make provision for deeming an education authority
to have refused a placing request in the event of their not having informed the parent in writing of
their decision on it in accordance with subsection (4) above within such period or before such date
as may be prescribed in the regulations and different periods or dates may be so prescribed for
different purposes.
(6)  In this section–
“primary school” does not include a nursery school or a nursery class; and
“qualifying child” means–
(a)   a child of school age;
(b)   a child who has commenced attendance at a primary school but is not of school
age; or
(c)   a child who is not of school age and who, on the date (being the date fixed
under subsections (1) and (2) of section 32 of this Act for the purposes of subsection
(6) of that section) next following the making of the request under subsection (1)
above, will be eligible under this Act to commence attendance at a primary school.
[44]

[28B.—   Information as to placing in schools and other matters.
(1)  Every education authority shall—
(a)   publish or otherwise make available information as to—
(i)   their arrangements for the placing of children in schools under their management;
(ii)   such matters as may be prescribed by regulations;
(iii)   such other matters as the authority consider necessary or expedient for the
purposes of their functions under this Act;
(b)   where a child falls, in accordance with those arrangements, to be placed in a school
under their management—
(i)   in a case where the authority propose to place the child in a particular school,
inform his parent of the school; and
(ii)   in every case, subject to subsection (4) below, inform the parent of the general
effect of section 28A(1) and (2) of this Act and of his right to make a placing request;
(c)   in making arrangements for the performance of their functions under this Act, formulate
guidelines to be followed by them as respects placing in schools generally or, if they think
it necessary, in any particular school in the event of there being more placing requests made
in respect of certain schools or, as the case may be, that school or in respect of any stage
or stages of school education provided there than there are places available;
(d)   on a request to that effect made to them at any time by a parent of a child, supply the
parent with any prescribed or determined information about any school under their
management.
In paragraph (d) above, “prescribed or determined information” means information prescribed or
determined under subsection (3)(c) below.
(2)  An education authority shall, in performing the duties imposed on them by subsection (1)
above, comply with any regulations made under subsection (3) below.

44

In relation to a recorded child under 1980 c.44, s.60: [See Westlaw UK].
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 24

(3)  The Secretary of State may by regulations prescribe or make provision for the determining
of—
(a)   the procedure in accordance with which education authorities are to perform the duties
imposed on them by subsection (1) above and when they are to do so;
(b)   how education authorities are to go about publishing or otherwise making available
information under subsection (1) above or informing parents under that subsection;
(c)   the kind of information which is to be so published or which is to comprise the
information so made available or supplied to parents.
(4)  The duty imposed by subsection (1)(b)(ii) above arises only when the existence of the child
and the fact that he falls to be placed in a school under their management are known to the education
authority.
] 45
28C.—   Reference to appeal committee of refusal of placing request.
(1)  Subject to subsections (2) and (3) below, a parent who has made a placing request may refer
a decision of the education authority refusing his request to an appeal committee set up under
section 28D of this Act.
(2) […]46
(3)  Where a reference under this section has been made in respect of a child, no further such
reference in respect of the child shall be competent during the period of 12 months beginning with
the day on which the immediately preceding such reference was lodged.
(4)  A reference under this section shall be lodged with the appeal committee within 28 days of the
receipt by the parent of the decision of the education authority (which, if posted, shall, unless the
contrary is proved, be presumed to have been received on the day after the date on which it was
posted except that a decision posted on a Friday or Saturday shall, unless the contrary is proved,
be presumed to have been received on the Monday next following), but the committee shall, on
good cause being shown, have power to hear such a reference notwithstanding that it was not lodged
within that time.
[28D.—   Appeal committees.
(1)  Every education authority shall—
(a)   set up and maintain such number of appeal committees; and
(b)   make such other arrangements
as are necessary to enable references to be made under sections 28C, 28E(6), 28F(7), 28H and 63
of this Act and heard by the committees.
(2)  An appeal committee set up under subsection (1) above shall be constituted in accordance with
Schedule A1 to this Act.
(3)  The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision for procedure in relation to references
under section 28C of this Act and regulations made under this subsection may include provision—
45
46

Ss. 28A-28G inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), s. 1(1)
repealed by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) s. 43(3)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 25

(a)   requiring the education authority to make information relevant to their decision available
to the committee and to the parent referring that decision to the committee;
(b)   deeming, for the purposes of this Act, an appeal committee to have confirmed the
decision of an education authority on a placing request in the event of the committee's not
having complied with section 28E(3) of this Act within such period or before such date as
may be prescribed in the regulations and different periods or dates may be so prescribed
for different purposes;
(c)   ancillary to or consequential upon provision made under paragraphs (a) and (b) above.
] 47
[28E.—   Appeal committees: supplementary provisions.
(1)  An appeal committee may, on a reference under section 28C of this Act, confirm the education
authority's decision if they are satisfied—
(a)   that one or more of the grounds of refusal specified in section 28A(3) of this Act exists
or exist; and
(b)   that, in all the circumstances, it is appropriate to do so
but otherwise shall refuse to confirm the authority's decision and shall, where they so refuse, require
the education authority to place the child to whom the reference relates in the specified school.
(2)  Where, in considering a reference under section 28C of this Act of a decision to refuse a placing
request where the specified school is a special school, an appeal committee refuse to confirm the
decision, they shall have power, if the education authority have decided not to record the child to
whom the reference relates, to require the education authority to reconsider their decision not to
record him.
(3)  An appeal committee shall notify their decision under this section and the reasons for it in
writing to the parent who made the reference and to the education authority and, where they confirm
the authority's decision, they shall inform the parent of his right of appeal to the sheriff under section
28F of this Act.
(4)  Where, on a reference under section 28C of this Act, an appeal committee refuse to confirm
an education authority's decision, the authority shall give effect to the placing request to which the
reference relates.
(5)  Where a decision of an appeal committee under this section is inconsistent with any decision
of the education authority refusing a placing request to place another child at the same time and at
the same stage of education and in the same school as that at and in which the child to whom the
appeal committee's decision relates is to be placed, the education authority shall review their decision
so to refuse and shall inform the parent of the other child in writing of their decision upon that
review and the reasons for it.
(6)  The decision of an education authority upon a review under subsection (5) above not to reverse
their decision to refuse the placing request in respect of the other child may be referred to an appeal
committee by the parent of the other child as if the decision upon the review were a decision refusing
his placing request and the provisions of this Act relating to references of decisions upon placing
requests and appeals therefrom (including those relating to appeal committees) shall apply
accordingly.
47

Ss. 28A-28G inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), s. 1(1)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 26

(7) […]48
(8) […]49
] 50
[28F.—   Appeal to sheriff from appeal committee.
(1)  A parent who has made a reference under section 28C of this Act may appeal to the sheriff
having jurisdiction where the specified school is situated against the decision of an appeal committee
on that reference.
(2)  The education authority may, but the appeal committee shall not, be a party to an appeal under
this section.
(3)  An appeal under this section—
(a)   shall be made by way of summary application;
(b)   shall be lodged with the sheriff clerk within 28 days from the date of receipt of the
decision of the appeal committee (which, if posted, shall, unless the contrary is proved, be
presumed to have been received on the day after the date on which it was posted, except
that a decision posted on a Friday or Saturday shall, unless the contrary is proved, be
presumed to have been received on the Monday next following); and
(c)   shall be heard in chambers.
(4)  On good cause being shown, the sheriff may hear an appeal under this section notwithstanding
that it was not lodged within the time mentioned in subsection (3) above.
(5)  The sheriff may on an appeal under this section confirm the education authority's decision if
he is satisfied—
(a)   that one or more of the grounds of refusal specified in section 28A(3) of this Act exists
or exist; and
(b)   that, in all the circumstances, it is appropriate to do so
but shall otherwise refuse to confirm their decision and shall, where he so refuses, require the
authority to give effect to the placing request to which the appeal relates.
(6)  Where the judgment of the sheriff on an appeal under this section is inconsistent with any
decision of the education authority (whether confirmed by the appeal committee or not) refusing
a placing request to place another child at the same time and at the same stage of education and in
the same school as that at and in which the child to whom the judgment relates is to be placed, the
education authority shall review their decision so to refuse and shall inform the parent of the other
child of their decision upon that review and the reasons for it.
(7)  The decision of an education authority upon a review under subsection (6) above not to reverse
their decision to refuse the placing request in respect of the other child may be referred to an appeal
committee by the parent of the other child as if the decision upon the review were a decision refusing
his placing request and the provisions of this Act relating to references of decisions upon placing
requests and appeals therefrom (including those relating to appeal committees) shall apply
accordingly.
48
49
50

Amends Tribunals and Inquiries Act 1971 (c. 62), Sch. 1 para. 36
Inserts s. 23(2)(f) in Local Government (Scotland) Act 1975 (c. 30)
Ss. 28A-28G inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), s. 1(1)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 27

(8)  The sheriff may make such order as to the expenses of an appeal under this section as he thinks
proper.
(9)  The judgment of the sheriff on an appeal under this section shall be final.
] 51
28G.—   Application of sections 28A to 28F and Schedule A1 to young persons.
Sections 28A to 28F of this Act and Schedule A1 to this Act shall apply in relation to a young
person who is a pupil and in that application references in those sections to the parent of a qualifying
child as well as references to the [qualifying ] 52 child himself shall be construed as references to
the young person.
[28H.—   Reference to appeal committee, and appeal therefrom of decision to exclude pupil.
(1)  Where an education authority decide to exclude a pupil from a school under their management
which he attends, the parent of the pupil or, where the pupil is a young person, the pupil may refer
the decision to an appeal committee set up under section 28D of this Act.
(2)  An appeal committee may, on a reference under this section, confirm or annul the decision of
the education authority excluding the pupil and, in confirming a decision of the authority to exclude
a pupil until certain conditions stipulated by them are complied with, the committee may modify
the conditions.
(3)  The decision of an appeal committee on a reference under this section and the reasons for it
shall be notified by the committee in writing to the parent or, as the case may be, the pupil making
the reference and to the education authority.
(4)  A decision of an appeal committee on a reference under this section annulling a decision of an
education authority or modifying the conditions subject to which an education authority have
excluded a pupil from a school shall be complied with by the authority.
(5)  The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision for procedure in relation to references
under this section and regulations made under this subsection may include provision—
(a)   requiring the education authority to make information relevant to their decision available
to the appeal committee and to the parent or, as the case may be, pupil referring that decision
to the committee;
(b)   deeming, for the purposes of this Act, an appeal committee to have confirmed the
education authority's decision to exclude a pupil from a school under their management
which he attends in the event of the appeal committee's not having complied with subsection
(3) above within such period as may be prescribed in the regulations and different periods
may be so prescribed for different purposes.
(6)  The decision of an appeal committee confirming an education authority's decision to exclude
a pupil or modifying conditions under subsection (2) above may be appealed against by the parent
of the pupil or, where the pupil is a young person, the pupil to the sheriff having jurisdiction where
the school from which the pupil has been excluded is situated, and subsections (2), (3), (4), (8) and
(9) of section 28F of this Act shall apply to an appeal under this subsection.
51
52

Ss. 28A-28G inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), s. 1(1)
word inserted by School Education (Amendment) (Scotland) Act 2002 asp 2 (Scottish Act) s. 1(3)(b)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 28

(7)  The sheriff may, on an appeal under subsection (6) above, confirm or annul the decision of the
education authority excluding the pupil and, in confirming a decision excluding the pupil until
certain conditions stipulated by them are complied with, he may modify the conditions.
] 53
29. […]54
Information as to schools and pupils
[28I.—   Information as to schools.
(1)  The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision requiring—
(a)   in respect of every school for the management of which an education authority is
responsible, the education authority; and
(b)   in respect of every other school—
(i)   where the school has a board of management, the board of management;
(ii)   in any other case, the managers,
to provide to him and to such persons (including education authorities) as may be prescribed such
information as regards the school and pupils attending the school as may be prescribed.
(2)  For the purposes of this section information about the continuing education of pupils leaving
a school, or the employment or training taken up by such pupils on leaving, is to be treated as
information about the school.
(3)  Where the Secretary of State exercises his power to make regulations under this section he
shall do so with a view to making available information which is likely to—
(a)   assist parents in choosing schools for their children;
(b)   increase public awareness of the quality of the education provided by the schools
concerned and the educational standards achieved in those schools; or
(c)   assist in assessing the degree of efficiency with which the financial resources of those
schools are managed.
(4)  Information which is required by virtue of regulations made under this section shall be
provided—
(a)   in such form and manner; and
(b)   on such occasions,
as may be prescribed.
(5)  No information provided in accordance with regulations made under this section shall name
any pupil to whom it relates.
(6)  The Secretary of State may—
(a)   publish information provided in accordance with regulations made under this section
in such form and manner as he considers appropriate;
(b)   require an education authority to publish such information at such times and in such
form and manner as he may specify for the purposes of this section; or
53
54

S. 28H inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), s. 1(1)
Repealed with saving by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c.58), s. 8(2)(3), Sch. 9
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 29

(c)   make arrangements for such information to be published in such form and manner, and
by such persons, as he may specify for the purposes of this section.
(7)  The powers given to the Secretary of State by this section and section 28J of this Act may be
exercised so as to make different provision in relation to different areas.
(8)  This section and sections 28J and 28K of this Act are not to be taken as restricting, or otherwise
affecting, any other powers that the Secretary of State may have to make regulations with respect
to, or otherwise require, the provision of information by any person.
(9)  Regulations made under this section and sections 28J and 28K of this Act may make different
provision for different cases or classes of case.
(10)  This section does not apply to nursery schools.
] 55
[28J.—   Requirement to provide information as to school education.
(1)  The Secretary of State may make regulations requiring education authorities, boards of
management and managers of grant-aided schools to provide to prescribed persons such information
or documents or categories of information or documents relating to school education as may be
prescribed.
(2)  Information or documents provided in pursuance of regulations made under subsection (1)
above shall be provided—
(a)   in such form and manner; and
(b)   on such occasions,
as may be prescribed.
] 56
[28K.—   Information as to pupils.
(1)  The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision requiring that such information and
reports as may be prescribed as regards pupils attending schools to which this section applies shall
be supplied to the parents of such pupils at such times and in such form and manner as may be
determined by or in accordance with the regulations.
(2)  This section applies to any school which is not a grant-aided school, an independent school or
a nursery school.
(3)  Regulations made under this section may contain provision as to—
(a)   the means of involvement of parents in consideration of such reports; and
(b)   the extent to which any information relating to general standards of performance in
examinations or other forms of assessment of any group of pupils shall be supplied to parents
of other pupils.

55

56

s.29 is moved into a new Section Group as part of the amendment inserting ss.28I-28K by Education (Schools)
Act 1992 c. 38 s. 17
s.29 is moved into a new Section Group as part of the amendment inserting ss.28I-28K by Education (Schools)
Act 1992 c. 38 s. 17
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 30

] 57
Duty of parents to provide education for their children
[30.   Duty of parents to provide education for their children.
(1)  It shall be the duty of the parent of every child of school age to provide efficient education for
him suitable to his age, ability and aptitude either by causing him to attend a public school regularly
or by other means.
(2)  Section 1 of the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. Act 2000 (asp 6) (right of child to be
provided with school education by, or by virtue of arrangements made by, an education authority)
is without prejudice to the choice afforded a parent by subsection (1) above.
] 58
31.   School age.
Subject to sections 32(3) and 33(2) and (4) of this Act, a person is of school age if he has attained
the age of five years and has not attained the age of sixteen years.
32.—   Dates for commencement of school attendance.
(1)  Subject to subsection (7) below, an education authority shall fix a date or dates (any such fixed
date being hereinafter referred to as a “school commencement date”) for the commencement of
attendance at primary schools in their area; and any such date may be either a calendar date or fixed
by reference to the occurrence of a particular annual event.
(2)  Subject to subsection (7) below, an education authority may, under subsection (1) above—
(a)   fix different school commencement dates for different primary schools in their area;
(b)   at any time fix a different school commencement date in substitution for any date
previously fixed by them under the said subsection (1).
(3)  A child who does not attain the age of five years on a school commencement date shall, for
the purposes of section 31 of this Act, be deemed not to have attained that age until the school
commencement date next following the fifth anniversary of his birth.
(4)  Subject to subsection (7) below, an education authority shall, in respect of each school
commencement date fixed by them under subsection (1) above and applicable to a public primary
school, fix the latest following date (any such fixed date being hereinafter referred to as an
“appropriate latest date”) on or before which a child must attain the age of five years in order to
come within the category of children whom the authority consider of sufficient age to commence
attendance at a public primary school at that school commencement date.
(5)  Subject to subsection (7) below, an education authority may, under subsection (4) above—

57

58

s.29 is moved into a new Section Group as part of the amendment inserting ss.28I-28K by Education (Schools)
Act 1992 c. 38 s. 17
renumbering existing s30 as s30(1) and subsection (2) added by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland)
Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) Sch. 2 para. 3(5)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 31

(a)   where a school commencement date is applicable to more than one public primary
school in their area, fix in respect of that school commencement date different appropriate
latest dates for those different schools;
(b)   at any time fix a different appropriate latest date in substitution for any date previously
fixed by them under the said subsection (4).
(6)  The education authority shall carry out their duty under section 1 of this Act as if a child who
is under school age on a school commencement date, but who will attain the age of five years on
or before the next following appropriate latest date fixed in respect of the school commencement
date, has attained the age of five years on the school commencement date; but nothing in this
subsection or in subsection (4) above shall, in respect of a child under school age,—
(a)   impose any duty on his parent; or
(b)   require an education authority to take any action under section 36 or 37 of this Act.
(7)  The period between an appropriate latest date applicable to a school and the next following
school commencement date applicable to that school (whether or not the school commencement
date is that in respect of which the appropriate latest date is fixed) shall not, except with the approval
of the Secretary of State on an application to him by the education authority, exceed six months
by more than seven days:
Provided that no such application shall be made, nor approval given, in respect of any such
period which commences after 31st December 1979.
(8)  In relation to any child, “school commencement date”—
(a)   in subsection (3) above—
(i)   means, where the child is a pupil in attendance at a primary school, a school
commencement date of that school;
(ii)   in any other case has the same meaning as in subsection (6) above;
(b)   in subsection (6) above means a school commencement date of the public primary
school to which a child of his religious denomination and from his place of residence would
normally be admitted.
(9)  In this section, “primary school”does not include a nursery school or a nursery class.
33.—   School leaving dates.
(1)  The last day of May (hereinafter referred to as the “summer leaving date”) and the appropriate
day in December (hereinafter referred to as the “winter leaving date”) shall be the school leaving
dates in each year.
(2)  Subject to subsection (4) below, for the purposes of section 31 of this Act a person shall, if the
date of his attaining the age of sixteen years is—
(a)   on or after 1st March but before the next summer leaving date, be deemed not to have
attained that age until the summer leaving date;
(b)   after the summer leaving date but before 1st October next following that date, be
deemed to have attained that age on the summer leaving date;
(c)   on or after 1st October but before the next winter leaving date, be deemed not to have
attained that age until the winter leaving date;
(d)   after the winter leaving date but before 1st March next following that date, be deemed
to have attained that age on the winter leaving date.

(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 32

(3)  In subsection (1) above, “the appropriate day in December” means —
(a)   in the case of a person who is a pupil in attendance at a school, the first day of the
Christmas holiday period;
(b)   in any other case, 21st December,
and in paragraph (a) of this subsection, “Christmas holiday period” means a period of consecutive
days which includes 25th December and in which the school does not meet for the purpose of
providing school education.
(4) […]59
34.—   Exemption from school attendance.
(1)  Where after due inquiry an education authority are satisfied that by reason of any circumstances
existing at his home it would cause exceptional hardship to require a child over fourteen years of
age to attend school, they may grant exemption from the obligation to attend school to enable the
said child to give assistance at home upon such conditions, if any, as to the amount and manner of
further attendance at school until the child reaches the upper limit of the school age as the authority
think fit.
(2)  No exemption granted under subsection (1) above shall extend beyond the date for commencing
school attendance next following the date upon which the exemption was granted:
Provided that the authority may if they think fit renew an exemption, so however that the
provisions of this section shall apply to such renewal in like manner as they apply to the
original grant.
(3)  An exemption granted under this section shall exempt the parent of the child concerned from
any prosecution or other proceeding under this Act for neglecting to provide for the education of
the said child.
(4)  The education authority shall keep a register of exemptions granted under this section wherein
shall be entered the name of each child so exempted and a statement of the circumstances in which
and the conditions upon which such exemption was granted.
Failure of parents to provide education for their children
35.—   Failure by parent to secure regular attendance by his child at a public school.
(1)  Where a child of school age who has attended a public school on one or more occasions fails
without reasonable excuse to attend regularly at the said school, then, unless the education authority
have consented to the withdrawal of the child from the school (which consent shall not be
unreasonably withheld), his parent shall be guilty of an offence against this section.
(2)  For the purposes of this section, a child who has been required to discontinue for any period
his attendance at a school on account of his parent's refusal or failure to comply with the rules,
regulations or disciplinary requirements of the school, shall, unless the court otherwise determines,
be deemed to have failed without reasonable excuse to attend regularly at the school.

59

Repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.39), s. 82(2), Sch. 11
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 33

36.—   Power of education authority in relation to irregular attendance of child at a public
school.
[ (1)  It shall be the duty of the education authority if they consider that a parent has committed an
offence against section 35 of this Act in respect of a child resident in their area, to serve a notice
on the parent requiring him, within such time as may be specified in the notice (not being less than
forty-eight hours or more than seven days from the service thereof) to appear (with or without the
child) before the authority and explain the reason for the absence of the child from school. If the
parent fails to satisfy the authority that he had a reasonable excuse, the authority may
(a)   instruct that he be prosecuted forthwith under section 43 of this Act, in the court of
summary jurisdiction in which proceedings may be taken for the offence, not being the
district court; or
(b)   report the circumstances to the procurator fiscal or;
warn the parent and postpone for a period not exceeding six weeks a decision as to whether so to
report.
] 60
(2)  Where an education authority in the exercise of the powers conferred upon them by subsection
(1) above postpone a decision as to whether to prosecute a parent, they may, if the child is still of
school age, make an attendance order in respect of the child in accordance with the provisions of
section 38 of this Act requiring the parent to cause the child to attend the public school which he
has been attending, or, if the child has changed his residence, a school attended by children residing
in the same neighbourhood as the child.
(3)  Without prejudice to the institution of proceedings for an offence against section 35 of this Act
or the exercise of the power conferred by section 44(1) of this Act, where a child of school age has
failed to attend a public school regularly, the education authority, where no requirement arises
under section 53(1) of the Children (Scotland) Act 1995 to give information about the child to the
Principal Reporter, may under this subsection provide the Principal Reporter with such information.
37.—   Power of education authority where not satisfied that parent is providing efficient
education for his child.
(1)  Where a child of school age has not attended a public school in the area in which his parent is
residing, or has attended such a school and has been withdrawn therefrom with the consent of, or
excluded by, the education authority, then, if the authority are not satisfied that the parent is providing
efficient education for him suitable to his age, ability and aptitude, it shall be the duty of the authority
to serve a notice on the parent requiring him within such time as may be specified in the notice
(not being less than seven or more than fourteen days from the service thereof) either—
(a)   to appear (with or without the child) before the authority and give such information as
the authority may require regarding the means, if any, he has adopted for providing education,
or
(b)   in the option of the parent, to give such information to the authority in writing.
(2)  If a parent on whom a notice has been served in pursuance of subsection (1) above fails to
satisfy the authority that he is providing efficient education for the child suitable to his age, ability
60

renumbering effect, exisiting text renumbered as (a) and (b) inserted by Bail, Judicial Appointments etc. (Scotland)
Act 2000 asp 9 (Scottish Act) Sch. 1 para. 3(1)(a)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 34

and aptitude or that there is reasonable excuse for his failure to do so, the authority shall make an
attendance order in respect of the child in accordance with the provisions of section 38 of this Act.
Attendance orders
38.—   Making of attendance orders.
(1)  References in sections 36 and 37 of this Act, and in the following provisions of this Act, to an
attendance order in respect of a child are references to an order in writing requiring the parent of
the child to cause the child to attend a school named in the order, being either a public school, or
a school (other than a public school) the managers of which are willing to receive the child.
(2)  In an attendance order in respect of a child—
(a)   a school at which the parent will be required to pay fees shall not be named except at
the request of the parent; and
[ (b)   a special school shall not be named unless the child is a recorded child. ] 61
(3)  Before making an attendance order under section 36 or 37 of this Act, the education authority
shall consider any views expressed by the parent as to the school which he desires his child to
attend.
(4)  The authority shall cause a copy of any attendance order made by them under section 36 or 37
of this Act to be served upon the parent, and it shall thereupon be the duty of the parent, subject to
an appeal to the sheriff under subsection (5) below, to cause the child to attend regularly at the
school named in the order.
(5)  A parent aggrieved by the making of an attendance order by an education authority may within
fourteen days after the date upon which a copy of the order was served upon him under subsection
(4) above appeal against it to the sheriff, who may confirm, vary or annul the order and whose
decision shall be final.
39.—   Amendment and revocation of attendance orders.
(1)  An education authority who have made an attendance order in respect of any child may at any
time while the order is in force serve upon the parent of the said child a notice of their intention to
amend the order by substituting the name of another school for that named in the order.
(2)  Where a child in respect of whom an attendance order is in force moves his residence, the
education authority of the area to which the child has moved may serve upon the parent of the said
child a notice of their intention to amend that order by substituting for the name of the school
appearing in the order the name of a school attended by children residing in the same neighbourhood
as the child.
(3)  The parent may within fourteen days of the service of a notice under subsection (1) or (2) above
intimate in writing to the authority any objections he may have to the proposed amendment. After
the expiry of the said period of fourteen days and after considering any objections made by the
parent, the authority may amend the attendance order, and subsections (2), (4) and (5) of section

61

S. 38(2)(b) substituted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 2 Pt. II para. 5, Sch. 8
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 35

38 of this Act shall apply in the case of the amended attendance order as they apply in the case of
an attendance order.
(4)  If at any time while an attendance order is in force with respect to any child the parent of the
child makes application to the authority by whom the order was made or amended requesting—
(a)   that another school be substituted for that named in the order, or
(b)   that the order be revoked on the ground that arrangements have been made for the child
to receive efficient education suitable to his age, ability and aptitude at a school other than
that named in the order or elsewhere than at school,
the authority shall amend or revoke the order in compliance with the request unless they are of
opinion that the proposed change of school is unreasonable or inexpedient in the interests of the
child, or that the arrangements made for the education of the child at a school other than that named
in the order or elsewhere than at school are not satisfactory, as the case may be; and, if a parent is
aggrieved by a failure of the authority to reach a decision upon his application within one month
after the date thereof or by refusal of the authority to comply with any such request, he may appeal
to the sheriff, who shall give such direction as he thinks fit.
40.   Period of operation of attendance orders.
An attendance order made in respect of any child shall, subject to any amendment thereof made
by an education authority or variation made by the sheriff, and unless revoked by an authority or
annulled by the sheriff, continue in force so long as the child is of school age:
[ Provided that if the Record in relation to a recorded child is or falls to be discontinued
by virtue of any enactment any attendance order requiring the attendance of that child at
a special school shall be deemed to be annulled. ] 62
41.   Failure to comply with attendance order.
Where an attendance order has been made and is in force in respect of any child, and a copy of
such order has been served on the parent of the child, the parent shall, if the order is not complied
with, be guilty of an offence against this section unless he satisfies the court that he has a reasonable
excuse.
Reasonable Excuses
42.—   Reasonable excuses.
(1)  For the purposes of sections 35,  36, 37, 41 and 44 of this Act, there shall [, subject to subsection
(1A) below,] 63 be deemed to be a reasonable excuse if—
(a)   there is within walking distance of the child's home measured by the nearest available
route no public or other school the managers of which are willing to receive the child and
to provide him with free education, and either—
(i)   no arrangements have been made by the education authority under section 50
or 51 of this Act with regard to the child; or
62
63

S. 40 proviso substituted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 2 Pt. II para. 6, Sch. 8
Words inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), s. 2(1)(a)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 36

(ii)   any arrangements so made are such as to require the child to walk more than
walking distance in the course of any journey between his home and school; or
(b)   the child has been prevented by sickness from attending school or receiving education
as the case may be; or
(c)   there are other circumstances which in the opinion of the education authority or the
court afford a reasonable excuse.
[ (1A)  Subsection (1) above shall not apply in a case where—
(a)   the education authority have, in accordance with their arrangements as published or
otherwise made available under section 28B(1)(a) of this Act, proposed to place the child
in a particular school or in one of a number of schools named by them and, where the
particular or named school is more than walking distance from the pupil's home measured
by the nearest available route, they have offered to make for him suitable arrangements of
the kind referred to in section 50 or 51 of this Act under which he would not require to walk
more than walking distance, so measured, in the course of any journey between his home
and the school; but
(b)   in consequence of a placing request, the child has been placed by them in a school
other than a school referred to in paragraph (a) above,
and in such a case, for the purposes of sections 35, 36, 37, 41 and 44 of this Act, there shall be
deemed to be a reasonable excuse if—
(i)   the child has been prevented by sickness from attending school or receiving education
as the case may be; or
(ii)   there are other circumstances which in the opinion of the education authority or the
court afford a reasonable excuse.
64
]
(2)  The fact that an application to an education authority, or an appeal to the sheriff, has been made
under section 39(4) of this Act in relation to an attendance order in respect of a child shall not be
deemed to be a reasonable excuse for failure to cause the child to attend regularly at the school
named in the order.
(3)  Where a parent alleges that his child has been prevented by sickness from attending school or
receiving education as the case may be, the parent shall, if required by the education authority,
permit a medical officer of the appropriate Health Board to examine the child, and any parent who
fails to do so shall be guilty of an offence against this section.
(4)  In this section—
“walking distance” means , in the case of a child who has not attained the age of eight years,
two miles, and in the case of any other child, three miles;
“the appropriate Health Board”, in relation to any child, means —
(a)   where an attendance order is in force in respect of the child, the Health Board
in whose area the school named in the order is situated;
(b)   in any other case, the Health Board in whose area the place of residence of the
child is situated.

64

S. 42(1A) inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), s. 2(1)(b)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 37

Prosecutions
43.—   Prosecutions and penalties.
(1)  Any person guilty of an offence against section 35, 41 or 42 of this Act shall be liable, on
conviction by a court of summary jurisdiction, to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale
or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding one month or to both such fine and such imprisonment.
(2)  Proceedings under this section[, other than in the district court,] 65 may be taken at the instance
either of the public prosecutor of the court of summary jurisdiction in which the proceedings are
to be taken or of another person authorised by the education authority to institute proceedings on
their behalf.
44.—   Powers of Courts in relation to child.
(2)  If the court before which a prosecution is brought for an offence against section 35 of this Act
is satisfied that a child has failed without reasonable excuse to attend regularly at school, but does
not, in the exercise of the powers conferred upon it by [section 54(1) of the Children (Scotland)
Act 1995, refer the matter to the Principal Reporter] 66 , the court may, if the child is still of school
age, make an attendance order in respect of the child requiring the parent to cause the child to attend
the public school which he has been attending or, if the child has changed his residence, a school
attended by children residing in the same neighbourhood as the child; and subsections (2) and (3)
of section 38 and sections 39 to 41 of this Act shall apply with any necessary modifications to an
attendance order made by a court under this section as they apply to an attendance order made by
an education authority.
Attendance at junior colleges
45.— […]67
46.— […]68
47.— […]69
48.— […]70
Corporal Punishment
48A.— […]71
65
66
67
68
69
70
71

words inserted by Bail, Judicial Appointments etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 9 (Scottish Act) Sch. 1 para. 3(2)
words substituted by Children (Scotland) Act 1995 c. 36 Sch. 4 para. 28(3)(b)
Repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.39), s. 82(2), Sch. 11
Repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.39), s. 82(2), Sch. 11
Repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.39), s. 82(2), Sch. 11
Repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.39), s. 82(2), Sch. 11
repealed by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) s. 16(6)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 38

Provision to assist pupils to take advantage of educational facilities
49.—   Power of education authorities to assist persons to take advantage of educational
facilities.
(1)  Subject to the following provisions of this section, an education authority shall have power to
grant, on such conditions as may be prescribed, and make payments in pursuance of, bursaries,
scholarships or other allowances to persons over school age attending courses of full-time or
part-time education (whether held in Scotland or elsewhere) which are not courses of school
education or (in the case of courses held outside Scotland) are not courses of education comparable
to school education in Scotland.
(2)  Subject to the following provisions of this section, an education authority shall have power,
for the purpose of enabling persons to take advantage without hardship to themselves or their parents
of the facilities for school education available to them, to grant, on such conditions as may be
prescribed, and make payments in pursuance of, allowances for the purpose of defraying in whole
or in part—
(a)   such expenses of persons attending any school as may be expedient to enable them to
take full part in the activities of the school;
(b)   the fees and expenses payable in respect of persons attending schools at which fees
are payable;
(c)   the maintenance expenses of persons over school age who are attending schools.
[ (2A)  In subsection (2) above, references to attending school are to so attending not only where
the school is in Scotland, but also where it is in England and Wales or in Northern Ireland ('school
education'being construed accordingly). ] 72
(3)  The Secretary of State may make regulations providing that the powers conferred on an education
authority by subsections (1) and (2) above—
(a)   shall be exercised in accordance with such provisions as may be prescribed by or under
the regulations; and
(b)   shall not be exercised in relation to a person who does not fulfil such requirements as
to residence in the area of the authority, or as to other matters, as may be specified in the
regulations;
and regulations made under this subsection may contain provision for the determination by the
Secretary of State of any question whether any such requirements are fulfilled in any particular
case.
50.—   Education of pupils in exceptional circumstances.
(1)  Where in the opinion of an education authority—
(a)   any pupil is, owing to the remoteness of his home or the conditions under which he is
living or other exceptional circumstances, unable to receive the full benefit of school
education unless special arrangements are made for him, or
(b)   school education suitable to the age, ability and aptitude of any pupil can best be
provided for him at any particular school

72

S. 49(2A) inserted by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.39), s. 82(1), Sch. 10 para. 8(9)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 39

the authority, in a case where subsection (3) applies, may make such arrangements of either a
temporary or a permanent character as they think best suited to the purpose of enabling that pupil
to attend, in any case falling under—
(i)   paragraph (a) of this subsection, an appropriate school; and
(ii)   paragraph (b) thereof, the particular school.
(1A)  In subsection (1) above, references to an appropriate school and to a particular school are
references not only to schools in Scotland but also to schools in England and Wales or in Northern
Ireland ('school education'being construed accordingly).
(2)  The arrangements made under subsection (1) above may include—
(a)   the provision of travelling facilities or the payment of travelling expenses under
subsection (1) of section 51 of this Act (for the purposes of this paragraph, any reference
in that section to a school being construed as a reference not only to a school in Scotland
but also to a school in England and Wales or in Northern Ireland); or
(b)   the accommodation of the pupil at a boarding school , or in a hostel, home or other
institution; or
(c)   other provision of board and lodging, provided that the education authority shall, so
far as practicable, give effect to the wishes of the parent with respect to the religious
denomination of the person with whom the pupil will reside; or
(d)   provision for the travelling, board and lodging of teachers.
(3)  This subsection applies where—
(a)   the education authority have, in accordance with—
(i)   their arrangements as published or otherwise made available under section
28B(1)(a) of this Act—
(ii)   any arrangements made by them under section 23(1A) of this Act; or
(iii)   the arrangements subsisting before the establishment of new local government
areas under Part I of the Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994 and continuing
by virtue of section 23(1C) of this Act
proposed to place the pupil in a particular school or in one of a number of schools named
by them and have, in connection with that proposal, made or offered to make for the pupil
suitable arrangements of the kind referred to in subsection (2) above; but
(b)   in consequence of a placing request, the pupil has been placed by them [ or another
education authority] 73 in a school other than a school referred to in paragraph (a) above.
(4)  The duty imposed by subsection (1)(a) or (b) above does not apply where the pupil belongs
(in accordance with section 23(3) of this Act) to the area of some other education authority or of
a local education authority in England and Wales.
51.—   Provision of transport and other facilities.
(1)  An education authority, in a case to which subsection (2A) below applies, may and, in any
other case, subject to subsection (2B) below shall make such arrangements as they consider necessary
for the provision of any of the following facilities in respect of pupils attending schools or other
educational establishments—

73

words added by Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994 c. 39 Pt IV s. 145(2)(b)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 40

(a)   for their conveyance without charge for the whole or part of the journey between their
homes and the schools or other educational establishments which they are attending;
(b)   for making bicycles or other suitable means of transport available to the pupils, or to
their parents for the use of the pupils, upon such terms and conditions as may be arranged,
or for paying money allowances in lieu thereof;
(c)   for paying the whole or any part, as the authority think fit, of their reasonable travelling
expenses,
and any such arrangement may in respect of any pupil make provision for more than one of the
facilities specified in the foregoing paragraphs of this subsection.
(2)  Where the requirements of pupils, for the conveyance of whom arrangements have been made
by an education authority under subsection (1)(a) above, have been met, it shall be the duty of that
authority, where there are any vacant places in any vehicle used for such conveyance, to allow such
vacant places to be used by other pupils to be selected by the authority.
(2AA)  An education authority may—
(a)   subject to subsection (2BB) below, charge the parent of a pupil using a vacant place
by virtue of subsection (2) above such sum as the authority consider appropriate; or
(b)   allow a vacant place to be so used without charge,
and the authority may make different charges for different cases or different classes of case.
(2BB)  An education authority may not charge any sum under subsection (2AA)(a) above unless,
having had regard to the financial circumstances of the parent to be charged, the authority consider
that the charge can be paid by the parent without undue hardship.
(2A)  This subsection applies where—
(a)   the education authority have, in accordance with—
(i)   their arrangements as published or otherwise made available under section
28B(1)(a) of this Act
(ii)   any arrangements made by them under section 23(1A) of this Act; or
(iii)   the arrangements subsisting before the establishment of new local government
areas under Part I of the Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994 and continuing
by virtue of section 23(1C) of this Act
proposed to place the pupil in a particular school or in one of a number of schools named
by them and, where the particular or named school is more than walking distance from the
pupil's home measured by the nearest available route, they have offered to make for him
suitable arrangements of the kind referred to in subsection (1) above under which he would
not require to walk more than walking distance, so measured, in the course of any journey
between his home and the school; but
(b)   in consequence of a placing request, the pupil has been placed by them or another
education authority in a school other than a school referred to in paragraph (a) above.
In this subsection “walking distance”has the same meaning as in section 42 of this Act.
(2AB)-(2AC) […]74
(2AD)  Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) above, the duty imposed by that
subsection applies in cases where a pupil attends a school or educational establishment under the
management of another education authority—
(a)   in accordance with any arrangements made by them under section 23(1A) of this Act;
74

repealed by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) Sch. 3 para. 1
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 41

(b)   in accordance with the arrangements subsisting before the establishment of new local
government areas under Part I of the Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994 and
continuing by virtue of section 23(1C) of this Act; or
(c)   if at the time when the pupil was placed in that school or educational establishment it
was under the management of the education authority for the area to which the pupil
belonged, and is under the management of another education authority as a consequence
of the establishment of such new local government areas.
(2B)  The duty imposed by subsection (1) above does not apply where the pupil belongs (in
accordance with section 23(3) of this Act) to the area of some other education authority or of a
local education authority in England and Wales.
(2C)  In considering whether to make any arrangements under subsection (1) above in respect of
pupils attending schools, an education authority shall have regard to the safety of such pupils.
(3)  Where as a condition of admission to any educational institution a person is required to attend
for examination or interview at a particular place, the education authority may pay the whole or
part of the expenses necessarily incurred by that person in respect of such attendance.
(4)  In this section “school” does not include a nursery school or a nursery class in a school.
52.—   Recovery of cost of board and lodging.
Where an education authority have provided a pupil with board and lodging, whether at a school,
[…] 75 hostel or elsewhere, the authority may, in their discretion, require the parent to pay to them
in respect thereof such sums if any not exceeding the cost of such board and lodging as in the
opinion of the authority he is able without financial hardship to pay:
Provided that—
(i)   where the board and lodging provided for any pupil were so provided under
arrangements made by the authority for any of the reasons specified in section 50(1)
of this Act, no sum shall be recoverable in respect thereof under this section; and
(ii)   where the board and lodging have been so provided for a young person […] 76
under section 13 of this Act, at [an] 77 educational establishment, the authority, if
satisfied that he is in a financial position to pay the whole or any part of a sum
recoverable from his parent under this section, may recover that sum or that part
thereof from the young person instead of from the parent.
Provision of food and clothing
53.—   Provision of school meals.
(1)  An education authority—
(a)   may provide milk, meals or other refreshment for pupils in attendance at public schools
and other educational establishments under their management and may do so either on the
75
76
77

Words repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.39), s. 82(2), Sch. 11
Words repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.39), s. 82(2), Sch. 11
Word substituted by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.39), s. 82(1), Sch. 10 para. 8(11)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 42

premises or at any place other than the school premises where education is being provided;
and
(b)   shall provide such facilities as the authority consider appropriate for the consumption
of any meals or other refreshment brought to the school or other educational establishment
by such pupils.
(2)  Subject to subsection (3) below, an authority must charge for anything provided by them under
subsection (1)(a) above and must charge every pupil the same price for the same quantity of the
same item.
(3)  Subsection (3AA) below applies in relation to a pupil—
(a)   whose parents are in receipt of—
(i)   income support;
(ii)   an income-based jobseeker's allowance (payable under the Jobseekers Act
1995);
(iii)   support provided under Part VI of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999; or
(iv)   any other benefit or allowance or any tax credit or element of such a tax credit
(within the meaning of the Tax Credits Act 2002 (c.21)) that the Scottish Ministers
may by regulations prescribe, in such circumstances as may be so prescribed;
(b)   who is himself in receipt of—
(i)   income support;
(ii)   an income-based jobseeker's allowance; or
(iii)   any other benefit or allowance or any tax credit or element of such a tax credit
(within the meaning of the Tax Credits Act 2002 (c.21)) that the Scottish Ministers
may by regulations prescribe, in such circumstances as may be so prescribed.
(3AA)  An authority shall so exercise the power conferred by subsection (1)(a) above as to ensure
that such provision is made for the pupil in the middle of the day as appears to the authority to be
requisite and shall make that provision for him free of charge.
(3A) […]78
(4)  For the purposes of this section, a pupil for whom an education authority have made special
arrangements under section 14 of this Act may, at the discretion of the authority, be deemed to be
in attendance at a public school under their management.
54.—   Provision of clothing for pupils at public schools.
(1)  When it is brought to the notice of an education authority that a pupil attending a school under
their management is unable by reason of the inadequacy or unsuitability of his clothing to take full
advantage of the education provided, the education authority shall make such provision for the
pupil for the purpose of ensuring that he is sufficiently and suitably clad as they may deem necessary
during such period while the pupil is attending school (including days when the school does not
meet) as they may determine.
(2)  Where an education authority make provision for a pupil in pursuance of this section, they
shall be entitled to recover from the parent of the pupil the expense thereby incurred or, if the
authority are satisfied that the parent is unable without financial hardship to pay the whole of that
78

repealed by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) Sch. 3 para. 1
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 43

expense, such part thereof, if any, as he is, in the opinion of the authority, able without financial
hardship to pay.
(3)  Without prejudice to any powers conferred upon them by subsections (1) and (2) above, an
education authority may provide clothing free of charge—
(i)   for any pupil who is a boarder at a school, or
(ii)   for any pupil in attendance at a nursery school or a nursery class,
under the management of the authority […] 79 .
(4)  For the purposes of this section—
(a)   a pupil on attaining the age of five years shall, pending his admission to school, be
deemed to be attending a school under the management of the education authority in whose
area he is ordinarily resident; and
(b)   a recorded child or recorded young person in respect of whom an education authority
are, under section 62(3) of this Act, under a duty shall be deemed to be attending a school
under the management of that authority.
55.   Provision of food and clothing for pupils at schools other than public schools.
An education authority may, with the consent of the managers of any school in their area which is
not a public school, and upon such financial and other terms, if any, as may be determined by
agreement between the authority and the managers, make arrangements for securing—
(a)   the provision of milk, meals and other refreshment for pupils in attendance at the school;
and
(b)   […] 80 the provision, for any pupil in attendance at the school who is unable by reason
of the inadequacy or unsuitability of his clothing to take full advantage of the education
(including physical exercise) provided by the school, of such clothing as in necessary for
the purpose of ensuring that he is sufficiently and suitably clad while he remains a pupil at
the school.
56.   Condition of provision of clothing by education authorities.
Save as may be otherwise prescribed, provision of clothing by an education authority under any of
the powers conferred by this Act may be made in such a way as to confer, at the option of the
authority, either a right of property in the clothing or a right to use it only.
Health and cleanliness of pupils
57.—   Medical and dental examination and inspection.
(1)  The Secretary of State may make regulations as to the conduct of medical and dental
examinations and medical and dental inspections for the purposes of the performance of his duties
under section 39 of the National Health Service (Scotland) Act 1978.
(2)  For the purpose of securing the proper medical or dental inspection of the pupils and young
persons for whom there is a duty under the said section 39 to provide such inspection, an education
79
80

words repealed by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) Sch. 3 para. 1
words repealed by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) Sch. 3 para. 1
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 44

authority may require the parent of any pupil in attendance at any school under their management
to submit the pupil for medical or dental inspection in accordance with arrangements made by the
appropriate Health Board in agreement with the authority; and the authority may require any young
person in attendance at any educational establishment under their management to submit for such
medical or dental inspection.
(3)  If any parent fails without reasonable excuse to comply with a requirement made by an education
authority […] 81 under subsection (2) above, he shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable
on conviction by a court of summary jurisdiction to a fine not exceeding level 1 on the standard
scale.
(4)  In this section “the appropriate Health Board”, in relation to any pupil or young person, means
the Health Board in whose area is situated the school, or other educational establishment at which
the pupil or young person is in attendance.
58.—   Power to ensure cleanliness.
(1)  An education authority may, by directions in writing issued with respect to all schools, and
other educational establishments under their management or with respect to any of such schools,
or establishments named in the directions authorise a medical officer of the appropriate Health
Board to cause examinations to be made of the bodies and clothing of all or any of the pupils in
attendance at such schools and young persons in attendance at such establishments whenever in
his opinion such examinations are necessary in the interests of cleanliness.
(2)  Any such examination as aforesaid shall be made by such medical officer or by a person
authorised in writing by him to make such examinations (in this section referred to as an “authorised
person”), and, if the body or clothing of any pupil or young person is found upon such an examination
to be infested with vermin or in a foul condition, the authority may serve upon the parent of such
pupil or upon the young person a notice requiring the parent to cause the body and clothing of the
pupil to be cleansed or the young person to cause himself and his clothing to be cleansed as the
case may be.
(3)  A notice served under subsection (2) above shall inform the person upon whom it is served
that, unless within the period limited by the notice, not being more than twenty-four hours after
the service thereof, the body and clothing of the pupil or young person to whom the notice relates
are cleansed to the satisfaction of the medical officer or an authorised person as may be specified
in the notice, the cleansing thereof will be carried out under arrangements made by the education
authority; and, if at the expiration of that period the medical officer or an authorised person is not
satisfied that the body and clothing of the pupil or young person have been properly cleansed, the
medical officer or an authorised person may issue an order directing that the body and clothing of
the pupil or young person be cleansed under such arrangements. The order shall be sufficient to
authorise any officer of the authority to cause the body and clothing of the pupil or young person
named in the order to be cleansed in accordance with such arrangements, and for that purpose to
convey him to the premises where the cleansing is to be carried out and to detain him there until
such time as the cleansing has been completed.
(4)  It shall be the duty of the education authority to make arrangements for securing that any
cleansing under this section, whether at the request of a parent or young person or in pursuance of
81

words repealed by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) Sch. 3 para. 1
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 45

an order issued under this section, may be carried out in suitable premises by suitable persons and
with suitable appliances.
(5)  If after the cleansing of the body or clothing of any pupil or young person has been carried out
under this section his body or clothing is again found to be infested with vermin or in a foul condition
at any time while he is in attendance at such school, or other educational establishment, and it is
proved that the condition of his body or clothing is due to neglect on the part of his parent, or, in
the case of a young person in attendance at our educational establishment, to his own neglect, the
parent or the young person, as the case may be, shall be liable on conviction by a court of summary
jurisdiction in the case of a first conviction to a fine not exceeding £1, in the case of a second
conviction to a fine not exceeding £5, and in the case of a third or subsequent conviction to a fine
not exceeding £10 or to a term of imprisonment not exceeding one month or to both such fine and
such imprisonment.
(6)  Where such a medical officer or authorised person has reason to believe that the body or clothing
of any pupil or young person in attendance at such school, or other educational establishment is
infested with vermin or in a foul condition, but action for the examination or cleansing thereof
cannot immediately be taken, he shall so advise the authority […] 82 , who may, if they consider
it necessary so to do in the interests either of the pupil or young person or of other children or young
persons in attendance at the school, or other educational establishment, direct that the pupil or
young person be excluded from the school, or other educational establishment until such action
has been taken; and such a direction shall be a defence to any proceedings under this Act in respect
of the failure of the pupil or young person to attend school or to comply with the requirements of
an attendance notice, as the case may be, on any day on which he is excluded in pursuance of the
direction, unless it is proved that the issue of the direction was necessitated by the wilful default
of the parent or of the young person.
(7)  No female shall be examined or cleansed under the powers conferred by this section except by
a registered medical practitioner or by a woman authorised for that purpose by a medical officer
of a Health Board.
(8)  In this section “the appropriate Health Board”has the same meaning as in section 57 of this
Act.
Children requiring special education
59. […]83
[60.—   Functions of education authority in relation to children and young persons with
certain special educational needs.
(1)  It shall be the duty of an education authority to disseminate in their area information as to the
importance of the early discovery of special educational needs and as to the opportunity for
assessment available under the following provisions of this Act.
(2)  An education authority—
82
83

words repealed by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) Sch. 3 para. 1
Repealed by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 9
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 46

(a)   shall have power, as regards—
(i)   children in their area who have not attained school age [and are not children in
respect of whom the authority is under a duty by virtue of subparagraph (ii) of
paragraph (b) below] 84 ; and
(ii)   young persons belonging to their area (in accordance with section 23(3) of this
Act) who are receiving school education; and
(b)   shall be under a duty, as regards children belonging to their area (in accordance with
section 23(3) of this Act) who,
(i)   are of school age[; or] 85
[ (ii)   have not attained school age but, being at least two years of age, have come
to the attention of the authority as having, or appearing to have, special educational
needs, ] 86
in accordance with the provisions of section 61 of this Act, to establish which of those children or,
as the case may be, young persons have pronounced, specific or complex special educational needs
which are such as require continuing review and to open and keep a Record of Needs of each such
child or young person.
(3)  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, “Record”, when used as a noun, means a
Record of Needs opened and kept under subsection (2) above and “recorded” and other cognate
expressions shall be construed accordingly.
(4)  A Record shall not be disclosed by an education authority otherwise than in accordance with
regulations made under section 65D(1)(e) of this Act.
(5)  The power of an education authority under subsection (2)(a)(ii) above shall be exercisable in
relation to a young person only on a request to that effect being made to the authority by the young
person or his parent.
] 87
[61.—   Examination and assessment of children and young persons.
(1)  It shall not be lawful for an education authority to establish, under section 60 of this Act, that
a child has pronounced, specific or complex special educational needs such as require continuing
review and to record him unless he has undergone a [process of observation and assessment
(including educational, psychological and medical assessments)] 88 , for the purpose of affording
to the authority advice as to his special educational needs and whether or not they ought to record
him; and before doing so, an authority shall—
(a)   invite the parent of that child by notice in writing to submit the child for [assessment] 89
for the said purpose, and
(b)   (in the case of a child [in respect of whom the authority is under a duty under section
60(2) of this Act ] 90 ) if the parent fails without reasonable excuse to submit the child as
84
85
86
87
88
89
90

Words inserted by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.39), s. 72(1)(a)
Words inserted by subparagraph (i)
Ss. 60(2)(b)(i) and (ii) inserted by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.39), s. 72(1)(b)
Ss. 60–65F substituted for ss. 60–65 by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c.58), s. 4(1), Sch.8
Words substituted by Disabled Persons (Services, Consultation and Representation) Act 1986 (c.33), s. 14(3)(a)(i)
Word substituted by Disabled Persons (Services, Consultation and Representation) Act 1986 (c.33), s. 14(3)(a)(ii)
Words substituted by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.39), s. 72(2)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 47

aforesaid, by notice in writing served upon the parent require him to submit the child for
[assessment] 91 for the said purpose.
(2)  A parent who submits his child for [assessment ] 92 in pursuance of subsection (1) above or
subsection (6) below shall be entitled to be present at [any medical examination held in connection
with the assessment] 93 .
(3)  A notice under paragraph (a) or (b) of subsection (1) above in respect of any child shall—
(a)   state that the purpose of the [assessment ] 94 is to afford to the education authority
advice as to his special educational needs and whether or not they ought to record the child;
(b)   specify the times and places at which [any examinations held in connection with the
assessment ] 95 will be held;
(c)   inform the parent of his right to be present at [any medical examination held in
connection with the assessment ] 96 ;
(d)   inform the parent of the name of the officer of the authority from whom advice and
further information may be obtained;
(e)   invite the parent to express in writing to the authority, within 21 days from the date of
the notice or such longer period as the notice may specify, his views as regards the special
educational needs of the child and the measures required to meet those needs;
and a notice under the said paragraph (b) shall in addition inform the parent of the effect of subsection
(4) below.
(4)  If any parent on whom a notice has been served under paragraph (b) of subsection (1) above
fails without reasonable excuse to comply with the requirements of the notice, he shall be guilty
of an offence and liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding [level 2 on the standard
scale] 97 .
(5)  The duty imposed by section 60(2) of this Act shall not apply if the parent of the child has had
notice served upon him under subsection (1)(b) above and has failed to comply with that notice.
(6)  If the parent of any child requests the education authority for the area to which the child belongs
(in accordance with section 23(3) of this Act) to make arrangements for the child to undergo such
process of [observation and] 98 assessment as is mentioned in subsection (1) above for the purpose
mentioned there, the authority shall comply with the request unless in their opinion the request is
unreasonable.
(7)  It shall not be lawful for an education authority to establish, under section 60 of this Act, that
a young person has pronounced, specific or complex special educational needs such as require
continuing review and to record him unless—

91
92
93
94
95
96
97

98

Word substituted by Disabled Persons (Services, Consultation and Representation) Act 1986 (c.33), s. 14(3)(a)(ii)
Word substituted by Disabled Persons (Services, Consultation and Representation) Act 1986 (c.33), s. 14(3)(b)(i)
Words substituted by Disabled Persons (Services, Consultation and Representation) Act 1986 (c.33), s. 14(3)(b)(ii)
Word substituted by Disabled Persons (Services, Consultation and Representation) Act 1986 (c.33), s. 14(3)(c)(i)
Words substituted by Disabled Persons (Services, Consultation and Representation) Act 1986 (c.33), s. 14(3)(c)(ii)
Words substituted by Disabled Persons (Services, Consultation and Representation) Act 1986 (c.33), s. 14(3)(c)(iii)
Words from “level” to “scale” substituted for word “£50” by virtue of Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1975
(c. 21), s. 289G (as inserted by Criminal Justice Act 1982 (c. 48), s. 54)
Words inserted by Disabled Persons (Services, Consultation and Representation) Act 1986 (c.33), s. 14(3)(d)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 48

(a)   that young person has undergone such process of [observation and] 99 assessment as
the authority consider necessary for the purpose of affording to them advice as to his special
educational needs and whether or not they ought to record him; and
(b)   that young person or, where the education authority are satisfied that a young person
is not capable of expressing his views for the purposes of this section, his parent has been
invited by the authority, by notice in writing, to express to the authority, within 14 days
from the date of the notice or such longer period as the notice may specify, his views as
regards the special educational needs of the young person and the measures required to
meet those needs.
] 100
[62.—   Recording of children and young persons.
(1)  In deciding whether or not to record a child or young person an education authority shall take
into consideration—
(a)   in the case of a child, the advice given to them with respect to the child in consequence
of the process of [observation and]101 assessment undergone by him in pursuance of section
61(1) or (6) of this Act;
(b)   in the case of a young person, the advice given to them with respect to the young person
in consequence of the process of [observation and ] 102 assessment undergone by him in
pursuance of section 61(7) of this Act;
(c)   any views expressed by the parent of the child, or by the young person or, where the
education authority were satisfied that the young person was not capable of expressing his
views for the purposes of section 61(7) of this Act, his parent;
(d)   if he has been at any time in attendance at any school other than one under their
management, any reports or other information with respect to him obtained by them from
the managers of the school or from teachers at the school;
(e)   any other reports or information relevant to his educational needs which they are able
to obtain.
(2)  The decision of an education authority whether or not to record a child or young person, the
reasons for that decision and the terms in which the education authority propose to record the child
or young person shall be intimated forthwith by notice in writing to the parent of the child or, in a
case where the authority were satisfied that the young person was not capable of expressing his
views for the purposes of section 61(7) of this Act, to his parent or, in any other case, to the young
person, and the education authority shall, in recording the child or young person, have regard to
any views expressed upon these terms by the parent of the child or of the young person or, as the
case may be, the young person, within 14 days of the date of the notice, and thereafter notify him
of—
(a)   their decision as to those terms;
(b)   the right of appeal under section 63 of this Act; and

99
100
101
102

Words inserted by Disabled Persons (Services, Consultation and Representation) Act 1986 (c.33), s. 14(3)(e)
Ss. 60–65F substituted for ss. 60–65 by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c.58), s. 4(1), Sch.8
Words inserted by Disabled Persons (Services, Consultation and Representation) Act 1986 (c.33), s. 14(4)(a)
Words inserted by Disabled Persons (Services, Consultation and Representation) Act 1986 (c.33), s. 14(4)(a)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 49

(c)   the name and address of the person to whom application may be made for advice and
information about the child's or young person's special educational needs [unless the parent
of the child or of the young person or, as the case may be, the young person has requested
the education authority not to appoint such a person] 103 .
(3)  An education authority shall ensure that the provision made by them under this Act for a
recorded child or a recorded young person includes provision for his special educational needs [;
and they shall in any event, as regards each such child belonging to their area as is mentioned in
section 60(2)(b)(ii) of this Act, make provision for any special educational needs recorded in respect
of the child which are not being met by other suitable arrangements] 104 .
] 105
[63.—   Appeals against decisions about recorded children or young persons.
(1)  The parent of a recorded child may refer to an appeal committee set up under section 28D of
this Act—
(a)   a decision of an education authority to record the child or, following a review under
section 65A of this Act, to continue to record him;
[ (aa)   a decision of an education authority not to record the child or, following a review
under section 65A of this Act, not to continue to record him; ] 106
(b)   their decision as to the terms in which the matters specified in section 65D(2)(a) or (b)
of this Act are recorded in his Record or any such decision following a review under section
65A of this Act;
(c)   subject to subsections (3) and (4) below, their decision as to the nomination, for the
purposes of section 65D(2)(d) of this Act, of a school to be attended by him or any such
decision following a review under section 65A of this Act;
(d)   subject to subsection (4) below, their decision refusing his placing request in respect
of the child.
(2)  Where the education authority were satisfied that a young person was not capable of expressing
his views for the purposes of section 61(7) of this Act, his parent and, in any other case, the young
person himself may refer to an appeal committee set up under section 28D of this Act—
(a)   a decision of the education authority, in accordance with section 62 of this Act or
following a review under section 65A of this Act, as to the terms in which the matters
specified in section 65D(2)(a) or (b) of this Act are recorded in the young person's Record;
[ (aa)   a decision of an education authority not to record the young person, or, following a
review under section 65A of this Act, not to continue to record him; ] 107
(b)   subject to subsections (3) and (4) below, their decision as to the nomination, for the
purposes of section 65D(2)(d) of this Act, of a school to be attended by the young person
or any such decision following a review under section 65A of this Act;
(c)   subject to subsection (4) below, their decision refusing a placing request in respect of
the young person.
103
104
105
106
107

Words inserted by Disabled Persons (Services, Consultation and Representation) Act 1986 (c.33), s. 14(4)(b)
Words inserted by section 60(2)(b)(ii)
Ss. 60–65F substituted for ss. 60–65 by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c.58), s. 4(1), Sch.8
S. 63(1)(aa) inserted by Disabled Persons (Services, Consultation and Representation) Act 1986 (c.33), s. 14(5)(a)
S. 63(2)(aa) inserted by Disabled Persons (Services, Consultation and Representation) Act 1986 (c.33), s. 14(5)(b)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 50

(3)  A decision of an education authority as to nomination of a school to be attended by a recorded
child or recorded young person may be referred under subsection (1)(c) or (2)(b) above only if the
parent or, as the case may be, the young person has made a placing request.
(4)  Where a reference under subsection (1)(c) or (d) or (2)(b) or (c) above has been made in respect
of a recorded child or recorded young person, no further such reference in respect of him shall be
competent during the period of 12 months beginning with the day on which the immediately
preceding such reference was lodged.
(5)  A reference under this section shall be lodged with the appeal committee within 28 days of the
receipt by the parent or, as the case may be, the young person of the notification of the decision of
the education authority as to the terms in which they have recorded the child or young person
(which, if posted, shall, unless the contrary is proved, be presumed to have been received on the
day after the date on which it was posted except that a decision posted on a Friday or Saturday
shall, unless the contrary is proved, be presumed to have been received on the Monday next
following), but the committee shall, on good cause being shown, have power to hear such a reference
notwithstanding that it was not lodged within that time.
(6)  The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision for procedure in relation to references
made under this section and regulations made under this section may include provision—
(a)   requiring the education authority to make information relevant to their decision available
to the committee and to the parent or, as the case may be, young person referring that
decision to the committee;
(b)   deeming, for the purposes of this Act, an appeal committee to have confirmed the
decision of an education authority in relation to which a reference to the committee was
made in the event of the committee's not having complied with section 64(10) of this Act
within such period or before such date as may be prescribed in the regulations and different
periods or dates may be so prescribed for different purposes.
] 108
[64.—   Provisions supplementary to section 63.
(1)  Where—
(a)   an appeal committee are satisfied that a reference to them under section 63 of this Act
is made under subsection (1)(a)[, (aa)] 109 or (b) or [(2)(aa) or (a)] 110 of that section; or
(b)   an appeal committee consider that, without having the decision of the Secretary of
State on the question whether or not a child should be recorded or on the matters specified
in section 65D(2)(a) or (b) of this Act in relation to a child or young person, they cannot
deal with a reference made under section 63(1)(c) or (2)(b) of this Act which relates to the
education authority's decision as to the nomination for the purposes of section 65D(2)(d)
of this Act of a school to be attended by the child or young person,
they shall in turn refer the reference or, as the case may be, that question or so much of the reference
as relates to matters specified in section 65D(2)(a) or (b) of this Act to the Secretary of State.

108
109
110

Ss. 60–65F substituted for ss. 60–65 by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c.58), s. 4(1), Sch.8
Words inserted by Disabled Persons (Services, Consultation and Representation) Act 1986 (c.33), s. 14(6)(a)
Words substituted by Disabled Persons (Services, Consultation and Representation) Act 1986 (c.33), s. 14(6)(b)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 51

(2)  Subject to subsection (1) above, an appeal committee may, on a reference made to them under
section 63(1) or (2) of this Act, confirm the education authority's decision as to nomination, for the
purposes of section 65D(2)(d) of this Act, of a school to be attended by the child or young person
to whom the reference relates or refusing a placing request in respect of him if they are satisfied
that—
(a)   in relation to the placing request, one or more of the grounds of refusal specified in
section 28A(3) of this Act as it applies to recorded children or, as the case may be, recorded
young persons exists or exist; and
(b)   it is, in all the circumstances, appropriate to do so
but otherwise shall refuse to confirm the authority's decision and shall, where they so refuse, require
the education authority to place the child or young person in the specified school.
In this subsection, the reference to a placing request includes a reference to a placing request the
making of which has, by virtue of section 63(3) of this Act, enabled the reference to the appeal
committee to be made; and the reference to the specified school includes a reference to the school
specified in such a placing request.
(3)  Where, in the case of a recorded child or recorded young person—
(a)   an appeal committee refuse to confirm the education authority's decision as to the
nomination of a school to be attended by him or refusing a placing request in respect of
him; and
(b)   the specified school is an independent or grant-aided special school,
the committee shall require the authority to meet the fees and other necessary costs of the child's
or young person's attendance at the specified school, and the authority shall comply with that
requirement.
In this subsection, the reference to the specified school includes a reference to the school specified
in the placing request the making of which has, by virtue of section 63(3) of this Act, enabled the
reference to the appeal committee to be made.
(4)  On a reference to him under subsection (1) above the Secretary of State shall, subject to
subsection (7) below—
(a)   confirm or refuse to confirm the education authority's decision to record or to continue
to record the child;
(b)   confirm, with or without modification, the terms in which the matters specified in
section 65D(2)(a) or (b) of this Act are recorded in the Record of the child or young person.
(5)  Where the Secretary of State refuses, under paragraph (a) of subsection (4) above, to confirm
an education authority's decision to record a child or to continue to record a child, he shall direct
the authority to discontinue the Record of the child and the authority shall comply with such a
direction.
(6)  Where the Secretary of State, under subsection (4)(b) above, confirms with modifications an
education authority's decision as to the terms in which the matters specified in section 65D(2)(a)
or (b) of this Act are recorded in the Record of a child or young person, he shall direct the authority
to modify the Record accordingly and the authority shall comply with such a direction.
(7)  Where a reference has in turn been made to the Secretary of State under paragraph (b) of
subsection (1) above, the Secretary of State shall not—
(a)   refuse to confirm the decision of the education authority to record or to continue to
record the child; or

(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 52

(b)   confirm, with modifications, their decision as to the terms in which the matters specified
in section 65D(2)(a) or (b) are recorded in the Record of the child or young person
unless he has first obtained and taken into consideration the views of the parent or young person
who made the reference to the appeal committee.
(8)  The Secretary of State shall notify his decision under this section to the appeal committee, the
person who made the reference to the appeal committee and the education authority.
(9)  Where, on a reference to an appeal committee under section 63 of this Act, the committee have
in turn referred the reference or any part thereof to the Secretary of State under subsection (1)(a)
or (b) above, they shall not dispose of so much of the reference as relates to the school to be attended
by the child or young person until the Secretary of State's decision upon the matter referred in turn
to him is notified to the appeal committee and they shall reach their decision as respects the school
to be attended by the child or young person in the light of the Secretary of State's decision.
(10)  An appeal committee shall notify their decision under this section and the reasons for it in
writing to the parent or, as the case may be, young person who made the reference to them and to
the education authority and, where they confirm the education authority's decision as to the
nomination of a school to be attended by the child or young person or refusing the placing request
to which the reference relates, they shall inform the parent or, as the case may be, the young person
who made the reference to them of his right of appeal to the sheriff under section 65 of this Act.
(11)  Where, on a reference under section 63(1) or (2) of this Act, an appeal committee refuse to
confirm an education authority's decision as to the nomination of a school to be attended by the
child or young person or refusing the placing request to which the reference relates, the authority
shall place him in the specified school and shall amend accordingly any nomination in his Record
of a school to be attended by him.
In this subsection, the reference to the specified school includes a reference to the school specified
in the placing request the making of which has, by virtue of section 63(3) of this Act, enabled the
reference to the appeal committee to be made.
] 111
[65.—   Appeal to sheriff on the placing in a school of a recorded child or young person.
(1)  A parent or young person who has made a reference to an appeal committee under section
63(1)(c) or (d) or 2(b) or (c) of this Act may appeal to the sheriff against the decision of the appeal
committee on that reference.
(2)  Subsections (2), (3), (4), (8) and (9) of section 28F of this Act shall apply to an appeal under
this section.
(3)  Where the sheriff considers that, without having the decision of the Secretary of State on the
question whether or not the child should be recorded or on the matters specified in section 65D(2)(a)
or (b) of this Act in relation to the child or young person, he cannot deal with an appeal under this
section against the decision of an appeal committee confirming the decision of an education authority
as to the nomination of a school to be attended by the child or young person, he may, subject to
subsection (5) below, on the motion of a party to the appeal, refer that question or those matters to
the Secretary of State.
111

Ss. 60–65F substituted for ss. 60–65 by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c.58), s. 4(1), Sch.8
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 53

(4)  The Secretary of State shall deal with a reference made to him under subsection (3) above as
if it were a reference made to him under section 64(1) of this Act.
(5)  The sheriff shall not make a reference to the Secretary of State under subsection (3) above if
the appeal committee, in reaching the decision appealed against, have already referred the reference
to them to the Secretary of State under section 64(1) of this Act.
(6)  Subject to subsection (3) above, the sheriff may, on an appeal made to him under this section,
confirm the education authority's decision if he is satisfied that—
(a)   in relation to the placing request, one or more of the grounds of refusal specified in
section 28A(3) of this Act, as it applies to recorded children, or as the case may be, recorded
young persons, exists or exist; and
(b)   it is, in all the circumstances, appropriate to do so
but otherwise shall refuse to confirm the authority's decision and shall, where he so refuses, require
the education authority to place the child or young person in the specified school and to amend
accordingly any nomination in the Record of the child or young person of a school to be attended
by him.
In this subsection, the reference to the placing request includes a reference to the placing request
the making of which enabled, by virtue of section 63(3) of this Act, the reference to the appeal
committee whose decision thereon has been appealed to the sheriff, to be made; and the reference
to the specified school includes a reference to the school specified in such a placing request.
(7)  Where, in the case of a recorded child or recorded young person—
(a)   the sheriff refuses to confirm the education authority's decision as to the nomination
of a school to be attended by him or refusing the placing request made in respect of him;
and
(b)   the specified school is an independent or grant-aided school,
the sheriff shall require the authority to meet the fees and other necessary costs of the child's or
young person's attendance at the specified school.
In this subsection the references to the placing request and the specified school shall be construed
in the same way as in subsection (6) above.
(8)  The sheriff shall dispose of—
(a)   any appeal against the decision of an appeal committee on a reference which was, in
turn, referred to the Secretary of State under section 64(1) of this Act;
(b)   any appeal in relation to which he has referred any matter or question to the Secretary
of State under subsection (3) above
in the light of the Secretary of State's decision on the reference to him.
] 112
[65A.—   Review by education authority of decision to record and information in Record.
(1)  Subject to subsection (2) below, it shall be the duty of an education authority to keep under
consideration the cases of all recorded children and recorded young persons belonging to their area
(in accordance with section 23(3) of this Act), and—
(a)   when in the discharge of their duty in relation to such a child or young person the
authority think it expedient; or
112

Ss. 60–65F substituted for ss. 60–65 by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c.58), s. 4(1), Sch.8
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 54

(b)   if the authority are at any time requested to do so by notice in writing given to them
by the parent of such a child or by such a young person or, where the authority are of the
opinion that such a young person is not capable of expressing his views, by his parent,
the authority shall review their decision to record the said child or young person and the information
entered in the Record of that child or young person.
(2)  The parent of a recorded child, a recorded young person or, as the case may be, the parent of
a recorded young person shall not, by virtue of subsection (1)(b) above, be entitled to request the
authority to review—
(a)   their decision to record the child or young person earlier than the expiry of the period
of 12 months from the date of that decision or the most recent review of that decision,
whichever is the later;
(b)   the information entered in the Record for the purposes of section 65D(2)(a), (b) or (c)
of this Act earlier than the expiry of the period of 12 months from the date of commencement
of the Record or the most recent review of the information entered therein, whichever is
the later.
(3)  Sections 61 and 62 of this Act shall apply to a review by an education authority of their decision
to record a child or young person and of the information contained in the Record of a child or young
person with such modifications as the Secretary of State may by regulations prescribe.
] 113
65B.—   Future provision for recorded children.
(1)  It shall be the duty of an education authority in accordance with this section to consider in
relation to each recorded child belonging to their area (in accordance with section 23(3) of this
Act) what provision would benefit him after he ceases to be of school age and to make a report
thereon.
(2)  The education authority shall perform the duty imposed on them under subsection (1) above
during the period beginning 2 years before the child ceases to be of school age and ending 9 months
before then.
(3)  Sections 61 and 62 of this Act shall apply to the process of consideration under this section
with such modification as the Secretary of State may by regulations prescribe.
(4)  The duty of consideration imposed by subsection (1) above may be performed in conjunction
with a review in relation to the child under section 65A of this Act.
(5)  The education authority's report under subsection (1) above shall include their recommendation
as to—
(a)   whether the child would benefit from school education after he ceases to be of school
age; and
(b)   if the recommendation under paragraph (a) above is that he would benefit therefrom,
whether or not his Record should be discontinued in accordance with section 65C(3) of this
Act after he ceases to be of school age,
and they shall send a copy of the report to the child's parent and inform him of the right to have
the Record discontinued under section 65C(3) of this Act.
113

Ss. 60–65F substituted for ss. 60–65 by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c.58), s. 4(1), Sch.8
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 55

(6)  In any case where they consider it appropriate to do so, the education authority shall, in
accordance with subsection (7) below, send a copy of their report to—
(a) […]114
(b)   the health board for the area in which the child resides; and
(c)   with the consent of the child's parent, any other body being a body making provision
from which, in their opinion, he might benefit.
and the local authority as education authority shall also ensure that the local authority for the
purposes of Part II of the Children (Scotland) Act 1995 receive such a copy.
(6A)  Without prejudice to the generality of paragraph (c) of subsection (6) above, the reference
in that paragraph to any other body shall include a reference to the board of management of a
college of further education (within the meaning of Part I of the Further and Higher Education
(Scotland) Act 1992) making provision from which, in the opinion of the authority, the child might
benefit.
(7)  The education authority shall, where possible, perform their duty under subsection (6) above
not later than 6 months before the child or young person to whom the report referred to in that
subsection relates is expected to cease receiving school education.
[65C.—   Continuance of Record of young persons.
(1)  Where a recorded child ceases to be of school age but, as a young person, receives school
education, the education authority shall, subject to subsection (3) below, continue his Record for
so long as he receives such education.
(2)  If and for so long as a Record is continued under subsection (1) above, the provisions of this
Act relating to the opening and keeping of Records of recorded young persons (other than section
60(5) of this Act) shall apply in relation to it, and the child whose Record is so continued shall be
deemed to be a recorded young person.
(3)  An education authority shall discontinue the Record of a young person if he requests them to
do so or, where the authority are of the opinion that he is not capable of expressing a request for
the purposes of this section, his parent so requests.
] 115
[65D.—   Regulations regarding Records.
(1)  The Secretary of State shall by regulations prescribe—
(a)   the form of a Record;
(b)   the nature of the information to be entered therein;
(c)   the procedure to be followed in relation to the keeping, discontinuance and destruction
of a Record and its transfer on the recorded child or recorded young person moving from
the area of one education authority to that of another;
(d)   the period for which a Record must be preserved after its discontinuance;
(e)   the persons to whom an education authority—
(i)   shall, at the request of such a person, disclose a Record; and
114
115

repealed by Children (Scotland) Act 1995 c. 36 Sch. 5 para. 1
Ss. 60–65F substituted for ss. 60–65 by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c.58), s. 4(1), Sch.8
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 56

(ii)   may disclose a Record,
and the manner of such disclosure;
(f)   such other matters relating to Records as are in his opinion necessary or expedient,
and the Secretary of State may—
(i)   under paragraph (c) of this subsection, prescribe different procedures in different
circumstances;
(ii)   under paragraph (d) of this subsection, prescribe different periods in different
circumstances; and
(iii)   under paragraph (e) of this subsection, prescribe different persons and different manners
of disclosure for different purposes.
(2)  Regulations under subsection (1) above shall provide that a Record shall include four parts
containing respectively—
(a)   a summary of the child's or young person's impairments;
(b)   a statement of the special educational needs arising from those impairments;
(c)   a statement of the measures proposed by the education authority to be taken to meet
those needs; and
(d)   where appropriate, the nomination of a school to be attended by him.
] 116
[65E.   Application of certain provisions of this Act to recorded children and young persons.
Schedule A2 to this Act (which modifies certain provisions of this Act in their application to
recorded children and young persons) shall have effect. ] 117
65F.   Secretary of State may prescribe standards etc. for special schools.
Without prejudice to section 2 of this Act, the Secretary of State may make regulations prescribing
standards and […] 118 requirements relating to the conduct of schools making provision for recorded
children or recorded young persons.
[65G.—   Attendance of certain children and young persons with special educational needs
at establishments outwith United Kingdom.
(1)  Without prejudice to sections 49 (power of educational authorities to assist persons to take
advantage of educational facilities) and 50 (education of pupils in exceptional circumstances) of
this Act, an education authority shall have power to make such arrangements as they think fit to
enable a child or young person to whom subsection (2) below applies to attend an establishment
(whether or not a school) outwith the United Kingdom if that establishment makes provision wholly
or mainly for persons with pronounced, specific or complex special educational needs.
(2)  This subsection applies to a child or young person if he has such needs as are mentioned in
subsection (1) above whether or not a record of those needs is kept in respect of him under section
60 of this Act.

116
117
118

Ss. 60–65F substituted for ss. 60–65 by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c.58), s. 4(1), Sch.8
Ss. 60–65F substituted for ss. 60–65 by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c.58), s. 4(1), Sch.8
Word repealed by Education (Scotland) Act 1996 c. 43 Sch. 6 para. 1
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 57

(3)  Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) above, the arrangements mentioned in
that subsection may include defraying, whether or wholly or partly—
(a)   the fees payable for the child's or young person's attendance and his travelling,
maintenance and other expenses in respect of that attendance; and
(b)   where in the opinion of the authority it would be to the advantage of the child or young
person were one (or both) of his parents, or some other person, to be present with him at
the establishment during the period of the attendance, such expenses of, as the case may
be, the parent, parents or other person.
119
]
PART III
ADMINISTRATION AND FINANCE
Central administration
66.—   Inspection of educational establishments.
(1)  The Secretary of State shall have power to cause inspection to be made of every school at such
intervals as appear to him to be appropriate, and to cause a special inspection of any school to be
made whenever he considers such an inspection to be desirable, and he may from time to time
cause inspection to be made of any other educational establishment (other than a designated
institution within the meaning of Part II of the Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Act 1992),
and such inspections shall be made by Her Majesty's Inspectors or any person appointed by the
Scottish Ministers for the purposes of this section (or Her Majesty's Inspectors and any such person).
(1AA)  If requested to do so by the Scottish Ministers–
(a)   Her Majesty's Inspectors or any person appointed by the Scottish Ministers for the
purposes of this section shall give advice to the Scottish Ministers on such matter as may
be specified in the request;
(b)   Her Majesty's Inspectors or any such person (or Her Majesty's Inspectors and any such
person) may, as respect a matter so specified, inspect and report on a school (including any
establishment in which school education is provided in pursuance of arrangements entered
into under section 35 of this Act), or class of schools, so specified.
[ (1A)  Without prejudice to subsection (1) above, the Scottish Ministers shall have power to cause
inspection to be made at any establishment in which school education is provided in pursuance of
arrangements entered into under section 35 of the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. Act 2000
(asp 6); and such inspections shall be made by Her Majesty's Inspectors or any person appointed
by the Scottish Ministers for the purposes of this section (or Her Majesty's Inspectors and any such
person). ] 120
(1B)  Notwithstanding subsection (1) above, the Secretary of State shall have power to cause
inspection to be make of the education and training, wherever it is carried out, provided by
institutions within the higher education sector (within the meaning of the Further and Higher
119
120

S. 65G inserted by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.39), s. 71(2)
substituted by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) s. 36
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 58

Education (Scotland) Act 1992) wholly or mainly for persons preparing to be, or persons who are,
teachers in schools, and such inspections shall be made by Her Majesty's Inspectors or other persons
appointed by the Secretary of State for the purpose.
(3)  If any person wilfully obstructs any person authorised to make an inspection in pursuance of
this section in the execution of his duty, he shall be liable on summary conviction to a fine not
exceeding level 4 on the standard scale or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months
or to both such fine and such imprisonment.
[66A   Code of practice as regards inspections under section 66
(1)  Subject to subsection (2) below, the Scottish Ministers may, for the purposes of–
(a)   giving practical guidance on matters relating to inspections under section 66 of this
Act (including, without prejudice to that generality, such mattes as the making and publishing
of reports on those inspections); and
(b)   promoting what appear to them to be desirable practices with respect to these matters,
from time to time prepare, approve and issue such codes of practice as in their opinion are suitable
for those purposes.
(2)  Subsection (1) above does not apply in relation to inspections of educational establishments
which are institutions for the provision of any form of further education.
] 121
[66B   Duty of Her Majesty's Inspectors to make reference to Scottish Ministers
(1)  This section applies where, after an inspection under subsection (1) or (1AA) of section 66 of
this Act of–
(a)   a public school; or
(b)   a grant-aided school,
Her Majesty's Inspectors identify that a relevant person requires to take action to secure
improvement in a matter relating to the school or the school education provided in it.
(2)  If it appears to Her Majesty's Inspectors that–
(a)   having been given sufficient opportunity to secure improvement in a matter identified
under subsection (1) above, the relevant person is failing or has failed to take satisfactory
action to do so; and
(b)   having regard to the seriousness of that failure, an enforcement direction is justified,
they shall make a reference to the Scottish Ministers.
(3)  A reference under subsection (2) above shall–
(a)   be in writing;
(b)   specify the failure mentioned in subsection (2)(a) above; and
(c)   include recommendations as to the action which, in the opinion of Her Majesty's
Inspectors, the relevant person requires to take to remedy or prevent the recurrence of that
failure.
(4)  Where Her Majesty's Inspectors make a reference under subsection (2) above, they shall inform
the relevant person of the making of that reference.
121

added by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) s. 12
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 59

(5)  In this section and in sections 66C and 66D of this Act, “relevant person” means–
(a)   in relation to a public school, the education authority; and
(b)   in relation to a grant-aided school, the managers of the school.
122
]
[66C   Preliminary notice
(1)  Where, on a reference under section 66B(2) of this Act, it appears to the Scottish Ministers
that–
(a)   the relevant person is failing or has failed to take satisfactory action to secure
improvement in the matter mentioned in section 66B(2)(a) of this Act; and
(b)   an enforcement direction is justified,
they may serve a preliminary notice on the relevant person.
(2)  A preliminary notice is a notice which–
(a)   informs the relevant person of the apparent failure mentioned in subsection (1)(a)
above; and
(b)   requires the relevant person to submit to the Scottish Ministers, within such time as is
specified in the notice, a written response which–
(i)   states that the person has not so failed and gives reasons supporting that
statement; or
(ii)   states that the person has so failed but gives reasons why an enforcement
direction should not be given to that person.
123
]
[66D   Enforcement direction
(1)  Where, following service under section 66C(1) of this Act of a preliminary notice and the
expiry of the time specified in it, it still appears to the Scottish Ministers that–
(a)   the relevant person is failing or has failed to take satisfactory action to secure
improvement in the matter mentioned in section 66B(2)(a) of this Act; and
(b)   having regard to the seriousness of that failure, action under this section is justified,
they may give the relevant person an enforcement direction.
(2)  An enforcement direction is a direction in writing by the Scottish Ministers requiring the
relevant person to whom it is given to take, within such time as is specified in the direction, such
action as is so specified, being action calculated to remedy or prevent the recurrence of the failure
mentioned in subsection (1)(a) above.
(3)  Where two or more courses of action are specified in an enforcement direction, the Scottish
Ministers may specify for each a different time within which it is to be taken.
(4)  An enforcement direction may place such conditions as the Scottish Ministers may specify in
it upon the carrying out of such functions of the relevant person in relation to the school and the
school education provided in it as are so specified.
122

123

added by School Education (Ministerial Powers and Independent Schools) (Scotland) Act 2004 asp 12 (Scottish
Act) Pt 1 s. 1
added by School Education (Ministerial Powers and Independent Schools) (Scotland) Act 2004 asp 12 (Scottish
Act) Pt 1 s. 1
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 60

(5)  The Scottish Ministers may vary an enforcement direction by giving a further such direction.
(6)  A further such direction need not proceed upon a further preliminary notice under section
66C(1) of this Act.
(7)  An enforcement direction may be revoked by the Scottish Ministers.
(8)  Before giving, varying or revoking an enforcement direction, the Scottish Ministers shall consult
Her Majesty's Inspectors.
(9)  A relevant person to whom an enforcement direction is given shall comply with it.
(10)  The Scottish Ministers may, instead of or as well as giving an enforcement direction, make
such recommendations to the relevant person as they think appropriate.
(11)  If the Scottish Ministers exercise their power to give, vary or revoke an enforcement direction
they shall–
(a)   prepare a report on their exercise of that power; and
(b)   lay that report before the Scottish Parliament.
124
]
67.   Local inquiries.
The Secretary of State may cause a local inquiry to be held for the purpose of the exercise of any
of his functions under this [or any other enactment relating to education]125 Act, and the provisions
of Schedule 1 to this Act shall have effect with regard to any such inquiry.
68.   Power to require submission to medical examination.
Where any question is to be decided by the Secretary of State under this Act or under any rule,
regulation or order made thereunder, then, if in the opinion of the Secretary of State the medical
examination of any pupil or other person enrolled at an educational establishment would assist the
determination of the question, the Secretary of State may by notice in writing served on the parent
of that pupil, if the pupil is enrolled at a school, or on the pupil[ or other person] 126 himself if he
is enrolled at another educational establishment, require the parent to submit him, or require the
pupil[ or other person] 127 to submit himself, as the case may be, for such examination; and if any
person on whom such a notice is served fails without reasonable excuse to comply with the
requirements thereof, he shall be liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 1 on
the standard scale.
69.—   Approval and carrying out of schemes.
(1)  The Secretary of State may, after considering any representations made to him on the subject
and the report of any local inquiry which may have been held under section 67 of this Act, approve,
either as submitted or with such modifications and amendments as he thinks proper, any scheme
124

125
126
127

added by School Education (Ministerial Powers and Independent Schools) (Scotland) Act 2004 asp 12 (Scottish
Act) Pt 1 s. 1
Words inserted by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.39), s. 82(2), Sch. 10 para. 8(15)
words inserted by Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Act 1992 c. 37 Sch. 9 para. 7(6)(a)
words inserted by Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Act 1992 c. 37 Sch. 9 para. 7(6)(a)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 61

or revised scheme or modification of an existing scheme (in this section referred to as “the scheme”)
submitted to him under this Act by an education authority; and thereupon it shall be the duty of the
education authority to carry the scheme into effect as so approved.
(2)  If an education authority inform the Secretary of State that they are aggrieved by his approval
with modifications or amendments of the scheme, the Secretary of State shall cause the scheme as
so approved to be laid before Parliament as soon as may be thereafter together with the report of
any local inquiry which may have been held under section 67 of this Act. If either House of
Parliament within the period of forty days beginning with the day on which the scheme is laid
before it resolves that the approval of the scheme be annulled, the scheme as so approved shall
cease to have effect, but without prejudice to anything previously done thereunder or to the
submission and approval with or without modifications and amendments of any new scheme,
revised scheme or modification of an existing scheme.
(3)  In reckoning any such period of forty days, no account shall be taken of any time during which
Parliament is dissolved or prorogued or during which both Houses are adjourned for more than
four days.
[70.   Powers to enforce duty of education authorities and other persons.
(1)  If the Secretary of State is satisfied, either on complaint by any person interested or otherwise,
that an education authority, a School Board, the managers of a school or educational establishment,
or other persons have failed to discharge any duty imposed on them by or for the purposes of this
Act or of any other enactment relating to education, the Secretary of State may make an order
declaring them to be in default in respect of that duty and requiring them before a date stated in the
order to discharge that duty. If by the said date the education authority, a School Board, managers
or other persons have not discharged the duty, one or other of the following steps may be taken to
secure the discharge thereof—
(a)   the Secretary of State may make such arrangements as he thinks fit for the discharge
of the duty, and all expenses incurred by the Secretary of State in so doing shall be
recoverable as a debt due by the authority, managers or other persons to the Secretary of
State; or
(b)   the Court of Session may, on the application of the Lord Advocate, order specific
performance of the duty.
(2)  Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) above, in that subsection the expression
“enactment”includes–
(a)   an Act of the Scottish Parliament but only in so far as it is an Act which relates to
school education; and
(b)   an order, regulation, rule or other instrument which has effect by virtue of an Act of
the Scottish Parliament but only in so far as it is an instrument which so relates.
] 128

128

existing s70 renumbered s70(1) and subsection (2) added by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act
2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) Sch. 2 para. 3(8)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 62

Advisory councils
71.—   Advisory councils.
(1)  It shall be lawful for Her Majesty by Order in Council to establish an advisory council consisting,
as to not less than two-thirds of the members, of persons qualified to represent the views of various
bodies interested in education, for the purpose of advising the Secretary of State on educational
matters, and the Secretary of State shall take into consideration any advice or representation
submitted to him by the advisory council.
(2)  Provisions may be made in the said order for the appointment by the advisory council of special
committees to deal with remits on particular subjects made to the council by the Secretary of State,
for such special committees to be composed of persons nominated by the Secretary of State of
whom some shall be members of the council and the remainder shall be persons having special
knowledge or experience of the subjects of the respective remits, and for the reports of special
committees to be submitted to the Secretary of State by the advisory council, who shall be entitled
in submitting the reports to make such comments thereon as they think fit.
(3)  The Secretary of State may, after consultation with education authorities and other persons
interested, by order establish a regional advisory council for any branch of education, to advise the
education authorities and other managers of schools, […] 129 and other educational establishments
in the region as to the development of the branch of education for which the council is appointed.
Finance
72.—   Expenses of Secretary of State.
(1)  The expenses incurred by the Secretary of State in the exercise of his functions under this Act
shall, in so far as they are not met under section 1(2) of the Reorganisation of Offices (Scotland)
Act 1939, be defrayed out of money provided by Parliament.
(2)  Any sum by which any grants under this Act are increased by reason of the powers and duties
conferred and imposed by the provisions of section 48 of this Act on education authorities shall be
defrayed out of money provided by Parliament.
73.   Power of Secretary of State to make grants to education authorities and others.
The Secretary of State may out of money provided by Parliament apply, in accordance with
regulations made by him, such sums as he thinks necessary or expedient for any or all of the
following purposes:—
(a)   the payment of grants to education authorities;
(b)   the payment of grants to universities;
(c)   the payment of grants to the managers of educational establishments;
(d)   the payment of grants to any other persons
(i)   for providing education or educational services; or

129

Words repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.39), s. 82(2), Sch. 11
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 63

(ii)   in respect of expenditure incurred or to be incurred by them for the purposes
of, or in connection with the provision (or proposed provision) of, education or
educational services.
(e)   the payment of grants to persons to assist the carrying out of educational research;
(f)   [the payment of allowances or loans to or in respect of persons
(i)   undertaking; or
(ii)   who have undertaken;
courses of education;] 130
(g)   providing for any other educational expenditure approved by him.
[73A.—   Transfer or delegation of functions relating to student support.
(1)  If the Secretary of State so determines, any function exercisable by him by virtue of regulations
made under section 73(f) of this Act shall, to such extent as is specified in his determination, be
exercisable instead by such body or person as is so specified.
(2)  A person or body by whom any function is for the time being exercisable by virtue of subsection
(1) above shall comply with any direction given by the Secretary of State as to the exercise of that
function.
(3)  The Secretary of State may make arrangements for any person or body specified in the
arrangements to exercise on his behalf, to such extent as is so specified, any function exercisable
by him by virtue of regulations under section 73(f) of this Act (including any such functions as to
appeals).
(4)  Any arrangements made under subsection (3) above shall not prevent the Secretary of State
from exercising the function in question himself.
(5)  The Secretary of State may make provision for enabling appeals—
(a)   to be made with respect to such matters arising out of the exercise by any person or
body of any function by virtue of subsection (1) or (3) above as he may determine; and
(b)   to be so made to a person or body appointed by him for that purpose.
(6)  The Secretary of State may pay to any person or body by whom any function is exercisable by
virtue of subsection (1) or (3) above—
(a)   such amounts as he considers appropriate for the purpose of meeting expenditure
incurred or to be incurred by that person or body—
(i)   in making grants or loans by virtue of regulations under section 73(f) of this
Act, or
(ii)   by way of administrative expenses,
in, or in connection with, the exercise of that function;
(b)   in the case of any such person, or of any body with which the Secretary of State has
made arrangements under subsection (3) above, such remuneration as he may determine.
(7)  Any payment under subsection (6)(a) above may be made subject to such terms and conditions
(including conditions as to repayment) as the Secretary of State may determine.

130

word substituted by Education (Graduate Endowment and Student Support) (Scotland) Act 2001 asp 6 (Scottish
Act) s. 3(2)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 64

(8)  The Secretary of State may pay to any person or body appointed by him under subsection (5)
such remuneration or administrative expenses (or both) as he may determine.
(9)  In relation to any function which, by virtue of subsection (1) or (3) above is exercisable to a
specified extent, references in any other provision of this section to the exercise of that function
are accordingly to its exercise to that extent.
] 131
73B.—   Regulations relating to student loans.
(1)  This section applies in relation to regulations under paragraph (f) of section 73 of this Act made
with respect to loans.
(2)  Regulations to which this section applies may make provision requiring such amounts as may
be prescribed, payable under loans granted by virtue of such regulations, to be paid directly to
institutions providing courses of education who have previously made payments of any prescribed
description to persons undertaking such courses to whom such loans may be granted.
(3)  Regulations to which this section applies may make such provision as the Secretary of State
considers necessary or expedient in connection with the recovery of amounts due from borrowers
under loans granted by virtue of such regulations, including provision for—
(a)   imposing on employers, or (as the case may be) such other persons or bodies as may
be prescribed, requirements with respect to—
(i)   the making of deductions in respect of amounts so due (or, in any prescribed
circumstances, amounts assessed in accordance with the regulations to be so due)
from emoluments payable to borrowers,
(ii)   the collection by other means of such amounts,
(iii)   the transmission of amounts so deducted or collected to the Secretary of State
in accordance with directions given by him;
(b)   imposing on employers, or such other persons or bodies as may be prescribed,
requirements with respect to the keeping and production of records for such purposes as
may be prescribed;
(c)   imposing on borrowers requirements with respect to—
(i)   the provision of such information, and
(ii)   the keeping and production of such documents and records,
relating to their income as may be prescribed;
(d)   requiring the payment, by persons or bodies to whom the requirements imposed in
pursuance of paragraphs (a) to (c) above apply, of—
(i)   penalties in cases of non-compliance with, or otherwise framed by reference
to, such requirements, and
(ii)   interest in respect of periods when such penalties are due but unpaid;
(e)   requiring the payment by borrowers, in respect of periods when amounts due under
their loans are unpaid, of—
(i)   interest (applied to such amounts at a rate calculated otherwise than in accordance
with subsections (6) and (7) below), or
(ii)   both such interest and one or more surcharges (together with further interest
in respect of periods when such surcharges are due but unpaid);
131

added by Teaching and Higher Education Act 1998 c. 30 Pt II c. II s. 29(2)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 65

(f)   enabling the Secretary of State to require the reimbursement by borrowers of costs or
expenses of any prescribed description incurred by him in connection with the recovery of
unpaid amounts;
(g)   applying or extending with or without modification, for purposes connected with the
recovery of amounts under regulations to which this section applies, any of the provisions
of the Taxes Acts or of PAYE regulations;
(h)   determining the priority as between deductions falling to be made by virtue of paragraph
(a)(i) above and deductions falling to be made from emoluments payable to borrowers by
virtue of other enactments (whenever passed);
(i)   modifying any enactment or instrument (whenever passed or made) so as to provide
for the treatment, in connection with any calculation with respect to income (however
defined), of amounts due from or payable to such persons under loans granted by virtue of
regulations to which this section applies.
(4)  In subsection (3) above—
(a)   “employers” means persons who make payments of, or on account of, [PAYE
income] 132 , and
(b)   “the Taxes Acts”has the same meaning as in the Taxes Management Act 1970.
(5)  Regulations to which this section applies may make provision for the payment, in respect of
amounts overpaid by borrowers, of interest at such rate, and calculated in such manner, as may be
determined by the Secretary of State from time to time.
(6)  A rate of interest, prescribed by regulations to which this section applies, to be borne by loans
shall at no time exceed the rate for the time being specified for the purposes of any exemption
conferred by virtue of section 16(5)(b) of the Consumer Credit Act 1974 (exemption of certain
consumer credit agreements by reference to the rate of the total charge for credit).
(7)  Subject to subsection (6) above, regulations to which this section applies shall not prescribe a
rate of interest to be borne by loans higher than that which the Secretary of State, having regard to
such retail prices index as appears to him to be appropriate, is satisfied is required to maintain the
value in real terms of the outstanding amounts of such loans.
(8)  Regulations to which this section applies may make provision, for the purpose of calculating
the interest to be borne by loans, for repayments by borrowers to be treated as having been made
or received on such date or dates as may be prescribed.
(9)  Regulations to which this section applies may prescribe requirements or other provisions which
add to or otherwise modify, during the currency of a loan, requirements or other provisions (whether
as to repayment or otherwise) which apply in relation to loans granted by virtue of such regulations.
(10)  Regulations to which this section applies may make provision for a borrower not to be liable
to make any repayment in respect of a loan—
(a)   during such periods as may be prescribed from time to time, or
(b)   in such circumstances as may be prescribed,
including provision for the cancellation of any further such liability of the borrower in any such
circumstances.

132

words substituted by Income Tax (Earnings and Pensions) Act 2003 c. 1 Sch. 6(2) para. 149(b)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 66

(11)  Regulations to which this section applies may make provision for appeals with respect to
matters arising under such regulations (including provision for determining, or enabling the
determination of, the procedure to be followed in connection with such appeals).
(12)  Regulations to which this section applies may, in relation to a borrower's discharge under or
by virtue of section 54 of the Bankruptcy (Scotland) Act 1985 or on an order being made under
paragraph 11 of Schedule 4 to that Act, make provision for the treatment of any debt or liability to
which a borrower is, or may become, subject in respect of sums received, or which he is entitled
to received, after the date of his sequestration.
(13)  Nothing in this section prejudices the generality of section 73(f) of this Act.
[73C.—   Transitional provisions and savings on repeal of Education (Student Loans) Act
1990.
(1)  The Secretary of State may by regulations make such transitional provision and savings in
connection with the repeal by the Teaching and Higher Education Act 1998 of the Education
(Student Loans) Act 1990 (“the 1990 Act”) as he considers necessary or expedient including—
(a)   provision for any function which has been conferred under or by virtue of the 1990
Act to transfer to, or otherwise become exercisable by—
(i)   the Secretary of State, or
(ii)   such other person or body as may be prescribed,
to such extent as may be prescribed; and
(b)   provision for the transfer to the Secretary of State or any such other person or body of
rights or liabilities arising under or by virtue of the 1990 Act.
(2)  Regulations made by virtue of paragraphs (a) and (b) of subsection (1) above may, in particular,
provide for—
(a)   any such function to be exercisable in pursuance of such regulations in such modified
form as may be prescribed;
(b)   the 1990 Act to have effect with such modifications as may be prescribed.
] 133
73D.—   Provision as to maximum amounts of certain allowances.
(1)  This section applies to allowances payable by virtue of section 73(f) of this Act in respect of
the fees charged in connection with […] 134 a course of higher education.
(2)  The Secretary of State may by order made by statutory instrument determine the maximum
amount payable in any academic year of allowances to which this section applies in respect of such
courses or classes of courses of higher education as may be so determined and, subject to subsection
(3) below, a statutory instrument containing an order under this subsection shall be subject to
annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.

133
134

added by Teaching and Higher Education Act 1998 c. 30 Pt II c. II s. 29(2)
words repealed by Education (Graduate Endowment and Student Support) (Scotland) Act 2001 asp 6 (Scottish
Act) s. 3(4)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 67

(3)  Where the Secretary of State has determined a maximum amount under subsection (2) above,
he shall not make a further determination increasing that maximum amount under that subsection
unless—
(a)   he is satisfied that the increase is no greater than is required to maintain the allowance's
value in real terms; or
(b)   a draft of the order containing the further determination has been laid before, and
approved by a resolution of, each House of Parliament.
(4)  For the purposes of subsection (3)(a) above the Secretary of State shall have regard to such
retail prices index as appears to him to be appropriate.
(5)  In subsection (2) above, “courses of higher education” means courses of higher education
falling within section 38 of the Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Act 1992.
[73E.—   Supply of information in connection with student loans.
(1)  This section applies to any information which is held—
(a)   by the Commissioners of Inland Revenue, or
(b)   by a person providing services to those Commissioners and in connection with the
provision of those services.
(2)  Information to which this section applies may be supplied to—
(a)   the Secretary of State or the Department of Education for Northern Ireland,
(b)   any person or body acting on behalf of the Secretary of State or that Department under
the delegation of functions provisions, or
(c)   any person or body by whom any function of the Secretary of State or that Department
is for the time being exercisable to any extent by virtue of the transfer of functions provisions,
for the purpose of enabling or assisting the recipient to exercise any function in connection with
the operation of the student loans scheme.
(3)  Information supplied under subsection (2) above shall not be supplied by the recipient to any
other person or body unless it is supplied—
(a)   to a person or body to whom it could have been supplied under that subsection, or
(b)   for the purposes of any civil or criminal proceedings arising out of the student loans
scheme.
(4)  Subsections (2) and (3) above extend only to the supply of information by or under the authority
of the Commissioners of Inland Revenue.
(5)  This section does not limit the circumstances in which information may be supplied apart from
this section.
(6)  In this section—
(a)   “the delegation of functions provisions” means section 73A(3) of this Act or section
23(4) of the Teaching and Higher Education Act 1998;
(b)   “the transfer of functions provisions” means section 73A(1) of this Act or section
23(1) of the Teaching and Higher Education Act 1998; and
(c)   “the student loans scheme” means the provisions of—
(i)   regulations under section 73(f) of this Act with respect to loans; or
(ii)   regulations under section 22 of the Teaching and Higher Education Act 1998
so far as having effect in relation to loans under that section;
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 68

and in this subsection any reference to a provision of this Act includes a reference to any
corresponding Northern Ireland legislation.
] 135
74.—   Payment of grants to be subject to conditions.
(1)  The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision that any payment which he is required
or authorised to make by or under this Act, except section 76 of this Act, shall be subject to such
conditions as may be prescribed in [or determined by him under ] 136 the regulations, and that
education authorities and other persons to whom such payments have been made shall comply with
such requirements as may be specified in [or determined by him under] 137 the regulations.
(2)  Where the Secretary of State is satisfied that the persons to whom any grant is payable under
this Act are, by reason of the provisions of any trust deed or other instrument, unable to fulfil any
condition or comply with any requirement imposed under this section, he may, after consultation
with them, by order make such modifications of the said provisions as may be necessary for the
purpose of enabling the said persons to fulfil that condition or comply with that requirement; and
any such trust deed or other instrument shall, during such period as may be specified in the order,
have effect subject to any modifications so made.
75.   Examination of accounts.
Save as may be otherwise prescribed, it shall be a condition of the payment by the Secretary of
State of a grant to the managers of a school or other educational establishment not under the
management of an education authority or to other persons providing educational services approved
by the Secretary of State that the accounts of the income and expenditure of such managers or
persons in respect of such school, educational establishment or service shall be set out according
to a form prescribed by the Secretary of State and shall together with the relative vouchers and
other documents be submitted for examination to the Secretary of State.
75A.—   Assisted places at grant-aided and independent schools.
(1)  The Secretary of State shall, subject to subsections (1A) and (1B) below, operate a scheme
whereby—
(a)   participating schools remit fees that would otherwise be chargeable in respect of pupils
admitted to assisted places under the scheme; and
(b)   the Secretary of State reimburses the schools for the fees that are remitted.
(1A)  The Secretary of State shall operate a scheme such as is described in subsection (1) above
only in relation to any pupil admitted to an assisted place under such a scheme prior to the beginning
of the first term of the 1997-98 school year where the pupil will be in attendance at the school
concerned—
(a)   at the beginning of that term; or

135
136
137

added by Teaching and Higher Education Act 1998 c. 30 Pt II c. II s. 30
Words inserted by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.39), s. 82(1), Sch. 10 para. 8(17)(a)
Words inserted by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.39), s. 82(1), Sch. 10 para. 8(17)(b)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 69

(b)   after the beginning of that term but before the end of that school year, and where it
appears to the Secretary of State that it is reasonable, in view of any particular circumstances
relating to that pupil, that he should be permitted to take advantage of that place after the
beginning of that term,
and, for the purposes of this section, “1997-98 school year” means the period of twelve months
beginning on 1st August 1997.
(1B)  A pupil holding an assisted place who is receiving primary education during the 1997-98
school year shall cease to hold that place—
(a)   at the end of the school year in which he completes his primary education; or
(b)   if the Secretary of State, where he is satisfied that it is reasonable to do so in view of
any particular circumstances relating to that pupil, decides that he should continue to hold
that place for a further period during which he receives secondary education, at the end of
that period.
(2)  In this section references to a participating school are references to any grant-aided or
independent school providing secondary education which the Secretary of State has determined,
prior to the coming into force of this subsection, to be a participating school for the purposes of
the scheme.
(3)  A determination under subsection (2) above—
(a)   shall state the maximum annual amount allocated by the Secretary of State to the school
under the scheme including the maximum annual amount so allocated for the purposes of
section 75B of this Act; and
(b)   may contain such conditions as the Secretary of State thinks fit in addition to those
prescribed under subsection (9) below.
(4)  The Secretary of State may alter—
(a)   the maximum annual amount referred to in subsection (3)(a) above; or
(b)   the conditions referred to in subsection (3)(b) above,
by written notification to the school concerned.
(5)  A participating school shall comply with any conditions contained in a determination under
subsection (2) above and with any condition or obligation prescribed under subsection (9) below.
(7)  The fees in relation to which the scheme is to have effect shall be—
(a)   tuition and other fees the payment of which is a condition of attendance at a participating
school but excluding—
(i)   boarding fees; and
(ii)   such other charges, if any, as may be prescribed by regulations; and
(b)   entrance fees for public examinations paid by a participating school in respect of
candidates from the school.
(8)  If the Secretary of State is of the opinion that any fee which falls to be remitted in whole or in
part under a scheme established and operated under this section is excessive, he may substitute for
such fee such other amount as he considers appropriate.
(9)  The Secretary of State shall by regulations prescribe—
(c)   the conditions subject to which, the extent to which, and the arrangements in accordance
with which, fees are to be remitted by participating schools;
(d)   the time and manner in which participating schools are to claim and receive
reimbursements from the Secretary of State;
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 70

(e)   conditions to be complied with by participating schools with respect to the fees to be
charged, the keeping and auditing of accounts and the furnishing of information to the
Secretary of State; and
(f)   such other matters as appear to him to be requisite for the purposes of the scheme.
(9A)  Regulations under this section may—
(a)   provide for the discharge of any future liabilities of the Secretary of State to make
reimbursements of fees by way of lump sum payments;
(b)   provide for the Secretary of State, in a case where a participating school—
(i)   merges with another school;
(ii)   closes (whether wholly or in part); or
(iii)   notifies the Secretary of State that it no longer wishes to provide assisted
places,
to authorise the new school or, as the case may be, any other participating school to provide
any assisted places which the participating school first mentioned was authorised to provide;
and a new school authorised to provide assisted places under regulations made under this
section shall be treated for the purposes of this section and section 75B of this Act as if a
determination had been made in respect of it under subsection (2) above[; and] 138
[ (c)   provide for the Secretary of State, in a case where he is satisfied that it is reasonable
to do so in view of any particular circumstances relating to a pupil who holds (or has, at
any time since the beginning of the first term of the 1997-98 school year, held) an assisted
place at a school under a scheme operated by virtue of subsection (1) above, to authorise
another school which is, or is treated as, a participating school to provide for the pupil under
such a scheme the assisted place which the first-mentioned school was authorised to provide.
] 139
(9B)  Without prejudice to his duty to operate a scheme under subsection (1) above in respect of
pupils such as are mentioned in subsection (1A) above, the Secretary of State may by regulations
make such provision as he considers necessary for or in relation to the ending of the scheme.
(9C)  Regulations made under this section or section 75B of this Act may make different provision
for different cases, circumstances or areas and may contain such incidental, supplemental, saving
or transitional provisions as the Secretary of State thinks fit.
(10)  Regulations under subsection (9) above may authorise the Secretary of State to make provision
for any purpose specified in the regulations.
(11)  Before making regulations under subsection (9) above the Secretary of State shall consult
such bodies as appear to him to be appropriate and to be representative of participating schools.
(12)  Regulations made under subsection (9)(c) above shall be reviewed by the Secretary of State
in consultation with such bodies as appear to him to be appropriate and to be representative of
participating schools—
(a)   not later than two years after the date on which the first such regulations are made; and
(b)   thereafter at intervals not exceeding two years.

138
139

and the word "and" immediately preceding it by School Standards and Framework Act 1998 c. 31 Pt VII s. 130(2)(b)
and the word "and" immediately preceding it by School Standards and Framework Act 1998 c. 31 Pt VII s. 130(2)(b)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 71

(13)  Except where the context otherwise requires, references in this section and section 75B of
this Act to a school include references to the proprietors and managers of the school; and references
in this section to an independent school are references to an independent school which is—
(a)   a registered school; and
(b)   conducted only for charitable purposes within the meaning of section 122(1) of this
Act.
[75B.—   Incidental expenses of and provision for pupils holding assisted places.
(1)  The Secretary of State may by regulations require or enable or make provision for requiring
or enabling any school participating in the scheme referred to in section 75A of this Act to make
grants in respect of such expenses, including such travelling expenses, and to remit such charges,
as may be specified in the regulations and to make such provision of meals or other refreshment
or of facilities for the consumption of meals or other refreshment and such provision of clothing
as the school making the provision considers appropriate, being expenses, charges or provision in
respect of matters incidental to or arising out of the attendance at the school of pupils holding
assisted places under the scheme.
(2)  Regulations made under this section may require or enable or make provision for requiring or
enabling any school providing meals or other refreshment under subsection (1) above to make such
charges as it thinks fit for any such meal or other refreshment except where it is provided by virtue
of subsection (4) below.
(3)  Regulations under this section shall provide that, within the maximum amount stated under
section 75A(3) of this Act, any amounts granted or remitted by a school and expenditure incurred
by them by or under the regulations shall be reimbursed to the school by the Secretary of State.
(4)  The Secretary of State shall exercise his power to make regulations under this section so as to
ensure that, in relation to any pupil whose parents are in receipt of supplementary benefit or family
income supplement, such provision is made for that pupil in the middle of the day as appears to
the school to be requisite.
(5)  Regulations under this section may in particular prescribe—
(a)   the conditions subject to which, the extent to which, and the arrangements in accordance
with which, grants and remissions are to be made and meals, other refreshment, facilities
for the consumption thereof and clothing are to be provided;
(b)   whether a charge is to be remitted in whole or in such part as may be prescribed in the
regulations;
(c)   the time and manner in which schools are to claim and receive reimbursement from
the Secretary of State.
(6)  Regulations under this section may authorise the Secretary of State to make provision for any
purpose specified in the regulations.
] 140

140

Ss. 75A, 75B inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), s. 5(1)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 72

76.—   Industrial scholarships.
(1)  The Secretary of State may award industrial scholarships or make payments to any other person
in respect of the award of such scholarships by that person.
(2)  In this section “industrial scholarships” means scholarships (however described) tenable by
persons undertaking full-time courses of higher education provided by a university, college or other
institution in the United Kingdom, being courses which appears to the Secretary of State or, as the
case may be, the person awarding the scholarships to be relevant to a career in industry.
(3)  In subsection (2) above the reference to a full-time course includes a reference to a course
consisting of alternate periods of—
(a)   full-time study in the university, college or institution in question; and
(b)   associated industrial, professional or commercial experience;
and the reference in that subsection to a course provided by a university, college or institution in
the United Kingdom includes a reference to a course provided by such a university, college or
institution in conjunction with a university, college or other institution in another country.
Grant-aided colleges
77.— […]141
Appointment of director of education
78. […]142
Local administration
79.   Education authorities may receive and administer bequests.
Every education authority shall be at liberty to accept any bequest or gift of property or funds for
behoof of any school or other educational establishment under their management, whether generally
or for the promotion of any particular branch or branches of education or instruction, or for increasing
the income of any teacher, and it shall be the duty of the authority to administer such property,
funds or money according to the wishes and intentions of the donors, and in such manner as to raise
the standard of education and otherwise increase the educational efficiency of the school or other
educational establishment intended to be benefited.
80.—   Funds for behoof of public schools etc., to be transferred to education authorities.
(1)  Where property or money has been or shall be vested in any persons as trustees for behoof of
a public school or other educational establishment under the management of an education authority,
or for the promotion of any branch of education in such school or educational establishment, or to
increase the income of any teacher therein, the free income of such property or money shall be
141
142

repealed by Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Act 1992 c. 37 Sch. 10 para. 1
repealed by Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994 c. 39 Sch. 14 para. 1
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 73

accounted for and paid to the education authority, and shall be applied and administered by the
education authority according to the trusts attaching thereto.
(2)  It shall be lawful for the education authority, with the approval of the Secretary of State, to
vary or depart from the said trusts, with a view to increasing the efficiency of the school or
educational establishment by raising the standard of education therein or by other means.
81.   Trust funds to be kept separate.
The amount of every property or fund held by an education authority on a separate trust shall be
kept separate.
82.   Reports by education authorities.
Every education authority shall make such reports and returns and give such information to the
Secretary of State as he may from time to time require.
83.   Returns by registrars of births, deaths, and marriages to education authorities.
Every registrar of births, deaths, and marriages shall make to an education authority on a form to
be provided by the authority such returns of particulars with regard to the births and deaths of
children registered by him as may be required by the authority with the approval of the
Registrar-General of Births, Deaths and Marriages in Scotland.
84.—   Certificates of birth.
(1)  Where the age of any person is required to be ascertained or proved for the purposes of this
Act or of any enactment relating to the employment of children or young persons, the registrar of
births, deaths and marriages having the custody of the register of births containing the entry relating
to the birth of that person shall, upon being presented by any person with a written requisition in
such form and containing such particulars as may be prescribed and upon payment of a fee of
[£8.50] 143 , supply that person with a copy of the entry certified under his hand.
(2)  Every registrar shall, upon being requested so to do, supply free of charge a form of requisition
for the purposes of this section.
85.   Presumption of age.
Where in any proceedings under this Act the prosecutor alleges that any person whose age is material
to the proceedings is under, of, or over, any age, then, unless the contrary is proved, the court may
presume that person to be under, of, or over, the age alleged.
86.   Admissibility of documents.
In any legal proceedings any document purporting to be—
(a)   a document issued by an education authority, and to be signed by the proper officer of
that authority;
143

sum substituted by Registration of Births, Deaths and Marriages (Fees) (Scotland) Order 2002/389 (Scottish SI)
Sch. 1 para. 1
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 74

(b)   an extract from the minutes of the proceedings of an education authority or of any
committee or sub-committee thereof, and to be signed by the chairman of the authority or
of the committee or sub-committee or by the officer having the custody of the minutes;
(c)   a certificate giving particulars of the attendance of a pupil at a school, and to be signed
by the head teacher of the school;
(d)   a certificate issued by a medical officer of a Health Board, and to be signed by such
officer;
(e)   a certificate issued by an education authority that an attendance order has been made
by the authority and a copy thereof served upon the parent of the child to whom the order
relates, and to be signed by the proper officer of the authority […] 144 ; or
shall be received in evidence and shall, unless the contrary is proved, be deemed to be the document
which it purports to be, and to have been signed by the person by whom it purports to have been
signed, without proof of his identity, signature or official capacity, and any such extract or certificate
as is mentioned in paragraph (b) (c) (d) or (e) above shall, in the absence of evidence to the contrary,
be sufficient evidence of the matters therein stated.
PART IV
TEACHERS
Appointment, dismissal, retirement and employment of teachers
87.   Appointment of teachers.
The function of appointing teachers for service in public schools and other educational establishment
under the management of an education authority shall be in the education authority, and every
appointment shall be during the pleasure of the authority.
[87A.   Appointment of principal teachers.
Where an education authority intend to fill a post, other than on an acting basis, of a principal
teacher in a school, they shall advertise the post in such publications circulating throughout Scotland
as they consider appropriate. ] 145
[87B.   Selection of teachers.
Without prejudice to section 7 of the Local Government and Housing Act 1989 (which provides
for the appointment of staff of local authorities to be made on merit) and to any requirement in any
other enactment as to the considerations to which they may or may not have regard in making
appointments, an education authority who are considering an appointment of a teacher shall not
exclude any person from consideration for such an appointment on the ground that—
(a)   he is not employed by that education authority; or
(b)   he is or is not employed by a particular employer or class of employer; or
(c)   he is not currently employed as a teacher.

144
145

words repealed by Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994 c. 39 Sch. 14 para. 1
Ss. 87A and 87B inserted by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.39), s. 74
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 75

] 146
88.— […]147
89.—   Age of retirement of teachers.
(1)  Subject to subsection (2) below, a teacher employed by an education authority or by the managers
of a grant-aided school shall retire from the post in which he is employed no later than the date of
his attaining the age of 65.
(2)  Nothing in subsection (1) above shall preclude the re-employment by the education authority
or, as the case may be, the managers of the grant-aided school, if and in so far as they consider it
appropriate, of—
(a)   a retired teacher in a post other than a post of special responsibility, either full-time or
part-time and for a period not exceeding one year in respect of any one re-employment;
(b)   (without prejudice to paragraph (a) above), a retired teacher who immediately before
his retirement held a post of special responsibility, in that post for a period not exceeding
three months from the date of his retirement.
(3)  In subsection (2) above, “post of special responsibility”shall be construed in accordance with
the memorandum referred to in an order made by the Secretary of State under section 92(4) of this
Act and for the time being in force.
90.—   Employment of teachers.
(1)  The Secretary of State may in regulations under section 2 or 74(1) of this Act prescribe that
only registered teachers shall be employed or continue to be employed as teachers by education
authorities in the educational establishments to which the regulations apply, subject to such
exceptions as may from time to time be so prescribed.
(2)  It is hereby declared that the power of the Secretary of State to make regulations under section
1(2) of the Education (Scotland) Act 1962, as originally enacted, and as re-enacted as section 2 by
the Education (Scotland) Act 1969 shall be deemed always to have included power on and after
1st November 1965 to prescribe in such regulations that only registered teachers shall be employed
or continue to be employed as teachers by education authorities in the educational establishments
to which the regulations apply, subject to such exceptions as may from time to time be so prescribed.
(3)  For the avoidance of doubt, it is hereby declared that the power of the Secretary of State to
make regulations under section 76(1) of the said Act of 1962 shall be deemed always to have
included power on and after 1st November 1965 to prescribe in such regulations that only registered
teachers shall be employed or continue to be employed as teachers by managers of educational
establishments in the educational establishments to which the regulations apply, subject to such
exceptions as may from time to time be so prescribed.
(4)  For the avoidance of doubt, it is hereby declared that in the Schools (Scotland) Code 1956, as
amended by the Teachers (Education, Training and Registration) (Scotland) Regulations 1967,

146
147

Ss. 87A and 87B inserted by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.39), s. 74
Repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.3), ss. 75, 82(2), Sch. 11
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 76

regulation 4(2) shall be construed as having always applied to teachers in employment on 1st April
1968, as well as to teachers taken into employment after that date.
Pay and conditions of teaching staff employed in providing school education
91.— […]148
92.— […]149
93.— […]150
Pay and conditions of teaching staff employed in providing further education
94.— […]151
95.— […]152
96.— […]153
Provisions common to the two committees
97. […]154
97A.— […]155
97B.— […]156
97C. […]157
97D. […]158

148
149
150
151
152
153
154
155
156
157
158

repealed by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) s. 55(1)
repealed by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) s. 55(1)
repealed by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) s. 55(1)
Repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.3), ss. 67(1), 82(2), Sch. 11
Repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.3), ss. 67(1), 82(2), Sch. 11
Repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.3), ss. 67(1), 82(2), Sch. 11
Repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.3), ss. 67(1), 82(2), Sch. 11
repealed by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) s. 55(1)
repealed by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) s. 55(1)
repealed by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) s. 55(1)
repealed by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) s. 55(1)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 77

PART V
INDEPENDENT SCHOOLS
98.—   Registration of independent schools.
(1)  The Secretary of State shall appoint one of his officers to be the Registrar of Independent
Schools in Scotland (hereinafter in this Part of this Act referred to as “the Registrar”), and it shall
be the duty of the Registrar to keep a register of independent schools, which shall be open to public
inspection at all reasonable times, and the Registrar shall register therein—
(a)   where the proprietor of an independent school makes application for the purpose and
furnishes the information required by regulations made under this section, such of the
particulars prescribed by regulations so made as the Secretary of State may direct,
(b)   every order of an Independent Schools Tribunal or of the Secretary of State imposing
or removing any disqualification under Part V of the Act of 1946, Part V of the Act of 1962
or this Part of this Act:and
(c)   where a school has ceased to be a grant-aided school, such of the particulars prescribed
by regulations made under this section as the Secretary of State may direct:
Provided that—
(i)   no independent school shall be registered if, by virtue of an order made under
the provisions hereinafter contained, the proprietor is disqualified from being the
proprietor of an independent school, or if the school premises are disqualified from
being used as a school, or if the school premises are used or proposed to be used
for any purpose for which they are disqualified by virtue of any such order;
(ia)   no independent school shall be registered if the Registrar has been given notice
by the Scottish Ministers that they are satisfied, on such grounds as they shall specify
in the notice, that the proprietor is not a proper person to be the proprietor of any
school, that a teacher to be employed in the school is not a proper person to be a
teacher in any school or that the school premises, or any parts of those premises,
are unsuitable for a school;
(ii)   Subject to subsection (1A) below, the registration of any school shall be
provisional only until the Secretary of State, after the school has been inspected on
his behalf under section 66 of this Act, gives notice to the proprietor that the
registration is final.
(1A)  Proviso (ii) to subsection (1) above shall not apply to the registration of any school referred
to in paragraph (c) of that subsection unless the Registrar gives notice in writing to the proprietor
of the school that the said proviso applies to that registration.
(2)  If any person—
(a)   conducts an independent school which is not a registered school or a provisionally
registered school, or
(b)   being the proprietor of an independent school does any act calculated to lead to the
belief that the school is a registered school while it is a provisionally registered school,
he shall be liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale or
to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months or to both such fine and such imprisonment.
(2A) […]159

(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 78

(3)  The Secretary of State shall make regulations—
(a)   prescribing the particulars information as to which is to be furnished to the Registrar
by the proprietors of independent schools and the manner in which it shall be so furnished;
(b)   requiring the notification to the Registrar of any changes in such particulars;
(c)   prescribing the circumstances in which the name of a school may be deleted from the
register if the Registrar is unable to obtain sufficient information of such changes; and
(d)   dealing with such incidental matters as the Secretary of State may deem expedient.
[98A   Refusal of registration: referral to Independent Schools Tribunal
(1)  When, such notice as is mentioned in paragraph (ia) of the proviso to section 98(1) of this Act
having been given, registration of school is refused, the Registrar shall so notify the proprietor
(and, if the notice related to a teacher, the teacher also) setting out the grounds which were specified
by the Scottish Ministers.
(2)  Every notification given under subsection (1) above shall limit the time, not being less than
one month after it is so given, within which the refusal of registration may be referred to an
Independent Schools Tribunal constituted as is mentioned in section 100 of this Act; and the
proprietor or teacher in question may within that time, in such manner as is mentioned in that
section, so refer the refusal.
(3)  Upon a refusal being so referred the tribunal shall, after affording to all parties concerned an
opportunity of being heard, and after considering such evidence as may be tendered by those parties
or on their behalf, have power–
(a)   to uphold the refusal; or
(b)   without prejudice to paragraph (ii) of the proviso mentioned in subsection (1) above,
to order the Registrar to register the school.
(4)  If the tribunal uphold the refusal then (according to what the grounds were which were specified
by the Scottish Ministers) the tribunal may disqualify the proprietor from being the proprietor of
any independent school, disqualify the teacher from being a teacher in any school or disqualify the
premises, or parts of premises, from being used as a school or as part of a school.
] 160
99.—   Complaints.
(1)  If at any time the Secretary of State is satisfied that any registered or provisionally registered
school is objectionable upon all or any of the following grounds—
(a)   that efficient and suitable instruction is not being provided at the school, having regard
to the ages and sex of the pupils attending thereat;
[ (aa)   that the welfare of a pupil attending the school is not adequately safeguarded and
promoted there; ] 161
(b)   that the school premises or any parts thereof are unsuitable for a school;
(c)   that the accommodation provided at the school premises is inadequate or unsuitable,
having regard to the number, ages and sex of the pupils attending the school;
159
160
161

repealed by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) s. 24(1)(b)
added by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) s. 24(2)
added by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) s. 25
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 79

(d)   that the proprietor of the school or any teacher employed therein is not a proper person
to be the proprietor of an independent school or to be a teacher in any school, as the case
may be,
the Secretary of State shall serve upon the proprietor of the school a notice of complaint stating the
grounds of complaint together with full particulars of the matters complained of, and, except in so
far as any of such matters are stated in the notice to be in the opinion of the Secretary of State
irremediable, the notice shall specify the measures necessary in the opinion of the Secretary of
State to remedy the matters complained of, and shall specify the time, not being less than six months
after the service of the notice, within which such measures are thereby required to be taken.
(2)  If it is alleged by any notice of complaint served under this section that any person employed
as a teacher at the school is not a proper person to be a teacher in any school, that person shall be
named in the notice and the particulars contained in the notice shall specify the grounds of the
allegation, and a copy of the notice shall be served upon him at the same time as the notice is served.
(3)  Every notice of complaint served under this section shall limit the time, not being less than one
month after the service of the notice, within which the complaint may be referred to an Independent
Schools Tribunal under the provisions hereinafter contained.
100.—   Determination of complaints.
(1)  Any person upon whom a notice of complaint or a copy of such a notice is served under section
99 of this Act may, within the time limited by the notice, appeal therefrom by referring the complaint,
in such manner as may be provided by rules made under Part V of the Act of 1946, Part V of the
Act of 1962 or this Part of this Act, to an Independent Schools Tribunal constituted in accordance
with Schedule 2 to this Act.
(2)  Upon a complaint being referred to an Independent Schools Tribunal the tribunal shall, after
affording to all parties concerned an opportunity of being heard, and after considering such evidence
as may be tendered by them or on their behalf, have power—
(a)   to order that the complaint be annulled;
(b)   to order that the school in respect of which the notice of complaint was served be struck
off the register;
(c)   to order that the school be so struck off unless the requirements of the notice, with such
modifications, if any, as may be specified in the order, are complied with to the satisfaction
of the Secretary of State before the expiration of such time as may be specified in the order:
Provided that where the Secretary of State intimates that he is not satisfied that such
requirements are complied with, the person upon whom the notice of complaint or
a copy thereof has been served may, within fourteen days after such intimation,
refer the matter to the tribunal, who shall have power to dispose of the reference in
such manner as shall appear to them to be just;
(d)   if satisfied that the premises alleged by the notice of complaint to be unsuitable for use
as a school or any part of such premises are in fact unsuitable for such use, by order to
disqualify the premises or part from being so used, or, if satisfied that the accommodation
provided at the school premises or any part thereof is inadequate or unsuitable having regard
to the number, ages and sex of the pupils attending the school, by order to disqualify the
premises or the said part, as the case may be, from being used as a school or part of a school
for pupils exceeding such number or of such age or sex as may be specified in the order;
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 80

(e)   if satisfied that any person alleged by the notice of complaint to be a person who is not
proper to be the proprietor of an independent school or to be a teacher in any school is in
fact such a person, by order to disqualify that person from being the proprietor of any
independent school or from being a teacher in any school, as the case may be.
(3)  Where a notice of complaint has been served under Part V of the Act of 1946, Part V of the
Act of 1962 or this Part of this Act on the proprietor of any school and the complaint is not referred
by him to an Independent Schools Tribunal within the time limited in that behalf by the notice, the
Secretary of State shall have power to make any order which such a tribunal would have had power
to make if the complaint had been so referred:
Provided that—
(i)   if the Secretary of State makes any such order as is mentioned in paragraph (c)
of subsection (2) above, the proviso to that paragraph shall apply in like manner
as if the order had been made by the tribunal; and
(ii)   if it was alleged by the notice of complaint that any person employed as a
teacher at the school is not a proper person to be a teacher in any school and that
person has, within the time limited in that behalf by the copy of the notice served
upon him, referred the complaint to an Independent Schools Tribunal, the Secretary
of State shall not have power to make an order requiring his dismissal or
disqualifying him from being a teacher in any school.
(4)  Where by virtue of an order made by an Independent Schools Tribunal or by the Secretary of
State any person is disqualified either from being the proprietor of an independent school or from
being a teacher in any school, then, unless the order otherwise directs, that person shall, by virtue
of the order, be disqualified both from being the proprietor of an independent school and from
being a teacher in any school.
101.—   Enforcement of orders.
(1)  Where an order is made by the Secretary of State or by an Independent Schools Tribunal,
directing that any school be struck off the register, the Registrar shall as from the date on which
the direction takes effect strike the school off the register.
(2)  If any person uses any premises for purposes for which they are disqualified by virtue of any
order made under this Part of this Act, that person shall be liable on summary conviction to a fine
not exceeding [level 4 on the standard scale] 162 , or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three
months or to both such fine and such imprisonment.
(3)  If any person acts as the proprietor of an independent school, or accepts or endeavours to obtain
employment as a teacher in any school, while he is disqualified from so acting or from being so
employed by any such order as aforesaid, he shall be liable on summary conviction to a fine not
exceeding [level 4 on the standard scale ] 163 , or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three
months or to both such fine and such imprisonment.
162

163

Words from “level 4” to “scale” substituted for words from “£20” to “£50” by Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act
1975 (c. 21), s. 289H, Sch. 7D items 56, 57 (as inserted byCriminal Justice Act 1982 (c. 48), ss. 54, 56(2), Sch.
6)
Words from “level 4” to “scale” substituted for words from “£20” to “£50” by Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act
1975 (c. 21), s. 289H, Sch. 7D items 56, 57 (as inserted by Criminal Justice Act 1982 (c. 48)ss. 54, 56(2), Sch. 6)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 81

(4)  For the purposes of the foregoing provisions of this Part of this Act, a person who is disqualified
by an order made under Part III of the Education Act 1944 from being the proprietor of an
independent school or from being a teacher in any school shall be deemed to be so disqualified by
an order made under this Part of this Act.
102.—   Removal of disqualifications.
(1)  If on the application of any person the Secretary of State is satisfied that any disqualification
imposed by an order made under Part V of the Act of 1946, Part V of the Act of 1962 or this Part
of this Act is, by reason of any change of circumstances, no longer necessary, the Secretary of State
shall by order remove the disqualification.
(2)  Any person who is aggrieved by the refusal of the Secretary of State to remove a disqualification
so imposed may, within such time after the refusal has been communicated to him as may be limited
by rules made under Part V of the Act of 1946, Part V of the Act of 1962 or this Part of this Act,
appeal to an Independent Schools Tribunal, who may or may not order the removal of the
disqualification, as they think fit.
103.—   Proceedings before Independent Schools Tribunals and matters relating thereto.
(1)  The Lord President of the Court of Session may, with the concurrence of the Secretary of State,
make rules as to the manner of making appeals to Independent Schools Tribunals and as to
proceedings before such tribunals and matters incidental to or consequential on such proceedings;
and, in particular, such rules may make provision requiring any such tribunal to sit at such places
as may be directed in accordance with the rules, and may make provision as to appearance before
such tribunals by counsel or solicitor.
(2)  Rules under subsection (1) above may make provision for reference to the Court of Session,
by way of stated case, of any question of law arising in such proceedings.
(3)  An Independent Schools Tribunal shall have power to make such orders as to expenses, and
as to such other consequential or incidental matters as appear to the tribunal to be necessary for
giving effect to any order made by the tribunal, as the tribunal considers to be just, and any such
order as to expenses may be enforced as if it were a recorded decree arbitral.
(4)  The power to make rules under this section shall be exercisable by statutory instrument; and
the Statutory Instruments Act 1946 shall apply to a statutory instrument containing rules made
under this section in like manner as if the Lord President of the Court of Session were a Minister
of the Crown.
(5)  The Secretary of State may, out of money provided by Parliament, pay to the members of
Independent Schools Tribunals such remuneration and allowances as he may, […] 164 determine.

164

words repealed by Scotland Act 1998 (Consequential Modifications) (No.2) Order 1999/1820 Sch. 2(IV) para. 1
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 82

PART VI
REORGANISATION OF ENDOWMENTS
104.—   Register of educational endowments.
(1)  [It shall be the duty of the Secretary of State ] 165 to keep a register of all educational
endowments, which shall contain such information as may be prescribed, and shall be open to
public inspection at all reasonable times.
(2)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be the duty of the governing body of every educational
endowment […] 166 , to furnish the [Secretary of State ] 167 with such information about the
endowment as may be prescribed by regulations made by the Secretary of State [in such manner
as may be so prescribed] 168 .
(3)  This section shall not apply to a university endowment, to a theological endowment, or to the
Carnegie Trust, and regulations made under this section may exempt any endowment or class of
endowments from any of the provisions of this section.
105.—   Schemes for reorganisation of educational endowments.
(1)  Subject to the provisions of this section, [an education authority, whether upon an application
made to them or not, may, if they think fit, ] 169 prepare draft schemes for the future government
and management of educational endowments, which schemes may provide—
(a)   for altering the purposes to which such endowments are applied or applicable and the
conditions and provisions regarding such application;
(b)   for the application of the capital or income of such endowments to such educational
purposes, mental or physical, moral or social, as the [education authority think ] 170 fit
having regard to the public interest and to existing conditions, social and educational:
Provided always that the capital of any such endowment shall not be expended
except on a purpose to which capital may properly be devoted;
(c)   for grouping, amalgamating, combining or dividing any such endowments;
(d)   for altering the constitution of the governing body of any such endowment, or uniting
two or more existing governing bodies or establishing new governing bodies with such
powers as shall seem necessary, and for incorporating any governing body, whether old or
new, and for dissolving any governing body whose endowment is transferred to another
governing body; and
(e)   for altering the powers as to the investment of the funds of any such endowment.

165
166
167
168
169

170

Words substituted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 3(a), Sch. 8
Words repealed by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 9
Words substituted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 3(b)(ii), Sch. 8
Words inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 3(b)(iii)
Words substituted with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 4(a), Sch. 8 and S.I.
1981/1557, art. 4
Words substituted with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 4(b), Sch. 8 and S.I.
1981/1557, art. 4
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 83

[ Provided that in considering whether to exercise, in relation to any endowment, the power
conferred upon them by this subsection an education authority may have regard to whether
the exercise of the power would prejudice the proper discharge by them of their functions
under this Act apart from this section or their functions as local authority under any
enactment. ] 171
(2)  It shall be the duty of the [education authority]172 in reorganising any endowment in pursuance
of the powers conferred by this Part of this Act to have special regard—
(a)   to the spirit of the intention of the founders as embodied either—
(i)   in the original deed constituting the endowment where it is still the governing
instrument, or
(ii)   in the scheme approved under any Act, or in any provisional order affecting
the endowment;
(b)   to the interest of the locality to which the endowment belongs;
(c)   to the possibility of effecting economy in administration by the grouping, amalgamation
or combination of any two or more endowments; and
(d)   to the need for continuing the provision from endowments of competitive bursaries at
universities, central institutions, colleges of education or other educational institutions of
a similar character.
(3)  In every scheme which abolishes or modifies any privileges or educational advantages to which
a particular class of persons is entitled, whether as inhabitants of a particular area or as belonging
to a particular class in life or otherwise, the [education authority ] 173 shall have regard to the
educational interests of such class of persons:
Provided always that, where the governing instrument of any educational endowment has
expressly provided for the education of children belonging to the poorer classes, either
generally or within a particular area, or otherwise for their benefit, such endowment for
such education or otherwise for their benefit shall continue, so far as requisite, to be applied
for the benefit of such children.
(4)  The powers of the [education authority] 174 under this section shall not extend—
(a)   to a university endowment, or
(b)   to the Carnegie Trust, or
(c)   to a theological endowment, or
(d)   to a new endowment;
[, or
(e)   to an endowment which relates in whole or in part to an educational establishment not
managed by the education authority who would, but for this paragraph, be empowered under
this section to exercise in relation to that endowment the functions conferred by this section,
or

171
172

173

174

S. 105(1) proviso inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 4(d)
Words substituted with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 4(c), Sch. 8 and S.I.
1981/1557, art. 4
Words substituted with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 4(c), Sch. 8 and S.I.
1981/1557, art. 4
Words substituted with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 4(c), Sch. 8 and S.I.
1981/1557, art. 4
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 84

(f)   to an educational endowment having no limitation either as to the area in which any
educational establishment to which it relates is situated or as to the area in which any of its
beneficiaries are required under its governing instrument to reside or with which they are
so required to have some other connection. ] 175
[ Provided that this subsection shall not apply to an endowment which falls within paragraph
(e) above solely by reason of the inclusion among its purposes of the award of prizes,
bursaries or similar benefits to persons who attend or have attended educational
establishments or other institutions not managed by an education authority. ] 176
[ (4A)  The Court of Session shall have power, on the petition of—
(a)   the governing body of any endowment to which subsection (4) above applies or, in the
case of the Carnegie Trust, the Trustees;
(b)   in relation to an endowment to which paragraph (e) of that subsection applies and
which relates only in part to an educational establishment not managed by the education
authority referred to in that paragraph, the education authority, in respect of the part of the
endowment in relation to which they would, but for the said h (e), be empowered under this
section to exercise the functions conferred by this section,
to give effect to draft schemes for the future government and management of the endowment or,
as the case may be, the Trust, which schemes may provide for any of the purposes set out in
paragraphs (a) to (e) of subsection (1) above and, in exercising the power conferred on it under this
subsection, the Court shall have special regard to the matters specified in paragraphs (a) to (d) of
subsection (2) above.
(4B)  Where a petition under subsection (4A) above relates to an endowment to which paragraph
(e) of subsection (4) above applies and which relates only in part to an educational establishment
not managed by the education authority referred to in that paragraph the Court of Session shall,
before making an order under the said subsection (4A)—
(a)   where the petition was presented by any body referred to in paragraph (a) of the said
subsection (4A), cause the petition to be served on the education authority;
(b)   where the petition was presented by an education authority under paragraph (b) of the
said subsection (4A), cause the petition to be served on the governing body of the endowment
to which the petition relates.
(4C)  The governing body of an endowment in relation to which an education authority are
empowered under this section to exercise the functions conferred by this section may, if the authority
refuse to exercise their power under subsection (1) above in relation to the endowment on the
ground that such exercise would prejudice the proper discharge by them of their functions under
this Act apart from this section or their functions as local authority under any enactment, present
a petition to the Court of Session, and subsections (4A), (4B) and (4D) of this section shall apply
to such a petition.
(4D)  Nothing in the Trustee Investments Act 1961 shall affect the power of the Court under
subsection (4A) above to confer wider powers of investment than those conferred by that Act or
affect the extent to which the power of the Court under that subsection is to be exercised. ] 177
(5) […]178
175
176
177

S. 105(4)(e)(f) inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 4(e)
S. 105(4) proviso substituted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 4(f), Sch. 8
S. 105(4A)–(4D) inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 4(g)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 85

(6)  After 30th June 1976 any reference in a scheme made or approved under Part VI of the Act of
1946 or under Part VI of the Act of 1962 (reorganisation of educational endowments)—
(a)   to a certificated teacher shall be construed as a reference to a teacher registered under
the Teaching Council (Scotland) Act 1965;
(b)   to a children's committee shall be construed as a reference to a social work committee
established under section 2(1) of the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968;
(c)   to the Scottish Counties of Cities Association or to the Association of County Councils
in Scotland shall be construed as a reference to the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities.
[ (7)  In this section, “education authority” means, in relation to an educational endowment, the
education authority for the area in which any educational establishment to which the endowment
relates is situated or, where the endowment relates to no particular such establishment, the education
authority for the area in which the beneficiaries of the endowment are required under its governing
instrument to reside or with which they are so required to have some other connection. ] 179
106.—   Sale of land belonging to educational endowments.
(1)  Where it appears to the [Court of Session] 180 to be desirable that a scheme under this Part of
this Act should make provision for the sale of any land forming an endowment or part thereof and
for the application of the proceeds of sale in accordance with the provisions of the scheme, but that
such provision cannot be made by reason of the third proviso to section 2 of the School Sites Act
1841 (which provides that if any land granted in accordance with the provisions of that section
ceases to be used for the purposes mentioned in that Act, the land shall revert to the grantor), or by
reason of any condition of a similar nature relating to the land in any Act, deed or other instrument,
[the Court may order] 181 that the said proviso or condition shall not have effect in relation to the
land:
Provided that no such [order shall be made] 182 in relation to any land unless the [Court] 183
is satisfied either—
(a)   that the person to whom the land would revert in accordance with the said proviso or
condition cannot after due inquiry be found; or
(b)   that, if that person can be found, he has consented to relinquish his rights in relation
to the land under the said proviso or condition, and that, if he has consented so to do in
consideration of the payment of a sum of money to him, adequate provision can be made
for the payment to him of that sum out of the proceeds of the sale of the land.
(2)  A scheme under this Part of this Act relating to any endowment which includes land in respect
of which an order has been made under subsection (1) above may make provision for the payment
178
179
180

181

182

183

Repealed with savings Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 9 and S.I. 1981/1557, art. 4
S. 105(7) inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 4(i)
Words substituted with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 5(a), Sch. 8 and S.I.
1981/1557, art. 4
Words substituted with savings byEducation (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 5(a), Sch. 8and S.I. 1981/1557,
art. 4
Words substituted with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 5(b)(i), Sch. 8 and S.I.
1981/1557, art. 4
Word substituted with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 5(b)(ii), Sch. 8 and S.I.
1981/1557, art. 4
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 86

out of the proceeds of the sale of the land of any sum which is payable to any person in consideration
of the relinquishment of his rights in relation to the land under the said proviso or condition.
(3)  For the purposes of this section, any land conveyed under section 2 of the School Sites Act
1841, or held under a condition of the nature referred to in subsection (1) above, other than land
forming the site or part of the site of an educational establishment under the management of an
education authority or of any building ancillary to such an educational establishment, shall be
deemed to be an educational endowment or part thereof notwithstanding anything in the third
proviso to that section or in the said condition.
107.—   Educational endowments applicable in part to non-educational purposes.
(1)  Where an endowment is an educational endowment [to which the powers conferred by section
105 of this Act extend ] 184 , and part of it is applicable or applied to other charitable purposes, the
scheme shall be in conformity with the provisions of subsections (2) to (6) below (except so far as
the governing body of such endowment assent to the scheme departing therefrom).
(2)  The proportion of the endowment or annual income for the time being derived therefrom which
is applicable to such other charitable purposes shall not be diverted by the scheme from such
purposes unless in the opinion of the [education authority having power to exercise, in relation to
that endowment, the functions conferred by section 105 of this Act—] 185
(i)   there are no persons who are entitled to benefit out of such part of the endowment; or
[ (ii)   the purposes of such part of the endowment have become obsolete or useless. ] 186
(3)  The proportion of the endowment or annual income for the time being so applicable to such
other charitable purposes shall be deemed to be the proportion which, in the opinion of the [education
authority ] 187 , is the proportion which has according to the average of [the five most recent years
for which accounts are available ] 188 been appropriated as regards capital or applied as regards
income to such purposes, or if that proportion differs from the proportion which ought to have been
so appropriated or applied according to the express directions of the instrument of foundation or
the decree of any competent court or the statutes or regulations governing such endowment, the
proportion applicable to such other charitable purposes shall be the proportion which ought,
according to the express directions of such instrument, or such decree or such statutes or regulations,
to have been appropriate or applied to such other charitable purposes.
(4)  If the proportion applicable to other charitable purposes amounts to or exceeds one half of the
whole of the endowment, the governing body of such endowment existing at the date of the scheme
shall, so far as regards its non-educational purposes, remain unaltered by the scheme.

184

185

186

187

188

Words substituted with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 6(a), Sch. 8 and S.I.
1981/1557, art. 4
Words substituted with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 6(b)(i), Sch. 8 andS.I.
1981/1557, art. 4
S. 107(2)(ii) substituted for s. 107(2)(ii)–(iv) with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para.
6(b)(ii), Sch. 8 and S.I. 1981/1557, art. 4
Words substituted with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 6(c)(i), Sch. 8 and S.I.
1981/1557, art. 4
Words substituted with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58) Sch. 6 para. 6(c)(ii), Sch. 8 and S.I.
1981/1557, art. 4
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 87

(5)  Where the governing body remains so unaltered, that body shall pay or apply for educational
purposes such proportion as under the former provisions of this section is applicable to those
purposes, or such less sum as may be fixed by the [education authority] 189 .
(6)  When any portion of the endowment or the annual income of such portion has been accumulated
and not applied to any purpose, the [education authority ] 190 shall determine whether, and in what
proportion, such portion or income is to be considered for the purposes of this section as having
been appropriated or applied for educational purposes or for other charitable purposes.
(7)  Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section, the [education authority ] 191 shall have
power by any scheme to deal with any such endowment, and with the governing body thereof, in
the same manner in all respects as if it were an endowment applied wholly to educational purposes.
108.—   Non-educational endowments.
(1)  Where the governing body of any endowment (not being an educational endowment) are of
opinion that it is expedient that the endowment should be [reorganised] 192 on any of the following
grounds, that is to say:—
(a)   that there are no persons entitled to benefit out of the endowment; or
(b)   that the purposes of the endowment have failed altogether or have become obsolete or
useless or prejudicial to the public welfare, or are otherwise sufficiently provided for, or
are insignificant in comparison with the magnitude of the endowment, or are not substantially
beneficial to the class of person for whom the endowment was originally intended; or
(c)   that it is impossible, owing to the inadequacy of the endowment or to the impracticable
character of the founder's intentions, to carry these intentions into effect,
the governing body may [present a petition to the Court of Session to give effect to a draft scheme
for the future government and management of the endowment and thereafter such endowment may
be dealt with in all respects as if it were included amongst those specified in section 105(4) of this
Act.] 193
108A.   Courts' power to give effect to reorganisation scheme on petition of Lord Advocate.
Where the Lord Advocate is of opinion on any such ground as is specified in [section 108 of this
Act ] 194 that a scheme should be [made] 195 for the future government and management of any
endowment […] 196 , he may present a petition to the Court of Session for such a scheme, and on
any such petition the Court shall have power to [make ] 197 a scheme for the future government
189

190

191

192
193
194
195
196
197

Words substituted with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 6(d), Sch. 8 and S.I.
1981/1557, art. 4
Words substituted with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 6(d), Sch. 8 and S.I.
1981/1557, art. 4
Words substituted with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 6(d), Sch. 8 and S.I.
1981/1557, art. 4
Word substituted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 7(a)(i), Sch. 8
Words substituted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 7(a)(ii), Sch. 8
Words substituted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 7(b)(i), Sch. 8
Words substituted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 7(b)(ii), Sch. 8
Words repealed by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 9
Word substituted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 7(b)(ii), Sch. 8
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 88

and management of the endowment and for the application of the capital or income of the endowment
to any purposes, as nearly as may be analogous to those contained in the governing instrument, as
the Court shall think fit.
109.—   Provisions regarding interests of individuals.
(1)  Where at 3rd August 1928, any individual held a vested interest in any office, place, employment,
pension, compensation allowance, bursary or emolument under or arising out of an endowment
being dealt with in a scheme, [made under this Part of this Act, the education authority or, as the
case may be, the Court ] 198 shall in such scheme save or make due compensation for the said
vested interest.
(2)  Every interest, right, privilege or preference which any person may acquire or may have acquired
since 3rd August 1928, in or relative to any endowment, or in the governing body thereof, or as
member of any such governing body, or in or relative to any office, place, employment, pension,
compensation allowance, bursary or emolument in the gift of any such governing body, shall be
subject to the provisions of any scheme made under this Part of this Act.
110.—   Provisions as to beneficiaries and teachers.
(1)  In [preparing a draft ] 199 scheme for any endowment, the [education authority ] 200 shall—
(a)   provide that in making a selection from amongst those eligible for the benefits of the
endowment, due regard shall be paid to [educational need ] 201 , diligence, attainment and
promise as ascertained in such manner as the [education authority ] 202 shall determine,
and
(b)   [unless in any particular case they consider it inexpedient to do so, ] 203 provide for
extending to both sexes the benefit of the endowment.
(2)  [Every scheme for an educational endowment ] 204 shall make provision for the application
in the case of the dismissal of a registered teacher of the provisions of section 88 of this Act, with
the substitution of the governing body for the education authority, and with any other necessary
modifications.
(3) […]205
198

Words substituted with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 8, Sch. 8 and S.I. 1981/1557,
art. 4

199

Words substituted with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 9(b)(i), Sch. 8 and S.I.
1981/1557, art. 4
Words substituted with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 9(a), Sch. 8 and S.I.
1981/1557, art. 4
Words inserted with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 9(b)(ii) and S.I. 1981/1557,
art. 4
Words substituted with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 9(a), Sch. 8 and S.I.
1981/1557, art. 4
Words substituted with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 9(b)(iii), Sch. 8 andS.I.
1981/1557, art. 4
Words substituted with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 9(c), Sch. 8 and S.I.
1981/1557, art. 4
Repealed with savings Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 9 and S.I. 1981/1557, art. 4

200

201

202

203

204

205

(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 89

(4)  Any such scheme—
[ (a)   given effect to by the Court of Session; or
(b)   prepared by an education authority with respect to a school other than one which has
been transferred to them under section 16 or provided under section 17(2) of this Act, ] 206
may contain provision for the removal of any religious test or qualification applicable to teachers.
111.—   Accounts and audit of educational endowments.
(1)  It shall be the duty of the governing body of every educational endowment administered under
a scheme made by the Court of Session which provides for the audit of the accounts of that
endowment , or administered under a provisional order made under the Act of 1878, or under a
scheme made under the Act of 1882, the Acts of 1928 to 1935, Part VI of the Act of 1946, Part VI
of the Act of 1962 or under this Part of this Act, other than any such endowment to which section
106(1) of the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973, applies, to comply with the following
provisions of this section.
(2)  The governing body of every endowment to which this section applies shall keep proper accounts
and other records in relation to the functioning of that body, and shall prepare in respect of each
financial year a statement of account
[ (3)  The accounts of every endowment to which this section applies shall be audited each year by
an auditor appointed by the governing body and no person shall be appointed auditor as aforesaid
unless he is eligible for appointment as a company auditor under section 25 of the Companies Act
1989. ] 207
(6)  The governing body of each endowment to which this section applies shall make the audited
accounts of that endowment available for public inspection at all reasonable times.
(7)  Any provision in a governing instrument referred to in subsection (1) above prescribing the
financial year of an endowment shall remain in operation notwithstanding the repeal by the Act of
1962 of section 11(2) of the Education (Scotland) Act 1956.
112.—   Procedure in preparation of reorganisation schemes.
(1)  Before making a scheme for the reorganisation of any educational endowment an education
authority shall prepare a draft scheme and shall—
(a)   send copies of the draft scheme to the governing body of the endowment to which it
relates;
(b)   give notice of the draft scheme in accordance with subsection (1A) below and cause
it to be published in such other manner, if any, as they think fit; and
(c)   permit public inspection of the draft scheme at such places and during such times as
may be specified in the notice given by them under paragraph (b) above;
and the governing body of that endowment or any other person interested in the scheme may, not
later than the expiry of the period of one month from the first notice of the draft scheme given by

206

207

Words inserted with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 9(e) and S.I. 1981/1557, art.
4
words substituted by Companies Act 1989 (Eligibility for Appointment as Company Auditor) (Consequential
Amendments) Regulations 1991/1997 Sch. 1 para. 36
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 90

the authority under paragraph (b) above , send in writing to the education authority objections to
the draft scheme, or proposed amendments thereto, or both.
(1A)  The notice to be given under subsection (1)(b) above—
(a)   shall be by way of advertisement in a newspaper circulating in the area in which each
educational establishment to which the endowment relates is situated or, where the
endowment relates to no particular educational establishment, the area in which the
beneficiaries of the endowment are required under its governing instrument to reside or
with which they are so required to have some other connection;
(b)   shall state that written objections to and proposed amendments of the scheme may be
made in the manner specified in subsection (1) above; and
(c)   shall state the places and times at which the draft scheme may be examined under
subsection (1)(c) above.
(1B)  The requirement under subsection (1A) above to give notice of the draft scheme by way of
newspaper advertisement shall not apply in relation to an educational endowment of less annual
value than £500 if, by giving notice in another manner, the education authority incur less expense.
(2)  If within the period referred to in subsection (1) above no objection and no proposed amendment
to the draft scheme is received by them, the education authority may, by resolution of the authority
authorising their proper officer to sign the scheme on their behalf, make the scheme in the terms
of the draft scheme of which notice has been given under subsection (1) above and on doing so
shall notify the date of commencement of the scheme to the governing body of the endowment.
(3)  If within the said period objections or proposed amendments to the draft scheme are received
by them, the education authority shall consider those objections and proposed amendments , shall,
if any of them were sent by any of the persons mentioned in subsection (7) below, hold a public
local inquiry into such of them as are not withdrawn and may thereafter, if they think fit, by
resolution of the authority authorising their proper officer to sign the scheme on their behalf, make
the scheme in such form as they think expedient.
(3A)  [Section 56 of the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973] 208 shall not apply to the making
of a scheme by an education authority under subsection (2) or (3) above.
(3B)  The person appointed by the education authority to hold a public local inquiry under subsection
(3) above shall not be a member or officer of the authority or a member or employee of the governing
body of the endowment to which the scheme relates.
(3C)  Without prejudice to their duty to hold a public local inquiry in the circumstances mentioned
in subsection (3) above, an education authority may, if they consider it appropriate, hold a public
local inquiry into any matter to which they may properly address themselves in the exercise of their
functions under this Part of this Act.
(4)  If an education authority make a scheme under subsection (3) above, they shall as soon as
practicable thereafter—
(a)   give to the persons who made the objections or, as the case may be, proposed the
amendments to the draft scheme notice in writing of their decision with respect to those
objections or amendments, together with a statement in writing of the reasons for their
decision;
(b)   send copies of the scheme to the governing body of the endowment to which it relates;
208

words substituted by Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994 c. 39 Sch. 13 para. 118(6)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 91

(c)   cause notice of the scheme to be given in accordance with subsection (1A)(a) and (c)
above, containing a statement that, unless not later than the expiry of the period of one
month from the first such notice a petition or appeal is presented to the Court of Session in
accordance with the following provisions of this section, the scheme will come into operation
on such date as the notice may specify, being not less than one month after the date of the
first such notice.
(5)  If no petition or appeal is presented to the Court of Session in accordance with the following
provisions of this section, the scheme shall come into operation on the date specified in the notice
under subsection (4)(c) above.
(5A)  If a petition or appeal is presented to the Court of Session in accordance with the following
provisions of this section and is refused by the Court, the Court hall make such order as it thinks
fit as respects the commencement of the scheme.
(7)  If within the period of one month from the date of the notice given under subsection (4) above
a petition or appeal is presented to the Court of Session by any of the persons mentioned below,
the scheme referred to in that notice shall thereby be suspended and the Court may amend the
scheme and make it as so amended or may make a new scheme and for those purposes the Court—
(a)   shall have the like powers as are conferred by this Part of this Act on an education
authority regarding schemes for the future government and management of educational
endowments, and
(b)   may make such orders as it thinks fit as respects notification and commencement of
the amended or new scheme.
The persons referred to above are—
(i)   the governing body of the endowment to which the scheme relates,
(ii)   the council of any district directly affected by the scheme,
(iii)   any education authority directly affected by the scheme,
(iv)   any ratepayers (not being less than twenty) of any district or place directly affected
by the scheme,
(v)   any person having a vested interest in the said endowment or any part of it.
(8)  If within the said period an appeal is presented to the Court of Session by—
(a)   the governing body of the endowment to which the scheme refers, or any other person
directly affected by the scheme, on the ground that the scheme is not within the scope of,
or is not made in conformity with, this Part of this Act, or
(b)   any person holding any office, place or employment, or receiving any pension,
compensation, allowance, bursary or emolument, under or arising out of the endowment to
which the scheme relates, on the ground that the scheme does not comply with the provisions
of this Part of this Act as to saving or making due compensation for his vested interests,
and the Court of Session decides that the scheme is contrary to law on any of the grounds mentioned
in paragraphs (a) and (b) above, the education authority shall rescind their decision to make the
scheme but may, if they think fit, make an amended scheme in such form as they think expedient,
and the provisions of subsections (4) to (7) above, and of this subsection, shall apply in relation to
an amended scheme made under this subsection as they apply to a scheme made under subsection
(3) above.
(9)  Where an education authority cause a draft scheme or a scheme to be publicised under this
section, they shall cause to be prefixed to that draft scheme or scheme a memorandum setting out—

(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 92

(a)   the reasons why, in their view, the reorganisation of the endowment to which the draft
scheme or scheme relates is necessary;
(b)   the respects in which the draft scheme or scheme involves any substantial alteration
of the purposes to which the said endowment is applied or applicable; and
(c)   the reasons for any such alteration;
and for the purposes of the provisions of this section relating to publication, that memorandum
shall be deemed to be part of the draft scheme or scheme, as the case may be.
113. […]209
114.—   Effect of schemes.
(1)  Any scheme made or [given effect to ] 210 under the foregoing provisions of this Part of this
Act shall […] 211 have effect in the same manner as if it had been enacted in this Act, and
accordingly, from the [date of commencement of the scheme ] 212 , any enactment, letters patent,
deed, instrument, trust or direction relating to the subject-matter of the scheme, so far as inconsistent
with the provisions thereof, shall cease to have effect.
(2)  [An instrument containing or giving effect to ] 213 a scheme, under this Part of this Act shall
[, from the date of commencement of the scheme, ] 214 be conclusive evidence that that scheme is
within the scope of, and was made in conformity with, this Act, and the validity of the scheme shall
not [, from the said date, ] 215 be questioned in any legal proceedings whatever.
[ (3)  Each of the powers to make schemes conferred by this Part of this Act implies power
exercisable in the same manner and subject to the same conditions or limitations to revoke, amend
or re-enact any scheme made under that power.
115. […]217
116. […]218

209
210

211

212

213

214

215

216

217
218

Repealed with savings Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 9 and S.I. 1981/1557, art. 4
Words substituted with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 13(a)(i), Sch. 8 and S.I.
1981/1557, art. 4
Words repealed with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 13(a)(ii), Sch. 9 and S.I.
1981/1557, art. 4
Words substituted with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 13(a)(iii), Sch. 8 and S.I.
1981/1557, art. 4
Words substituted with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 13(b)(i), Sch. 8 and S.I.
1981/1557, art. 4
Words inserted with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 13(b)(ii) and S.I. 1981/1557,
art. 4
Words inserted with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 13(b)(iii) and S.I. 1981/1557,
art. 4
S. 114(3) inserted with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 13(c) and S.I. 1981/1557,
art. 4
Repealed with savings Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 9 and S.I. 1981/1557, art. 4
Repealed with savings Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 9 and S.I. 1981/1557, art. 4
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 93

117.   Cost of publishing scheme, etc.
The cost of [publicising ] 219 and circulating any draft scheme, or scheme, or amended scheme,
under this Part of this Act shall be paid out of the funds of the endowment or endowments to which
the same relates: […] 220
[118.   Information by governing bodies.
Every governing body of an endowment to which section 105 of this Act extends shall give such
information to the education authority having power under that section to prepare a scheme for the
future government and management of the endowment as the authority may from time to time
require. ] 221
[118A.—   Income plans under schemes.
(1)  Any provision of a scheme referred to in subsection (2) below which (however expressed)
empowers or requires the governing body of the endowment to which the scheme relates—
(a)   to prepare and submit for the approval of the Secretary of State a plan, a revised plan
or an amendment of a plan for the exercise by the governing body of their functions in
relation to the application of the income of the endowment; or
(b)   to give effect to such a plan or amendment as approved by the Secretary of State,
shall be of no effect.
(2)  This section applies to any scheme made or approved under the Acts of 1928 to 1935, Part VI
of the Act of 1946, Part VI of the Act of 1962, or this Part of this Act.
] 222
119.   Quorum of governing body.
The majority of members of a governing body who are present at a meeting of their body duly
constituted shall have power to do anything that may be required to be done by a governing body
for the purposes of this Part of this Act:
Provided that this power shall be in addition to and not in restraint of any power which
any meeting of such governing body may have independently of this Part of this Act.
120.   Provision for default of governing body.
(1)  If the governing body of any educational endowment [to which section 105 of this Act does
not extend] 223 fail to give effect to the provisions of any provisional order or of any scheme made
or approved under the Act of 1882, the Acts of 1928 to 1935, Part VI of the Act of 1946, Part VI
219

220

221

222
223

Word substituted with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 15(a), Sch. 8 and S.I.
1981/1557, art. 4
S. 117 proviso repealed with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 15(b) and S.I. 1981/1557,
art. 4
S. 118 substituted with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 16, Sch. 8 and S.I. 1981/1557,
art. 4
S. 118A inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 17
Words inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 18(b)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 94

of the Act of 1962 or this Part of this Act [prior to the commencement of section 15 of the Education
(Scotland) Act 1981] 224 , it shall be lawful for the Secretary of State, after such inquiry as he shall
think proper, to send a requisition to such governing body, requiring them to give effect to the
provisions of the provisional order or scheme, and the governing body shall comply with the said
requisition within such time as may be specified in the requisition, and, if they fail, may be summarily
compelled to do so by the Court of Session, on the application of the Lord Advocate.
[ (2)  In relation to any educational endowment to which section 105 of this Act extends, subsection
(1) above shall apply—
(a)   with the omission of the words “to which section 105 of this Act does not extend” and
the words “prior to the commencement of section 15 of the Education (Scotland) Act 1981”;
and
(b)   with the substitution for the words “Secretary of State after such inquiry as he” of the
words “education authority having power under section 105 of this Act to prepare a draft
scheme for the future government and management of the endowment, after such inquiry
as they”.
] 225
121.   Judgment of Court of Session final.
In any proceeding before the Court of Session authorised by this Part of this Act—
(a)   the judgment or deliverance of the Court [other than one giving effect under section
105(4) of this Act to a draft scheme for the future government and management of an
endowment or the Carnegie Trust] 226 shall be final and not subject to review; and
(b)   the Court shall dispose of all questions of expenses, and may, if they think fit, direct
the expenses or any part thereof […] 227 to be paid out of the funds of the educational
endowment to which the proceeding relates: […] 228
122.—   Interpretation of Part VI.
(1)  In this Part of this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
“the Act of 1878” means the Endowed Institutions (Scotland) Act 1878;
“Carnegie Trust” means the property vested in the Carnegie Trustees for the Universities
of Scotland;
“charitable purposes”shall be construed in the same way as if it were contained in the Income
Tax Acts;
“educational endowment” means any endowment which has been applied or is applicable
in whole or in part, whether by the declared intention of the founder, or by the consent of

224
225
226

227

228

Words inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 18(c)
S. 120(2) inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 18(d)
Words inserted with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 19(a) and S.I. 1981/1557, art.
4
Words repealed with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 19(b) and S.I. 1981/1557, art.
4
Proviso repealed with savings by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 6 para. 19(b) and S.I. 1981/1557,
art. 4
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 95

the governing body, or in pursuance of any scheme approved under any Act or of any
provisional order or by custom or otherwise, to educational purposes;
“educational purposes”includes—
(i)   payments towards the cost of professional training and apprenticeship fees,
(ii)   the provision of maintenance, clothing and other benefits, and
(iii)   the payment of grants for travel;
“endowment” means any property, heritable or moveable, dedicated to charitable purposes,
but shall not, except with the consent of the governing body, include the funds, whether
capital or revenue, of any incorporation or society contributed or paid by the members of
such incorporation or society by way of entry moneys or other fixed or stated payments,
nor burgess or guildry fines paid to any such incorporation or society, nor funds bequeathed
or given to any such incorporation or society for the benefit solely of members or widows
or families of members of such incorporation or society;
“governing body” means the managers, governors or trustees of any endowment or other
person having the administration of the revenue thereof;
“governing instrument” means , with regard to any endowment, the scheme approved under
any Act or any provisional order [ or made under section 17 of the Local Government etc.
(Scotland) Act 1994]229 , in accordance with which the endowment is governed and managed
or, where there is no such scheme or provisional order, the deed constituting the endowment;
“provisional order” means provisional order confirmed by Act of Parliament and provisional
order made under the Act of 1878;
“theological endowment” means an endowment solely or mainly applicable or applied for
the purposes of theological instruction or belonging to any theological institution;
“university endowment” means an endowment vested in, or administered by, or in the gift
of any of the universities of Scotland or any of the colleges of such universities.
(2)  An educational endowment shall be deemed to be a “new endowment” until the expiry of
twenty years from the date when the deed creating the endowment comes into operation, so, however,
that where part of an endowment has been given at one time and another part has been given at a
later time and the two portions cannot in the opinion of the Court of Session be conveniently
separated from each other, the date of the older part of the endowment shall be held to be the date
of the endowment.
(3)  Any reference in this Act to the endowment to which a scheme under this Part of this Act relates
shall, in the case of a scheme relating to more than one endowment, be construed as a reference to
every endowment, or (as the context may require) to any endowment, to which the scheme relates.

229

words added by Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994 c. 39 Sch. 13 para. 118(7)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 96

PART VII
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Employment
123.—   Work experience in last year of compulsory schooling.
(1)  Subject to subsection (2) below, the enactments relating to the prohibition or regulation of the
employment of children shall not apply to the employment of a child to whom this subsection
applies where the employment is in pursuance of arrangements made or approved by the education
authority […] 230 with a view to providing him with work experience as part of his education.
(2)  Subsection (1) above shall not be taken to permit the employment of any person in any way
contrary to—
(a)   an enactment which in terms applies to persons of less than, or not over, a specified
age expressed as a number of years; or
(b)   section 1(2) of the Employment of Women, Young Persons and Children Act 1920 or
section 55(1) of the Merchant Shipping Act 1995 (prohibition of employment of children
in ships).
(3)  No arrangements shall be made under subsection (1) above for a child to be employed in any
way which would be contrary to an enactment prohibiting or regulating the employment of young
persons if he were a young person (within the meaning of that enactment) and not a child; and
where a child is employed in pursuance of arrangements so made, then so much of any enactment
as regulates the employment of young persons (whether by excluding them from any description
of work, or prescribing the conditions under which they may be permitted to do it, or otherwise
howsoever) and would apply in relation to him if he were of an age to be treated as a young person
for the purposes of that enactment shall apply in relation to him, in and in respect of the employment
arranged for him, in all respects as if he were of an age to be so treated.
(4)  Subsection (1) above applies to a child undergoing compulsory education during the period
between 1st May in the calendar year before the calendar year in which he attains the upper limit
of school age and the end of the latter year.
124.— […]231
125.   Adaptation of enactments relating to employment of children and young persons.
For the purpose of any enactment relating to the prohibition or regulation of the employment of
children or young persons, any person who is not for the purposes of this Act over school age shall
be deemed to be a child within the meaning of that enactment.

230
231

words repealed by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) Sch. 3 para. 1
Repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.3), s. 82(2), Sch. 11
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 97

Children and young persons in accommodation
125A.   Welfare of children and young persons in accommodation provided for purposes of
school attendance.
Where, for the purposes of his being in attendance at a school, a child or young person is provided
with residential accommodation, in a place in or outwith that school, by—
(a)   an education authority or the managers of a grant-aided or independent school; or
(b)   by any other person in pursuance of arrangements made by any such authority or
managers,
the authority […] 232 or managers in question shall have the duty to safeguard and promote the
welfare of the child or young person while he is so accommodated; and the powers of inspection
exercisable by virtue of section 66(1) of this Act shall include the power to inspect the place to
determine whether his welfare is adequately safeguarded and promoted there.
Careers services of education authorities
126.— […]233
127.— […]234
128.— […]235
Examinations Board
129.— […]236
Savings and exceptions
130.   Saving as to persons in the service of the Crown.
No power or duty conferred or imposed by this Act on the Secretary of State, on education
authorities, on parents or on young persons shall be construed as relating to any child or young
person who is employed by or under the Crown in any service or capacity with respect to which
the Secretary of State certifies that, by reason of the arrangements made for the education of children
and young persons employed therein, the exercise and performance of those powers and duties
with respect to such children and young persons is unnecessary.

232
233
234
235
236

words repealed by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) Sch. 3 para. 1
repealed by Trade Union Reform and Employment Rights Act 1993 c. 19 Sch. 10 para. 1
repealed by Trade Union Reform and Employment Rights Act 1993 c. 19 Sch. 10 para. 1
repealed by Trade Union Reform and Employment Rights Act 1993 c. 19 Sch. 10 para. 1
repealed by Education (Scotland) Act 1996 c. 43 Sch. 6 para. 1
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 98

131.—   Saving as to persons suffering from mental disorder and persons detained by order.
(1)  Unless the context otherwise requires, no power or duty conferred or imposed by this Act on
the Secretary of State, on education authorities or on parents or young persons shall be construed
as relating to any person to whom this section applies:
Provided that nothing in this section shall prevent an education authority from providing
or securing the provision of education for any such person if he is in their opinion capable
of deriving benefit therefrom.
(2)  The persons to whom this section applies are—
(a)   any person who is detained in pursuance of an order made by any court or of an order
of recall made by the Secretary of State;
(b)   any child subject to a supervision requirement requiring him to reside in a residential
establishment where education is provided.
[131A   Consent of child to medical procedures
(1)  Nothing in this Act shall prejudice any capacity of a child enjoyed by virtue of section 2(4) of
the Age of Legal Capacity (Scotland) Act 1991 (c.50) (capacity of child with sufficient understanding
to consent to surgical, medical or dental procedure or treatment); and without prejudice to that
generality, where under or by virtue of this Act a child is required to submit, or to be submitted, to
any medical or dental examination, inspection or treatment but the child has the capacity mentioned
in the said section 2(4), the examination, inspection or treatment shall only be carried out if the
child consents.
(2)  In subsection (1) above, without prejudice to the generality of the expression in question,
“medical examination”includes an examination under section 58 of this Act and “medical
treatment”includes cleansing under that section.
] 237
General
132.—   Amendment of enactments.
(1) […]238
(2)  Any reference in an enactment passed before 2nd July 1945 to a school in receipt of a
parliamentary grant shall, unless the context otherwise requires, be construed as a reference to a
school other than an independent school.
133.—   Regulations, etc.
(1)  Any power conferred by this Act on the Secretary of State to make regulations shall be
exercisable by statutory instrument.

237
238

added by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) s. 57
Repealed by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 9
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 99

(2)  Subject to subsections (2A) and (2B) below, Any statutory instrument containing regulations
made by the Secretary of State under this Act shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a
resolution of either House of Parliament.
[ (2A)  Subsection (2) above shall not apply to the first regulations to be made under section 73(f)
of this Act with respect to loans; and no such regulations shall be made (whether alone or with
other regulations) unless a draft of the statutory instrument containing the regulations has been laid
before, and approved by a resolution of, each House of Parliament.
(2B)  Subsection (2) above shall not apply to any regulations under section 73(f) of this Act with
respect to loans, other than the regulations mentioned in subsection (2A) above, where a draft of
the statutory instrument containing the regulations has been laid before, and approved by a resolution
of, each House of Parliament. ] 239
(3)  Any direction given by the Secretary of State or an education authority under the provisions
of this Act may be varied or revoked by a further direction given by the Secretary of State or that
authority, as the case may be:
Provided that where the power to give any such direction is exercisable only upon the
application or with the consent of any person, or after consultation with or intimation to
any person or is otherwise subject to any conditions, no direction given under such power
shall be varied or revoked except upon the like application, with the like consent, after the
like consultation or intimation or subject to the like conditions, as the case may be.
(4)  If it appears to the Secretary of State, on an application in that behalf made to him—
(a)   in relation to regulations made under section 2 or section 19(1) of this Act, by an
education authority;
(b)   in relation to regulations made under section 74(1) of this Act, by any education
authority or other person to whom any grant is payable under this Act;
that it is unreasonable that any provision of those regulations should apply in relation to that authority
or person or to such educational establishment under the management of that authority or person
as may be specified in the application, or should so apply without modification, he may, subject to
subsection (5) below, direct that the said provision shall not apply in relation to that authority or
person or that educational establishment or, as the case may be, shall so apply subject to such
modification as may be specified in the direction.
(5)  A direction under subsection (4) above—
(a)   may be given either unconditionally or subject to such conditions as may be specified
in the direction;
(b)   shall not be given in respect of any provision of any regulations which is described in
those regulations as not being subject to the giving of a direction under this section;
(c)   may be varied or revoked by a subsequent direction given by the Secretary of State
either of his own accord or on the application of the education authority or other person on
whose application the original direction was given.

239

added by Teaching and Higher Education Act 1998 c. 30 Sch. 3 para. 4(b)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 100

134.—   Notices.
(1)  Subject to the provisions of this section, any notice required or authorised by this Act to be
served or given to any person may be served or given by delivering it to him, or by leaving it at his
proper address, or by sending it to him by post.
(2)  For the purposes of this section and of section 7 of the Interpretation Act 1978 (service by post)
in its application to this section, the proper address of a person on or to whom any such notice as
aforesaid is to be served or given shall, in the case of an education authority, be the address of any
office of that authority and, in any other case, be the last known address of the person on or to
whom the notice is to be served or given.
(3)  Any notice which, in accordance with the provisions of subsection (1) above, is left for a person
at his proper address shall, unless the contrary is proved, be presumed to have been received by
him on the day on which it was left there.
135.—   Interpretation.
(1)  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
“the Act of 1882” means the Educational Endowments (Scotland) Act 1882;
“the Act of 1918” means the Education (Scotland) Act 1918;
“the Acts of 1928 to 1935” means the Educational Endowments (Scotland) Acts 1928 to
1935;
“the Act of 1937” means the Children and Young Persons (Scotland) Act 1937;
“the Act of 1946” means the Education (Scotland) Act 1946;
“the Act of 1962” means the Education (Scotland) Act 1962;
“attendance order”has the meaning assigned to it by section 38 of this Act;
“central institution” means an educational establishment for the provision of further education
recognised as a central institution by regulations made by the Secretary of State;
“child” means a person who is not over school age;
“clothing”includes boots and other footwear;
“dental examination” means examination by a registered dentist, so however that in
conducting an examination of any such class as may be prescribed, such dentist may be
assisted by other persons having such special qualifications or experience as may be
prescribed;
“dental inspection” and “dental supervision” mean, respectively, inspection and supervision
by a registered dentist;
“dental treatment”includes prevention and treatment of dental diseases by or (so far as
permitted by law) under the direction of any registered dentist, and the supply of appliances
on the recommendation of such dentist, but does not, in relation to any pupil other than a
pupil receiving school education elsewhere than at a school under arrangements made by
an education authority under section 14 of this Act, include treatment in that pupil's home;
“education authority” means a council constituted under section 2 of the Local Government
etc. (Scotland) Act 1994, and “area”in relation to an education authority shall be construed
accordingly;
“educational establishment”—
(i)   means a school and any institution for the provision of any form of further
education and the premises of such school, or institution, and

(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 101

(ii)   without prejudice to the foregoing generality, includes a designated institution
within the meaning of Part II of the Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Act
1992, a central institution, a hostel used mainly by pupils attending such schools or
institutions, and a residential institution conducted under a scheme under the Acts
of 1928 to 1935, Part VI of the Act of 1946, Part VI of the Act of 1962 or Part VI
of this Act, but
(iii)   does not include a university, a theological college, a hostel or other residence
used exclusively by students attending a university or a theological college, or a
club or other centre conducted by a voluntary society or body for the purpose of
providing facilities for social, cultural or recreative activities or for physical education
or training unless the society or body are in receipt of a grant from the Secretary of
State or of a contribution from an education authority or have obtained the consent
of the Secretary of State to the club or centre being treated in all respects as an
educational establishment;
“employment”includes employment in any labour exercised by way of trade or for purposes
of gain whether the gain be to the child or to the young person or to any other person, and
a person who assists in a trade or occupation carried on for profit shall be deemed to be
employed notwithstanding that he receives no reward for his labour; and “employ”shall be
construed accordingly;
“employer”includes a parent who employs his children;
“enactment”includes an order, regulation, rule or other instrument having effect by virtue
of an Act;
“enforcement direction” means a direction under section 66D(1) of this Act;
“functions”includes powers and duties;
“further education”includes the forms of instruction, occupation and teaching described in
section 1(5)(b) of this Act;
“grant-aided school” means a school in respect of which grants are made by the Secretary
of State to the managers of the school other than (a) grants in aid of the employers'
contributions provided for in Teachers (Superannuation) Regulations, and (b) sums paid
under a scheme under section 75A of this Act, or by virtue of section 75B of this Act, but
does not include a public school or a technology academy (within the meaning of the
Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989);
“Health Board” means a Health Board constituted under section 2 of the National Health
Service (Scotland) Act 1978;
“independent school” means a school at which full-time education is provided for five or
more pupils of school age (whether or not such education is also provided for pupils under
or over that age), not being a public schoolor a grant-aided school;
“Her Majesty's inspectors” means the inspectors of schools appointed by Her Majesty;
“managers”, in relation to an educational establishment, means the governing body, trustees,
or other person or body of persons responsible for the management of the establishment
but does not include an education authority;
“medical examination” means examination by a registered medical practitioner:
Provided that in conducting an examination of any such class as may be prescribed,
such practitioner may be assisted by other persons having such special qualifications
or experience as may be prescribed;

(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 102

“medical inspection” and “medical supervision” mean, respectively, inspection and
supervision by or under the directions of a registered medical practitioner;
“medical treatment”includes prevention and treatment of diseases by any registered medical
practitioner, and the supply of appliances on the recommendation of such practitioner, but
does not, in relation to any pupil other than a pupil receiving school education elsewhere
than at school under arrangements made by an education authority under section 14 of this
Act, include treatment in that pupil's home;
“nursery school” and “nursery class”have the respective meanings assigned to them by
section 1(5)(a)(i) of this Act;
“officers”includes servants;
“parent”includes guardian and any person who is liable to maintain or has parental
responsibilities (within the meaning of section 1(3) of the Children (Scotland) Act 1995)
in relation to, or has care of a child or young person;
“placing request”has the meaning assigned to it by section 28A(1) of this Act;
[ “preliminary notice” means a notice under section 66C(1) of this Act;] 240
“premises”in relation to any educational establishment includes the site of such establishment,
any building in which pupils attending such establishments are boarded whether managed
by the managers of such establishment or by any other person by arrangement with such
managers, and any playing fields used in connection with such establishment whether
contiguous to or detached therefrom;
“prescribed” means prescribed by the Secretary of State;
“proprietor” in relation to an independent school means the managers of such school, and
for the purposes of the provisions of this Act relating to applications for the registration of
independent schools includes any person or body of persons proposing to be the managers;
“provisionally registered school” means an independent school registered in the register of
independent schools whereof the registration is provisional only;
“psychological examination” means an examination by an educational or clinical psychologist
appointed by an education authority for the purpose;
“public school” means any school under the management of an education authority;
“pupil”, where used without qualification, means a person of any age for whom education
is or is required to be provided under this Act; and a pupil shall be deemed to be attending
or in attendance at a school if he is shown by the register of admission and withdrawal kept
at the school in accordance with regulations made under this Act, or by any other register
approved by the Secretary of State and kept for a similar purpose, to have been admitted
to, but not to have been withdrawn from, or to have been readmitted to, and not thereafter
to have been withdrawn from, the school; and similar expressions, whether relating to
schools or to other educational establishments, shall be similarly interpreted;
“Record”, and “recorded” and other cognate expressions have the same respective meanings
as in section 60 of this Act;
“registered school” means an independent school the registration of which in the register
of independent schools is final;
“registered teacher” means a teacher registered under the Teaching Council (Scotland) Act
1965;

240

definition inserted by School Education (Ministerial Powers and Independent Schools) (Scotland) Act 2004 asp
12 (Scottish Act) Sch. 1 para. 1(8)(c)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 103

“residential establishment” has the meaning given by paragraph (a) of the definition of that
expression in section 93(1) of the Children (Scotland) Act 1995;
“school” means an institution for the provision of primary or secondary education or both
primary and secondary education being a public school, a grant-aided school or an
independent school, and includes a nursery school and a special school; and the expression
“school” where used without qualification includes any such school or all such schools as
the context may require;
“school age”shall be construed in accordance with section 31 of this Act;
“school board”has the meaning assigned to it by section 1 of the School Boards (Scotland)
Act 1988
“school education”has the meaning assigned to it by section 1(5)(a) of this Act;
“special educational needs”has the meaning assigned to it by section 1(5)(d) of this Act;
“special school” means a school making provision wholly or mainly for recorded children,
and includes special classes forming part of primary schools or secondary schools and child
guidance clinics;
“specified school”has the meaning assigned to it by section 28A(1) and (2) of this Act;
“supervision requirement” has the meaning given by section 70(1) of the said Act of 1995;
“teachers' superannuation regulations” means regulations made under section 9 of the
Superannuation Act 1972;
“young person” means a person over school age who has not attained the age of eighteen
years.
(2)  Any reference in any enactment or other instrument (including this Act and, unless the contrary
intention appears, any enactment or other instrument passed or made after the commencement of
this Act) to—
(a)   primary education shall be construed as a reference to school education of a kind
(i)   which is appropriate in the ordinary case to the requirements of pupils who have
not attained the age of twelve years; and
(ii)   which is, in the case of a pupil with special educational needs, within the
provision made for the purpose of meeting his special educational needs until he is
transferred to the stage of secondary education;
(b)   secondary education shall be construed as a reference to school education of a kind
(i)   which is appropriate in the ordinary case to the requirements of pupils who have
attained that age;and
(ii)   which is, in the case of a pupil with special educational needs, within the
provision made for the purpose of meeting his special educational needs until he
ceases to be of school age or to receive school education, whichever is the later.
and any reference in any such enactment or other instrument as aforesaid to primary or secondary
schools or departments or classes shall be construed accordingly.
136.—   Transitional and savings provisions, amendments and repeals.
(1)  The transitional and savings provisions set out in Schedule 3 to this Act shall have effect.
(2) […]241
(3) […]242
241

Provides for amendments of enactments specified in Sch. 4
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 104

137.—   Short title, commencement and extent.
(1)  This Act may be cited as the Education (Scotland) Act 1980.
(2)  Subject to subsections (3) and (4) below, this Act shall come into force on the expiry of the
period of one month beginning with the date on which it is passed.
(3)  The provisions of this Act set out in Schedule 6 shall, to the extent there specified, come into
force on such day as the Secretary of State may by order made by statutory instrument appoint.
(4)  Subsections (5) to (7) of section 23 of this Act shall come into force on such date as the Secretary
of State may by order appoint.
(5)  Any order under subsection (4) above may make such transitional provision as appears to the
Secretary of State to be necessary or expedient in connection with the provisions thereby brought
into force, including such adaptations of those provisions, or of any other provision mentioned in
that subsection then in force, as appear to him to be necessary or expedient for the purpose or in
consequence of the operation of any such provision before the coming into force of any other such
provision.
(6)  This Act extends to Scotland only.
[SCHEDULE A1
APPEAL COMMITTEES] 243
[1. 
An appeal committee set up under section 28D(1) of this Act shall be constituted in accordance
with this Schedule.] 244
[2. 
An appeal committee shall consist of 3, 5 or 7 members nominated by the authority from among
persons appointed by the authority under this Schedule; and sufficient persons may be appointed
to enable 2 or more appeal committees to sit at the same time.] 245
3. 
The persons appointed shall comprise—
(a)   members of the authority or of any committee appointed by the authority whose purposes
include advising the authority on any matter relating to the discharge of any of their functions
as education authority or discharging any of those functions on behalf of such authority;
and
(b)   persons who are not members of the authority or of [any such committee] 246 but are—
(i)   parents of children of school age;
(ii)   persons who in the opinion of the authority have experience in education; or
242
243
244
245
246

Repeals enactments specified in Sch. 5
Sch. A1 inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), s. 1(2), Sch. 1
Sch. A1 inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), s. 1(2), Sch. 1
Sch. A1 inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), s. 1(2), Sch. 1
words substituted by Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994 c. 39 Sch. 13 para. 118(10)(a)(ii)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 105

(iii)   persons who in the opinion of the authority are acquainted with the educational
conditions in the area of the authority;
but shall not include any person employed by the authority as director of education or in an
administrative or advisory capacity as respects the discharge of their education functions..
4. 
The members of an appeal committee who are members of the authority or of [any committee such
as is mentioned in paragraph 3 above ] 247 shall not outnumber the other members of the appeal
committee by more than one.
5. 
A person who is a member of [any committee such as is mentioned in paragraph 3 above] 248 shall
not be chairman of an appeal committee.
[6. 
A person shall not be a member of an appeal committee for the consideration of a reference of a
decision if he was among those who made the decision or took part in or was present at discussions
as to whether the decision should be made.] 249
[7. 
A person who is—
(a)   a teacher at a relevant school (within the meaning of paragraph 8 below);
(b)   a pupil at such a school;
(c)   a parent of a pupil at such a school; or
(d)   a member of a [School Board] 250 having functions in relation to such a school
shall not be a member of an appeal committee for consideration of a reference involving a question
whether a child is to be placed in the specified school or excluded from the relevant school.] 251
[8. 
For the purposes of paragraph 7 above, “relevant school” means in relation to a reference to the
appeal committee—
(a)   the school which the child to whom the placing request relates attends;
(b)   the specified school;
(c)   the school which the education authority propose that the child to whom the placing
request relates should attend;
(d)   a school from which pupils are normally transferred to the school referred to in
sub-paragraph (b) or (c) above; or
(e)   the school from which the pupil has been excluded.
252
]

247
248
249
250
251
252

words substituted by Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994 c. 39 Sch. 13 para. 118(10)(b)
words substituted by Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994 c. 39 Sch. 13 para. 118(10)(c)
Sch. A1 inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), s. 1(2), Sch. 1
Words substituted by School Boards (Scotland) Act 1988 (c.4), ss. 23, 24(2), Sch. 4 para. 7
Sch. A1 inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), s. 1(2), Sch. 1
Sch. A1 inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), s. 1(2), Sch. 1
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 106

[9. 
An appeal committee constituted in accordance with this Schedule shall be included in the bodies
to which sections 45(4) and 46 of the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973 (allowances) apply.]253
[SCHEDULE A2
APPLICATION OF CERTAIN PROVISIONS OF THIS ACT TO RECORDED CHILDREN
AND YOUNG PERSONS] 254
[1. 
Sections 28B and 28D of this Act and Schedule A1 to this Act shall apply in relation to a recorded
child.] 255
[2. 
Sections 28C, 28E(1) to (6) and 28F(1) and (5) to (7) of this Act shall not apply in relation to a
recorded child (corresponding provision being made in sections 63 to 65 of this Act).] 256
[3. 
In relation to a recorded child, for section 28A of this Act there shall be substituted the following
section—
“28A.—  
(1)  Where the parent of a recorded child makes a written request to an education authority
to place his child in the school specified in the request, being a school under their
management, it shall be the duty of the authority, subject to subsections (2) and (3) below,
to place the child accordingly; and where the parent of a recorded child makes a written
request to the education authority for the area to which the child belongs (in accordance
with section 23(3) of this Act) to place his child in the school specified in the request, not
being a public school but being
[ (a)   a special school the managers of which are willing to admit the child, ] 257
[ (b)   a school in England and Wales or in Northern Ireland, the managers of which
are willing to admit the child and which is a school making provision wholly or
mainly for children (or as the case may be young persons) with pronounced, specific
or complex special educational needs;; ] 258
it shall be the duty of the authority, subject to subsections (2) and (3) below, to meet the
fees and other necessary costs of the child's attendance at the specified school. Such a request
so made is referred to in this Act as a “placing request” and the school specified in it is
referred to in this Act as the “specified school”.

253
254
255
256
257
258

Sch. A1 inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), s. 1(2), Sch. 1
Sch. A2 inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), s. 4(3), Sch. 3, Sch. 8
Sch. A2 inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), s. 4(3), Sch. 3, Sch. 8
Sch. A2 inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), s. 4(3), Sch. 3, Sch. 8
Para. (a) inserted by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.3), s. 71(1)
Para. (b) inserted by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.3), s. 71(1)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 107

(2)  Where a placing request relates to two or more schools being schools under the
management of the education authority to whom it is made or [schools mentioned in
paragraph (a) or (b) of subsection (1) above] 259 the managers of which are willing to admit
the child in respect of whom the request is made, the duty imposed by [that subsection] 260
shall apply in relation to the first mentioned such school, which shall be treated for the
purposes of this Act as the specified school.
(3)  The duty imposed by subsection (1) above does not apply—
(a)   if placing the child in the specified school would—
(i)   make it necessary for the authority to take an additional teacher into
employment;
(ii)   give rise to significant expenditure on extending or otherwise altering
the accommodation at or facilities provided in connection with the school;
(iii)   be seriously detrimental to the continuity of the child's education; or
(iv)   be likely to be seriously detrimental to order and discipline in the school
or the educational well-being of the pupils there;
(b)   if the education normally provided at the specified school is not suited to the
age, ability or aptitude of the child;
(c)   if the education authority have already required the child to discontinue his
attendance at the specified school;
(d)   if, where the specified school is a [school mentioned in paragraph (a) or (b) of
subsection (1) above;]261 the child does not have special educational needs requiring
the education or special facilities normally provided at that school;
(e)   if the specified school is a single sex school (within the meaning given to that
expression by section 26 of the Sex Discrimination Act 1975) and the child is not
of the sex admitted or taken (under that section) to be admitted to the school; or
(f)   if—
(i)   the specified school is not a public school;
[ (ii)   the authority are able to make provision for the special educational
needs of the child in a school under their management;
(iia)   it is not reasonable, having regard both to the respective suitability
and to the respective costs (including necessary incidental expenses) of the
provisions for the special educational needs of the child in the specified
school and in the school under the authority's management, to place the child
in the specified school; and ] 262
(iii)   the authority have offered to place the child in the school referred to
in sub-paragraph (ii) above,
but an education authority may place a child in the specified school notwithstanding
paragraphs (a) [to (e)] 263 above.

259
260
261
262
263

Words substituted by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.3), s. 71(1)
Words substituted by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.3), s. 71(1)
Words substituted by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.3), s. 71(1)
Paras. (ii) and (iia) substituted by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.3), s. 71(1)
Words substituted by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.3), s. 71(1)
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 108

(4)  An education authority shall inform a parent in writing of their decision on his placing
request and, where they decide to refuse it, shall give him written reasons for their decision
and inform him of his right to refer it under section 63 of this Act to an appeal committee.
(5)  On complying with a placing request an education authority shall modify accordingly
the nomination in the child's Record of a school to be attended by him.
(6)  The Secretary of State may, by regulations, make provision for deeming an education
authority to have refused a placing request in the event of their not having informed the
parent in writing of their decision on it in accordance with subsection (4) above within such
period or before such date as may be prescribed in the regulations and different periods or
dates may be so prescribed for different purposes.”.
] 264
[4.— 
(1)  Sections 28A, 28B and 28D of this Act and Schedule A1 to this Act shall, subject to the
provisions of this paragraph, apply in relation to a recorded young person as they apply in relation
to a recorded child.
(2)  For the purposes of the application of those provisions to recorded young persons, references
therein to the parent of a recorded child as well as references to the child himself shall, subject to
sub-paragraph (3) below, be construed as references to the recorded young person.
(3)  Sub-paragraph (2) above does not apply in a case where, for the purposes of section 61(7) of
this Act, the education authority were satisfied that the young person was not capable of expressing
his views for the purposes of that section. ] 265
[5. 
Sections 28C, 28E(1) to (6) and 28F(1) and (5) to (7) of this Act shall not apply in relation to a
recorded young person (corresponding provision being made in sections 63 to 65 of this Act).] 266
[6. 
Section 28G of this Act shall not apply in relation to a recorded young person (corresponding
provision being made in paragraph 4 of this Schedule).] 267
SCHEDULE 1
LOCAL INQUIRIES
Section 67
1. 
The Secretary of State shall appoint a person to hold the inquiry and to report thereon to him.

264
265
266
267

Sch. A2 inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), s. 4(3), Sch. 3, Sch. 8
Sch. A2 inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), s. 4(3), Sch. 3, Sch. 8
Sch. A2 inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), s. 4(3), Sch. 3, Sch. 8
Sch. A2 inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), s. 4(3), Sch. 3, Sch. 8
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 109

2. 
The person appointed shall notify the bodies and persons appearing to him to be interested of the
time when and the place where the inquiry is to be held.
3. 
The person appointed may be notice in writing require any person—
(a)   to attend at the time and place set forth in the notice to give evidence or to produce any
books or documents in his custody or under his control which relate to any matter in question
at the inquiry; or
(b)   to furnish within such reasonable period as is specified in the notice such information
relating to any matter in question at the inquiry as the person appointed may think fit and
as the person so required is able to furnish:
Provided that—
(i)   no person shall be required in obedience to such a notice to attend at
any place which is more than ten miles from the place where he resides
unless the necessary expenses are paid or tendered to him; and
(ii)   nothing in this paragraph shall empower the person appointed to hold
the inquiry to require any person to produce any book or document or to
answer any question which he would be entitled, on the ground of privilege
or confidentiality, to refuse to produce or to answer if the inquiry were a
proceeding in a court of law.
4. 
The person appointed to hold the inquiry may administer oaths and examine witnesses on oath and
may accept, in lieu of evidence on oath by any person, a statement in writing by that person supported
by a declaration of the truth thereof in such form as the person appointed may require.
5. 
The inquiry shall unless the Secretary of State otherwise directs be held in public.
6. 
Any person who refuses or wilfully neglects to attend in obedience to a notice issued under paragraph
3 above, or who wilfully alters, suppresses, conceals, destroys or refuses to produce any book or
document which he may be required to produce by any such notice, or who refuses or wilfully
neglects to comply with any requirement of the person appointed to hold the inquiry under paragraph
3 above, shall be liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding £20 or to imprisonment for
a period not exceeding three months.
7. 
The Secretary of State may make orders as to the expenses incurred by the parties appearing at the
inquiry and as to the parties by whom such expenses shall be paid.
8. 
Any order by the Secretary of State under paragraph 7 above requiring any party to pay expenses
may be enforced in like manner as [an extract registered decree arbitral bearing a warrant for
execution issued by the sheriff court of any sheriffdom in Scotland.] 268
268

Words substituted by Debtors (Scotland) Act 1987 (c.1), s. 108(1), Sch. 6 para. 22
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 110

[SCHEDULE 1A
REVOCATION OF DETERMINATIONS FOR THE PURPOSES OF THE ASSISTED
PLACES SCHEME] 269
1. […]270
2. […]271
3. […]272
4.— […]273
5. […]274
6. […]275
[SCHEDULE 1B
REMUNERATION OF TEACHING STAFF: THE COMMITTEE] 276
Procedure
1. […]277
2. […]278
General powers
3. […]279
4. […]280

269

Sch. 1A inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), s. 5(3),Sch. 4

270

repealed by Education (Schools) Act 1997 c. 59 Sch. 1(II) para. 1
repealed by Education (Schools) Act 1997 c. 59 Sch. 1(II) para. 1
repealed by Education (Schools) Act 1997 c. 59 Sch. 1(II) para. 1
repealed by Education (Schools) Act 1997 c. 59 Sch. 1(II) para. 1
repealed by Education (Schools) Act 1997 c. 59 Sch. 1(II) para. 1
repealed by Education (Schools) Act 1997 c. 59 Sch. 1(II) para. 1
Sch. 1B inserted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58),s. 14(2), Sch. 5
repealed by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) s. 55(1)
repealed by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) s. 55(1)
repealed by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) s. 55(1)
repealed by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) s. 55(1)

271
272
273
274
275
276
277
278
279
280

(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 111

Recovery of expenditure
5. […]281
6. […]282
SCHEDULE 2
CONSTITUTION OF INDEPENDENT SCHOOLS TRIBUNALS
Section 100(1)
1. […]283
2. 
No officer of any government department and no person employed by an education authority in
any capacity other than that of a teacher shall be qualified to be appointed to [an Independent
Schools Tribunal by the Secretary of State under paragraph 4 below, ] 284 and no person shall be
so qualified unless he has had such experience in teaching or in the conduct, management or
administration of schools as the Secretary of State considers suitable.
3. […]285
4. 
Where any complaint is required to be determined by an Independent Schools Tribunal, the tribunal
shall consist of the sheriff principal (or, if he is unable to act, a person qualified for appointment
as sheriff principal nominated by the Lord President of the Court of Session), who shall be chairman,
and two other members appointed […] 286 by the Secretary of State, […] 287
5. 
In this Schedule “sheriff principal” means the sheriff principal of the sheriffdom in which the school
to which the complaint relates is situated or, in the case of an appeal against a refusal to remove a
disqualification, the sheriff principal of the sheriffdom where the appellant resides.

281
282
283
284
285
286
287

repealed by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) s. 55(1)
repealed by Standards in Scotland's Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 asp 6 (Scottish Act) s. 55(1)
Repealed by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 9
Words substituted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58),s. 11(b), Sch. 8
Repealed by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 9
Words repealed by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 9
Words repealed by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 9
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 112

SCHEDULE 3
TRANSITIONAL AND SAVINGS PROVISIONS
Section 136(1)
General
1. 
Where any document refers expressly or by implication to an enactment repealed by this Act, the
reference shall, except where the context otherwise requires, be construed as, or as including, a
reference to the corresponding provision of this Act.
2. 
Any reference in any provision of this Act (whether expressed or implied) to a thing done or falling
to be done under a provision of this Act shall, in so far as the context permits, be construed as
including, in relation to times, circumstances and purposes in relation to which a corresponding
provision of an enactment repealed by this Act had effect, a reference to a thing done or falling to
be done under that corresponding provision.
Children Requiring Special Education
3. 
Any reference in any enactment or other instrument passed or made before the commencement of
the Education (Scotland) Act 1969 to special educational treatment shall be construed as a reference
to [provision for recorded children] 288 .
4. 
Any decision, made under the Act of 1962 before the commencement of the said Act of 1969 by
an education authority to the effect that a child requires special educational treatment, which is in
force at such commencement, shall continue in force and be deemed to be a decision under section
62 of this Act (duly notified to the parents of a child under [subsection (2) of that section) to record
the child.] 289
Savings
5. 
The repeal by the said Act of 1969 of sections 84 and 87 of the Act of 1962 shall not affect the
payment after the commencement of this Act of any pension, gratuity or retiring allowance which
was payable by virtue of paragraph 11 of Schedule 4 to the said Act of 1969 immediately before
the commencement of this Act.

288
289

Words substituted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 2 Pt. II para 9, Sch. 8
Words substituted by Education (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 58), Sch. 2 Pt. II para. 10, Sch. 8
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 113

6. 
The repeal by the said Act of 1969 of section 94 of the Act of 1962 shall not affect the application
of that section to any part of the annual revenue of any scheme, being a part to which that section
applied immediately before the commencement of the said Act of 1969.
SCHEDULE 4
1. […]290
2. […]291
3. […]292
4. […]293
5. […]294
6. […]295
7. […]296
8. […]297
9 
(a) […]298
(b) […]299
10. […]300
11. […]301
12. […]302
13. […]303
290
291
292
293
294
295
296
297
298
299
300
301
302

Repealed by Foster Children (Scotland) Act 1984 (c.56), s. 22(3), Sch. 3
Repealed by Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984 (c.36), s. 127(2), Sch.5
Amends Factories Act 1961 (c. 34), s. 176(1)
Amends Public Expenditure and Receipts Act 1968 (c. 14), Sch. 3 para. 1(b)
Amends Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968 (c. 49), s. 94(1)
Amends Sex Discrimination Act 1975 (c. 65), s. 22 Table para. 7
Amends Sex Discrimination Act 1975 (c. 65), s. 23(2)
Amends Sex Discrimination Act 1975 (c. 65), s. 25(3)(5)
Amends Sex Discrimination Act 1975 (c. 65), s. 79
Amends Sex Discrimination Act 1975 (c. 65), s. 79(1)(b)(4)
Amends Sex Discrimination Act 1975 (c. 65), s. 81(3)(b)
Amends Sex Discrimination Act 1975 (c. 65), s. 82(1)
Amends Race Relations Act 1976 (c. 74), s. 17 Table para. 7
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 114

14. […]304
15. […]305
16. […]306
17. […]307
18. […]308
19. […]309
SCHEDULE 5 […]310
SCHEDULE 6
POSTPONEMENT OF THE COMMENCEMENT OF CERTAIN PROVISIONS
Section 137(3)
1. […]311
2. […]312
3. […]313
4. […]314
5. […]315
6. […]316
7. […]317
303
304
305
306
307
308
309
310
311
312
313
314
315
316

Amends Race Relations Act 1976 (c. 74), s. 18(2)
Amends Race Relations Act 1976 (c. 74), s.19(3)(5); repealed by 2000 c.34 Sch.3 on April 2, 2001
Amends Race Relations Act 1976 (c. 74), s. 78(1)
Amends National Health Service (Scotland) Act 1978 (c. 29),s. 15(1)(f)
Amends National Health Service (Scotland) Act 1978 (c. 29), s. 39(5)
Amends National Health Service (Scotland) Act 1978 (c. 29), s. 108(1)
Amends National Health Service (Scotland) Act 1978 (c. 29), Sch. 15 para. 10(b)
Specifies enactments repealed by s. 136(3)
Repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.3), s. 82(2), Sch. 11
Repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.3), s. 82(2), Sch. 11
Repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.3), s. 82(2), Sch. 11
Repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.3), s. 82(2), Sch. 11
Repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.3), s. 82(2), Sch. 11
Repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.3), s. 82(2), Sch. 11
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

Education (Scotland) Act 1980

Page 115

8. […]318
9. […]319
10. […]320
11. […]321
12. […]322
13. […]323
14. […]324
15. […]325
[16. 
Section 127(3) and (4).] 326

317
318
319
320
321
322
323
324
325
326

Repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.3), s. 82(2), Sch. 11
Repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.3), s. 82(2), Sch. 11
Repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.3), s. 82(2), Sch. 11
Repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.3), s. 82(2), Sch. 11
Repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.3), s. 82(2), Sch. 11
Repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.3), s. 82(2), Sch. 11
Repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.3), s. 82(2), Sch. 11
Repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.3), s. 82(2), Sch. 11
Repealed by Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 (c.3), s. 82(2), Sch. 11
Para. 16 added retrospectively by Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) (Scotland) Act 1981 (c. 23), s.
38
(Represents Current Law in Force - for pending amendments see Prospective Law on Westlaw UK.)

